S/PRST/2021/7

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 March 2021
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
On 24 March 2021, in connection with the Council’s consideration of the item
entitled “The question concerning Haiti”, in accordance with the procedure agreed in
light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the COVID -19 pandemic and set
out in S/2020/372, the President of the Security Council issued the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council takes note of the report from the Secretary -General
of 11 February (S/2021/133) and the observations contained therein, and
reaffirms its support for the efforts of the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti (BINUH).
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern regarding the protracted
political, constitutional, humanitarian, and security crises in Haiti, and recalling
resolutions 2547 (2020) and 2476 (2019), further stresses the primary
responsibility of the government of Haiti to address underlying drivers of
instability.
“The Security Council stresses that the democratic will of the Haitian
people must be respected, and underscores the need to address essential security,
transparency, and logistical considerations in connection with upcoming
electoral processes. The Security Council reiterates the urgent need to hold free,
fair, transparent, and credible legislative elections that have been overdue since
October 2019. The Security Council also urges that all preparations be made for
free, fair, transparent, and credible presidential elections in 2021. The Security
Council urges all political stakeholders in Haiti to set a side their differences in
the interest of the people of Haiti, to engage constructively to enable the
organization of upcoming elections and to ensure elections take place in a
peaceful environment, and calls on the international community to support Haiti
in this endeavor.
“The Security Council further stresses the importance of an independent
judiciary and of the full, equal, and meaningful participation of women and the
inclusion of all Haitians, including youth, persons with disabilities, and civil
society in Haiti’s political processes.
“The Security Council underscores the need to strengthen the rule of law
and urges the government of Haiti to step up its efforts against corruption and
to ensure accountability and transparency in connection with the se efforts.
“The Security Council emphasizes the need for an immediate and
coordinated response by Haitian authorities to demonstrate their commitment to

21-03950 (E)

260321

*2103950*

S/PRST/2021/7

addressing the deteriorating security situation in Haiti, including gang -related
criminal activities, increases in kidnappings, homicides, and rape. The Security
Council calls for the provision of adequate resources to the Haitian National
Police, for the adoption of a sustainable long-term strategy to address the root
causes of violence and for concrete measures to address ongoing violence,
including that listed in OP 1(b) of Security Council Resolution 2476 (2019).
“The Security Council notes with concern reported violations and abuses
of international human rights, including those involving the allege d use of
deadly force against protesters, as well as reported arbitrary arrests and
detentions. The Security Council calls on the government of Haiti to respect
freedom of expression and freedom of association, and for the Haitian National
Police Inspector General to conduct a thorough investigation of these incidents.
“The Security Council stresses the urgency of accountability for human
rights violations and abuses and calls on the government of Haiti to take
immediate action to end impunity for those responsible, particularly noting the
emblematic cases outlined in the most recent report from the Secretary -General,
including Grand Ravine (2017), La Saline (2018), and Bel-Air (2019) and the
assassination of the president of the Port-au-Prince Bar Association, M. Dorval
(2020). The Security Council also urges the government of Haiti to end the
practice of prolonged pre-trial detention.
“The Security Council notes its concern regarding the humanitarian
situation in Haiti, noting in particular growing food insecurity and malnutrition
that have been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, and stresses the need
for increased support and attention to the humanitarian situation and
development needs in Haiti, as well as efforts to advance the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
“The Security Council recognizes the important role of neighboring
countries and regional organizations such as the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) and the Organization of American States (OAS), and underlining
the importance of harmonized, coordinated and strengthened efforts, encourages
them to continue their active engagement on Haiti and in this regard, welcomes
the decision by CARICOM to send a fact-finding mission in support of UN
efforts.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support for the people of Haiti and
underscores the importance of continued international support to Haiti as it
seeks to address its urgent ongoing challenges, and to create the conditions for
peaceful and democratic elections.
“The Security Council encourages continued close collaboration and
coordination between BINUH and the United Nations Country Team in Haiti
with a view to helping the government of Haiti to take responsibility to realize
the long-term stability, development, and economic self-sufficiency of the
country.”

2/2

21-03950
