TWENTY-SIX'?'H

YEAR
MEETING: 13 DECEMBER 197 1

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ I6 13) . . . , , . , . . . . , , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . .,/, .
Statement by the President , . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to
the United Nations addressedto the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-General on the United,+Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/10401) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . - ._. . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . * .

1

Letter dated 12 December 197 1 from the Permanent Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/10444) , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . : . +. . . .

4

SlPV.1613

c

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securi~ Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

,’
/
‘:
I
;,

!
:,

,:,:,
>. ,!
;,:i,
, .

‘i

SIXTEEN

HUNDRED

AND THIRTEENTH

Held in New York on Monday,
l+midetzt: Mr. I. B. TAYLOR-KAMARA

13 December

MEETING
1971, at 4 p.m.

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the’ Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/l 04011)

(Sierra Leone).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. S. ‘Kyprianou
(Cyprus),
Mr. U. H. Bayiilken (Turkey) and Mr. D. S.
Bitsios (Greece) took places at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT: I have a list of speakers for this
afternoon’s meeting and I should like to appeal to all
members to bear in mind that we have another item which
was scheduled to start this afternoon, but because this item
on the agenda has not been completed, that other item has
been postponed. That item is very important, because it
involves the life and death of millions of people. I would
therefore appeal to speakers to make their interventions as
brief as possible, without in any way restricting the rights
of freedom of speech.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 613)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/10401).

3. The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Poland to whom I now give the floor, trusting he will heed
my remarks.

3. Letter dated 12 December 1971 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/10444).

4. Mr. LUDWICZAK (Poland): First of all I should like to
take this opportunity of expressing my delegation’s deep
sorrow on the occasion of the sudden and tragic death of
Comrade Ivan Bachev, Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Bulgaria, a country which which Poland maintains the best
friendly and fraternal relations. Mr. Bachev made a significant contribution to the deveIopment of relations between
our two countries and to the promotion of international
peace and security, particularly in Europe. I should like to
ask our Bulgarian friends to convey to the Government of
Bulgaria and to the family of the late Comrade Minister
Bachev our deep-felt sorrow and condolences.

Statement by the President

1. The PRESIDENT:
Before I proceed, I must inform
representatives that we have received a communication
from Ambassador Gerogrozev, Deputy Foreign Minister and
Permanent Representative of the People’s Republic of
Bulgaria to the United Nations. The communication reads
as follows:
“Please accept, on behalf of the delegation of the
People’s Republic of Bulgaria and on my own behalf, our
sincere gratitude for the condolences which YOU expressed on the occasion of the untimely and tragic death
of Bulgaria’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Ivan
Bachev.

5. At its meeting this morning the Security Council voted
ori a resolution extending for a further six months the
mandate of the United Nations Peace-Keeping Force in
Cyprus (resol&iorr 305 (197111, as proposed by the
Secretary-General in his report of 30 November I971
/S/10401], and with the concurrence of Cyprus and the
parties concerned. Motivated by&s interest in the preservation of peace and security, the Polish delegation supported
that resolution. We did so in the hope, which we share with
the Secretary-General, that despite the difficulties so far
encountered the parties to the problem will soon find it
possible to make progress towards a settIement in the spirit
of compromise and mutual accommodation. Our position
as to the conditions for such a settlement remdns un-

“May 1 be permitted; Mr. President, to convey through
you our gratitude to the distinguished members of the
Security Council for the expressions of condolence they
offered in this connexion.”
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
1

I

changed. We continue to consider that the situation in

Cypruscan be normalized only through full recognition and
respect of the sovereign independence and territorial

integrityof Cyprus,normalization based on mutual understanding and agreement of all Cypriot people. In the view
of my delegation such a normalization requires above all
full respect for the sovereignrights of the peoples of Cyprus
to pursuetheir policy of peace and non-alignment. It
requiresthe elimination of outside interference of all
imperialist
military influences which now stand in the way
of the achievement of a lasting and peaceful solution of the
problem. Poland has always supported and continues to
supportsuch a solution, We look forward to the early
resumption and reactivation of the talks between the Greek
and Turkish communities, talks which constitute an impOrtam internal factor for ths settlement of the over-all
problem, a problem which is still outstanding in this very
sensitive part of the world.
6. Before concluding, I should like on behalf of my
delegation to rnost warmly congratulate Ambassador
Bayiilken on the occasion of his promotion to the high
office of Minister of Foreign Affairs of Turkey, a country
which which Poland is interested in developing further
relations in all possible fields. I should like to extend to
Ambassador Baytilken my delegation’s best wishes.
7. Mr. BENNETT (United States of America): I should
like to join others round this table in extending our
condolences to the Government of Bulgaria on the untimely death of the Foreign Minister.
8. Now I have the distinct pleasure of extending congratulations, both official and personal, to our friend Ambassador Baytilken on his nomination to a new’ and very high
office in his Government. We Iook forward to a continuation of the co-operation and understanding that has long
characterized our relationship.
9. Once again the Security Council has considered the
question of Cyprus and has agreed on the extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Force in Cyprus for another
six months. The United States delegation wishesfirst of all
to express its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
particularly comprehensive and penetrating report to the
Security Council, which is yet further evidence of his
devotion and dedication to the work of peaceful solutions
to a most complex problem.
10. For over seven years UNFICYP has played an invaluable role in Cyprus, conducting a truly effective and
indispensable peace-keeping operation. My Government is
convinced that Uh’FICYP has been instrumental in prevent.
ing several serious intercommunal incidents from escalating
intO kdxm on the island. However, the excellent work of
IJNFICYP in maintaining the uneasy peace’is no substitute
for concrete progress towards a permanent settlement of
the Problems facing Cyprus, a settlement which would
permit the Greek and Turkish communities to live in
harmony and prosperity within a single independent and
sovereign Cyprus.
11. The United States delegation notes with deep regret
that, rather than progress, there has been a significant

deterioration in the general situation On Cyprus, as de
strated by the increase in tension between the
communities. There has also been a regrettable
towards aggressive actions and lack of co-operation, apptiently aimed at changing the military starus 4,Uo. We sbtie
the Secretary-General’s concern over the apparent deadlia&
in the intercommunalstalks. We believe that the best ho3
for progress in negotiations towards a peaceful resolution air’
the Cypruscom’lict is the reactivation of the ime>:.
communal talks. The United States therefore ~upp.&s
wholeheartedly the Secretary-General’s proposal contain&
in paragraph 79 of his report, to reactivate the *
communal talks under a new procedural formula. We a
to all parties to accept the Secretary-General’s suggcstraa
We welcome the progress thus far made in this direct&particularly the expressed intention of the Foreign MinhIxa
of Cyprus, Mr. Kyprianou, to accept the Secrc
General’s proposal, and the statement of the Fo
Minister of Turkey, Mr. Baytilken, that his Governruec
intends to pursue consultations to find a consensus [16f”o&
meeting]. If problems still remain concerning the rm:b
dalities of the discussions, we suggest that they be wotL&
out in Cyprus in connexion with the reactivation of ak
intercommunal talks.
12. While our main concern is the over-all peac&Z
settlement of the Cyprus problem, we would likewise ur@
that determined efforts be made to achieve progress in L!
area of normalization
of relations between the Gre&
Cypriot and the Turkish Cypriot communities.
13. We share the Secretary-General’s disappointment tk&
since our last meeting to consider the renewal 6%:
UNFICYP’s mandate, there has been no progress m&
towards normalization, particularly in the important are
of deconfrontation, freedom of movement, economic da&
opment and refugee resettlement. We appeal to ail pan&
concerned to exert their most statesmanlike efforts to re&
mutually acceptable interim accommodations whicfb wor;:J
allow all elements of the Cypriot population to particip:r
fully and without fear in all aspects of the life of then;
country.
14. Finally, I should like to turn to UNFICYF’s finanri&
problems, which are discussed in paragraphs 105 and 1O&o<
the Secretary-General’s report. The United States has gi\*@
consistent financial support to’UNFICYF and will continllrc
to do so as long as other Governments do their pfl
However, we wish to associate ourselves with the Sc<srtary-General’s comments in his report that:
“the maintenance of international peace and security ii&
collective responsibility , . . which must be shared by &
its Members. In the case of UNFICYP, the fnandi
burden has been borne by a limited number of Gowrcments, including some States not Members of I!X
Organization. Many Members of the ‘IJnited Nations, o:
the other hand, including some of those who have spec&
responsibilities with regard to the United Nations acriorti
in Cyprus, have not contributed to UNFICYP or hair
onwed to do so for a long period of time.” (~/Ii1@1~
para. 106.1

15. We appeal to all Members of the United Nations, en:
in Particular to the members of the Security Council, IL?

contribute their fair share to this peace-keeping operation,
which has probably averted a much more costly war on
Cyprus.
16. We note that even if $9,600,000 in payments is
received on all the assured pledges, the UNFICY’B deficit
would still total $16,400,000 as of 15 December. The
United States has pledged up to 40 per cent of the costs of
UNFICYP to the United Nations. Much of that sum has
already been paid into the Organization, but we have been
ridable to turn over all of it because pledges and payments
to cover the other 60 per cent have been lacking.
17. In light of the serious financial crisis facing this vital
peace-keeping operation, we are at present consulting with
other interested Governments in an effort to work out an
approach which would eliminate the deficit and place
future UNFICYP financing on a sound and sustainable
basis.
18. In this connexion, the United States would be
prepared to make a substantial additional payment on its
pledges to UNFICYP in the near future. We appeal to all
other Member States for their assistance in these efforts to
ensure that the United Nations activities in Cyprus, as well
as other vital peace-keeping efforts, can be effectively
maintained in accordance with the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.
19. Mr. JOUEJATI (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from French): We were deeply saddened by the tragic news
of the sudden death of the Foreign Minister of Bulgaria, a
distinguished and energetic statesman devoted to the cause
of peace. We fully share the sorrow of the people and
Government of Bulgaria, and my delegation would like to
associate itself with the messages of condolences and
sympathy which were sent this morning.
20. I should now like to refer to two facts which are a
source of pleasure to us. The first was that the SecretaryGeneral once again participated in our work this morning
after his period of indisposition. We should like to express
our best wishes to him, The second relates to the
appointment of Ambassador Baytilken as Foreign Minister
of Turkey, a fraternal and neighbouring country. We have
always been proud of the brilliant career of Ambassador
Bayiilken, and we wish him every possible success in the
service of his country and in the service of the cause of
international peace and justice. Within the context of the
question before us, his appointment as Foreign Minister of
Turkey is a good sign for the peaceful and satisfactory
solution of this problem. We share his hope that we shall
very shortly see peace and conciliation reign in Cyprus.
21. In our view, the present deadlock in the intercommunal talks in Cyprus should not continue very long.
There are differences between the representatives who are
parties to this dialogue, differences which at the present
time seem insurmountable, particularly with respect to the
two major problems of local administration and guarantees
for independence. These differences are due more to the
complexity
of these problems than to any lack of goodwill.
The goodwill is there, which makes it almost certain that
these differences will be reduced. Everyone is attached to

the unity of the country. Everyone cherishes the independence of the country. It is necessary to find the optimum
formula to ensure peace, equality and prosperity for
everyone. That is not impossible to find. At the top of the
hierarchy of preoccupations we find the need to re-establish
fraternity and the common membership of a country with a
fine and promising future.,The sense of a common destiny
and a spirit of accommodation and flexibility should
triumph.
22. The statements we heard this morning [I612th
meeting] from. the Foreign Ministers’of Cyprus and Turkey
and from the Ambassador of Greece are very edifying in
this respect. To resume the dialogue is an imperative duty,
As the Ambassador of Greece quite rightly pointed out, the
dialogue is irreplaceable, because it is precisely in the
success of the dialogue that we shall find the true unity of
Cyprus and of its sons. To accelerate these talks and to
tackle the many problems in a spirit of flexibility and
accommodation would bring the hour of final reconciliation much closer and, at the same time, would facilitate the
task of the Security Council.
23. The reIative caIm reigning in the island should be
strengthened in order to bring about a normal climate and
not to maintain an exceptional one. Conditions would then
be propitious for bringing the two sides closer together. The
representatives of the two communities could benefit from
the report of the Secretary-General and draw from it any
suggestions to bring about a rapprochement.
24. It is in this spirit that we voted in favour of the draft
resolution which the Security Council adopted this
morning.
25. I should not like to conclude without expressing our
sincere gratitude for the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General as well as of the Commander
of the Force and his staff.
26. Mr. SEVILLA-SACASA
(Nicaragua) (interpretation
ffam Spanish): My first words will be to most cordially
congratulate Ambassador Bayiilken for his well-deserved
promotion to the lofty post of Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Turkey. We congratulate him, knowing that his talents
and international experience will contribute to the success
he will achieve in his post, a success which we, his friends,
will of course greet with satisfaction.
27. For Secretary-General U Thant it must be a source of
genuine satisfaction to know that the recovery of his health
is celebrated by all his friends in all parts of the world, this
strife-tom world to serve which he has dedicated his talents,
his experience and his academic erudition, winning universal recognition for his noble effort and sacrifice.
28. Naturally, the tragic death of Mr. Ivan Bashev, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bulgaria, has caused great
sorrow. The delegation of Nicaragua associates itself with
the expressions of condolence on the occasion of this
painful loss which Bulgaria has suffered.
29. “With regard to the Cyprus problem, all of us who feel
affection and warm friendship for that noble nation

continue to hope that a solution may be found. This is a
case for which the best solution must be found, and it must
be found soon with the friendly co-operation which, in
various forms and ways, the nations friendly to Cyprus in
this Organization will provide.

[s/10401,

paw. 791 concerning the broadening of
intercommrmal talks, with the participation in an a&&~~
capacity of constitutional experts from Turkey and C
and that of his Special Representative in the exercisens
good offices.

30. May I extend my greetings to the distinguished
representatives of that esteemed country, a land bathed by
the Mediterranean, and devotedly guarded by history. I
greet them and declare to them that the favourable vote
cast by Nicaragua for the resolution we adopted this
morning carries with it the hope that in the near future the
IJnited Nations Force will no longer be necessary to secure
the maintenance of peace in that friendly nation. When that
Force is withdrawn, joyful applause will be heard throughout the world, applause in praise of the United Nations for
the effort it has exerted and applause for Cyprus because of
its patriotic cooperation in the cause of peace. The hour
will come, and it will mark a new day in the annals of that
nation, born for freedom and glory.

37. In paragraph 99 of his report, the Secretary&nerd
states his conviction that the best way of achieving s
solution to the Cyprus problem is through a negctlai32
agreement between the two communities on its consiir,;tional aspects. But in paragraph 103, the Secretary&nerd
has pointed to the need to give those intercommunal ;dks
some new impetus and has suggested that on some of 1k-e
basic issues this Council might become more active:?
involved in assisting the parties concerned in their seal;?,
for a solution to the Cyprus problem.
38. In the view of my delegation, the present timewen:J
not be appropriate for the Council to take any nm
initiative until the extended and expanded intercommu.r+d
talks proposed by the Secretary-General have been given p
chance to succeed. It is gratifying to my delegation to ne::
tha.t all parties have agreed to take part in those talks.

31. Greek and Turkish Cypriots must remember that they
are today citizens of a single fatherland, independent and
sovereign, which enjoys great sympathy in the world; a
sympathy that will be all the greater the more Cyprus is
honoured by its sons.

39. If, after six months, the Secretary-General is unable t.2
report any progress on these talks, then the Council shcul?
seriously consider what new initiatives it should take c.:
solve the problem. But this should be only the last rean,
and not the first. In any such initiative taken by or on
behalf of the Council, the terms of reference shoubl be
sufficiently wide to allow the greatest flexibility in deal@
with this complex problem, and it would be necessary1:.
predicate any approach on certain broad, considerations.

32. The report of Secretary-General U Thant deservesour
praise. It is the record of an excellent job which means yet
another success for its distinguished author. The SecretaryGeneral and his representatives must feel very happy at this
Council’s recognition of that success,
33. We hope that our dear friends the Cypriot Greeks and
the Cypriot Turks will go on with their talks. We hope they
will continue those talks as brothers, without flagging in
their endeavours and efforts which we here will applaud
with satisfaction.

40. In the view of my delegation, one consideraticn mnn
be that the Treaties of Guarantee and Alliance, whichk&p:
the effect of entrenching certain features of the Cyln-,,r
Constitution, were formulated in the light of an exceed.
ingly complex and delicate situation. If, as the March I%+
report of the United Nations Mediator on Cyprus fS/6.%.$!
suggests, there cannot be a complete return to II!X
constitutional situation that prevailed before 1963, cc.
tainly there should be no unilateral abrogation of ~IIPE
agreements, and their intent must be preserved in so fara!
they relate to ihe rights and obligations of the [%,I^:
communities.
41. Two other considerations which my delegation !x*
lieves must be fundamental to any solution of the CYP~~
problem are these: that Cyprus must retain its status ;isE
independent, sovereign State, and that it must retain iti
national and territorial unity. The most basic fearsaa’
suspicions of Greek and Turkish Cypriots, respectively, E
engendered by the possibility that either the indepertdeszt
or the unity of Cyprus might be brought to an end.zr:
both these fears should be allayed once and for all.

34. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): This Council has had ample
evidence of the danger to international peace and security
of long-standing and bitter regional conflicts where the
contending parties are supported by other States with
competing interests in the area. The Security Council has
had to deal with this kind of situation in Cyprus and has
been seized of the question since December 1963. As we
know from the Secretary-General’s reports-in particular
the most recent one, dated 30 November 1971-the United
Nations efforts to bring peace to that troubled island have
not been able to proceed beyond the more superficial task
of peace-keeping to the fundamental, one of peace-making.
And indeed, over the years, instead of accommodation and
mutual acceptance by Greek and Turkish Cypriots of each
other’s legitimate claims, there has been a consolidation of
inflexible attitudes and increased tension.
35. It seems clear to my delegation that when a peacekeeping effort planned originally for a three-month period
extends for seven years, and there is no sign that the
passage of the years has calmed mutual fears and suspicions,
then the time is more than ripe for a determined effort to
remove the need for a peace-keeping operation.

42. In the final analysis, it is for the two communities~f
Cyprus to choose between the present situation Wherei:
are threatened by the possibility of a return to vi&::
conilict, and a genuine movement towards a perman?::
solution. The Security Council, however, has s lV$
responsibility in this matter. It can provide the modaLlie;
for a process of reconciliation and reconstruction. lt flrir
work actively for a settlement in a situation where1b.t

36. For this reason, my delegation was glad to note the
Secretary-General’s suggestion of 18 Qctober 197 1
4

competing interests of Greece and Turkey in Cyprus can
seriously disturb the equilibrium of the eastern Mediterranean and can threaten international peace and security.
My delegation will support any effort, along the lines I have
mentioned, to try to bring peace to the people of Cyprus
and security to the Mediterranean region.
43. Finally, my delegation would like to pay tribute to the
untiring efforts of the Secretary-General and his staff to
promote an atmosphere of confidence in which the parties
involved can move towards a solution of the problem.
44. Yaving expressed the view of my delegation on this
question, I now wish to make a few complimentary remarks
to my friend, the Ambassador of Turkey, on his new
appointment. I am sure that he will carry with him all our
best wishes and that he will discharge the responsibilities of
his new post as well as he has discharged those of his
present position.
45. The PRESIDENT: Speaking as the representative of
SIERRA LEONE, I should like now to say a few words.
46. The Council has been convened for the second time
this year to consider the extension of the life of UNFICYP.

The report of the Secretary-General, contained in document S/10401, now before the Council, covers the period
20 May to 30 November 1971 and leaves in our minds the
impression that the period under review has been characterized by an atmosphere of instability.
47. Since our last meeting on this question the situation in
the island has been marked by an increased number of
shooting incidents. The Secretary-General’s report indicates
clearly that a total of 10 additional incidents over a
comparable period last year were reported.
48. After almost eight years of peace-keeping efforts on
the island and hundreds of millions of dollars expended in
this connexion, it is a matter of deep regret that a solution
of the Cyprus question is still not in sight. But we must not
lose hope because, in our opinion, the question is capable
of solution, and a solution should be found in the interests
of the well”being of the people of that island and in the
cause of international peace and security, The situation in
Cyprus should not be allowed to deteriorate into one of the
hotbeds of disaster in the world. The fear of partition, on
the side of the Greek Cypriots, and the fear of enosis, on
the side of the Turkish Cypriots, should be completely
eliminated. The apprehensions arising from these two fears
are understandable, but unless they are. .dispelled the
chances of a lasting peace between the two communities in
the island will remain a wishful concept.
49. Attention ‘has again and again been called to the
question of financing the peace-keeping operations of the
United Nations. The report clearly indicates that contributions totalling $22.9 million must be received if the cost of
maintaining the Force for a period of six months after
15 December 1971 is to be met. Unless new ways and
means are devised to finance important peace-keeping
efforts of this nature, I am afraid that little progresswill be
achieved in this important area.

50. My delegation has’on a number of occasions emphasized the need for a continuation of the intercommunal
talks between the two interlocutors, We have always held
the position that progress in these talks will contribute
significantly to the reduction of tension between the parties
and to bringing peace and stability to the island. We are,
therefore, gravely disturbed to be apprised of the deadlock,
if not the complete breakdown in this area. My delegation
joins with the Secretary-General in appealing to all concerned to resume these talks without further delay.
5 1. With the extension of the stationing of UNFICYP for
a further six months, and with the Secretary-General’s
suggestion to reactivate the talks, there exists some ground
for optimism, My delegation voted in favour of the draft
resolution unanimously adopted this morning because we
sincerely hope that within that six-month period the
reactivation of the intercommunal talks will set the pace for
a satisfactory solution to this problem.
52. Last, but not least, may I associate myself with all the
agreeable and moving sentiments expressedby the representatives regarding the elevation of the representative of
Turkey to the post of Foreign Minister of his country. I
came to know this distinguished gentleman a’ few weeks
ago, and the more I meet him the more I am coming to
know and like him as a person of great quality such as will
enable him to solve the Cyprus problem. We hope that he
will prove worthy of the confidence which his country,
and, for that matter, this Council repose in him.
53. As PRESIDENT,
of Cyprus.

I give the floor to the representative

54. Mr. KYPRIANOU (Cyprus): I should like to sayjust a
few words. First of all, I wish to express my gratitude to
the Council for giving so much of its valuable time, in the
present circumstances, to dealing with the Cyprus situation.
It was not, of course, appropriate and the occasion wasnot
the right one, to go into all the aspects of the Cyprus
problem which, after all, have been discussedover and over
and over again in the main forums of the United Nations, in
the General Assembly, and, in particular, in the Security
Council.
55. In exercising my right of reply, I would only like to
point out one or two things which I believe to be essential;
1 do not wish to enter into polemics or to open a debate.
56. In a low key and, if I may say so, in a not polemic
statement by the Foreign Minister of Turkey, there were
certain remarks concerning the internal situation in Cyprus
as ‘arising from the Secretary-General’s report. I will not
discuss them. But with your permission, I would simply like
to quote from the observations of the report of the
Secretary-General [S/ICJ401/. In paragraph 97, inter alia,
he says:
“In this connexion, while the Cyprus Government has
continued to co-operate with TJNFICVP in most cases,
the Turkish Cypriot leadership has been reluctant to
extend to UNFICYP .the same measure of co-operation as
in the past. . . .”

so forth. But let us not discuss that. In so far as cm
position on the treaties is conceined, if any one cf the
parties were to challenge the position which we take cn the
legal aspect, we would be quite willing and preparedto see
that party make recourse to the International Court ef
Justice. But this is not the subject matter of the disckea.
As it was properly stated, our effort is to try and achieves
political solution, taking into consideration, of course,tM
whole background. We start from the constitutional st~c.
ture. We have tried for three years and we have failed.

57. The second quotation I would like to add from the
same observations is in paragraph 96. This is in connexion
with the situation which prevails in the island because there
has been some .talk of suffering and hardship on the part of
a section of the population of Cyprus. The SecretaryGeneral here says:
“Despite UNFICYP’s efforts, the Turkish Cypriot
leadership has continued to deny freedom of movement
in the area it controls to unarmed Greek Cypriot civilians.
The leadership ascribes its negative attitude to security
reasons, but the fact remains that some 80 per cent of the
population of Cyprus are deprived of their basic right to
travel freely on the public roads of that area.”

60. The Secretary-General has now put forward a new
formula. As I stated this morning, we have a number of
reservations. However, we declared in this Council that no
accepted the formula, and we accept this formula. end
now, what remains to be done, I believe quite humbly, B
for the Turkish Government to accept it. I think wel-rave
been consulting for the last three months, and I think we
were the ones who were maintaining the reservationsw
grounds of principle, on grounds of persistent fears,1mltfr
admit again that both the Secretary-General and l$
collaborators have tried to remove these fears from us,

I do not wish to add any further remarks in this connexion
because I do believe this covers the substance of what has
been said. Of course there are many other details, but this is
not the proper time to go into them.
~58. I come to one particular point before I conclude
which, though essential, gives rise to misunderstandings.
This phrase “two communities” has become a slogan. If it is
a slogan for the purpose of proving that the people of
Cyprus have equal status, I must remind the members of
the Security Council that the Greek people of Cyprus
comprise 82 per cent of the population and the Turkish
people 18 per cent of the population. If the idea of putting
forward the slogan of two communities is for the purpose
of emphasizing the need of co-operating and creating
common, interests as one people, despite their different
ethnic and religious characteristics, which no one would
deprive them of, then it is a different question. But if the
slogan of the two communities is used as it was in the past
for the purpose of emphasizing division, to this we very
strongly object. Because if we speak of two communities,
where is the people of Cyprus? Well, the people of Cyprus
are the 82 per cent Greek and the 18 per cent Turkish.
Nobody denies to them their ethnic or religious charac
terlstics. And in this connexion I should add what the
representative of Greece said this morning in the course of
his statement. It was not only the question of autonomy in
religious, educational and cultural affairs which was considered for the minority community-if
I may use the
phrase without having any difficulty in calling it the
Turkish community. But there were also other things which
have been considered, such as the guaranteed participation
in all the organs of State in proportion to the populationsomething which I do not think exists in many other
countries. Further, certain things were also discussed in
connexion with local government. But what we have been
trying to avoid is precisely creating conditions which would
lead to division. We are trying to create conditions which
would lead to unity. From what I have heard in the course
of this debate, the word “unity” has been used by most of
the speakers.

61. Therefore, in view of the urgency which haskm
stressed in the Council of trying to achieve something, al
trying to reactivate the talks, of trying to see what canbe
done in the months that lie ahead, whether it is two moati
or three or six months, as the representative of Somaliah
said, I think we must decide. As far as we are concerned,we
have accepted the formula as it stands in the report oftbe
Secretary-General and as it has been proposed in ti
relevant paragraph, which I think is paragraph 79. I donot
think this should be a matter of negotiation any mea
because we have had our consultations and our discus&as,
We have aired our reservations. We now remove ow
reservations and we are ready to start reactivating thetnlb
immediately. So what remains to be done before the next
step? From what I see from the debate, if we fail againthe
Security Council may have to act, or we may haveto ask
the Council to act in accordance with the letter andspirit
of paragraph 103 of the report. What remains to be done
now in the months which lie ahead is not to continue with
consultations and try to change the formula but to stall
immediately, Otherwise we shall find ourselves in exaclly
the same situation as now, and then again hear complaintl
of not having made progress with regard to the substance
of
the problem.
62. I would ask my colleague whether we may take it till
the proposal, as it has been put forward by the Sscretw
General, is acceptable to him as it has been acceptedbyU.
If so, we can move on quickly to reactivate the talksand
act in accordance with the spirit of what we have heard
today in the Security Council.
63. The PRESIDENT:
tive of Turkey.

59. Regarding the treaties to which one or two speakers
referred, our position is well known. They have their
political aspect as well as their legal aspect. We have dealt
with that in the Security Council on many occasions. I am
not going to go into that. We have our legal stand on the
question of the treaties, as to how they came into being, as
to how they are in conflict with the Charter, and so on and

I give the floor to the represefiu-

64. Mr, BAYDLKEN (Turkey): My exercise of the n&t of
reply will be different, I believe it will be rather on a haPPY
note of thanks. Mr.President, I am indeed very mui+h
touched by your kind words and good wishes and fic@‘?f
the members of the Council and the representativesf
Greece. I wish to express my gratitude and thanks 1re@
6

these very kind remarks also as recognition and appreciation of my country’s peaceful and constructive policies in
general and its unswerving support for the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the IJnited Nations both in the
letter and in the spirit. My country entertains good and
cordial relations with all the countries that are represented
around this table. Certainly we are desirous of further
promoting those relations, and in my new capacity I shall
see to it that no additional efforts on our part in that
direction are spared. It will be my pleasant duty to work in
that direction.

people of Cyprus-the peoples of Cyprus. With regard to
the percentages, it would be much more realistic to say that
for every four Greek Cypriots there is one Turkish Cypriot
on the island.
69. With regard to the treaties, I shall not go into the
substance of the question, although he makes his points
with his customary brilliance and with a gentle voice. He
stated his position about treaties. The Council knows our
position with regard tq treaties. The archives abound with
our statements about them. Of course, our position is in
line with the precepts of international law.

65. As to the United Nations, where I have sevedone third
of my official career of about 30 years and where I spent
IO years of my life, I had the honour and privilege of
participating in 15 General Assembly regular sessionsand
four emergency sessions. I have come to know that this
Organization is a most democratic Organization where titles
and ranks do not mean much, It is possible to know one
another better here than in any other place. There is a
coilegial feeling of friendship and a sense of working
together. While I regret my departure from the Organization because of my new duties, I can assure all my
colleagues and friends that I shall always cherish these
memories and I shall see to it that I shall come at quite
frequent intervals to this Organization to bring my modest
contribution.

70. As regards the suggestions of the Secretary-General
and the responsesgiven by the different parties, I think it is
true that the suggestions were made on 18 October, The
Turkish Government responded on 24 November, and
today we have heard the Foreign Minister of Cyprus say
that they accepted them. It is now 13 December. So I think
there has been no delay on our part in answering the
suggestions of the Secretary-General. I can restate what I
said in my main statement [1612th meeting], that a
consensus will be soon found and the talks will be
reactivated. I am glad to hear that Mr. Kyprianou said that
they are ready to reactivate the talks,
71. In conclusion, I should like again to thank all the
representatives for their constructive contributions through
their interventions at the present meeting of the Council. I
appreciate their fair approach to the problem, which I am
sure will help to facilitate the resumption of the intercommunal talks. The bicommunal basis of the Republic of
Cyprus not only emerges from international treaties but is
also a fact of life. The treaties took this reality into account
when the independent status of Cyprus was framed,
Therefore respect for these international obligations is
equally respect for the realistic situation in Cyprus, I am
sure that a common will should exist on the part of all the
parties in order to arrive at an agreed solution and I hope
that such a common will will not fail to emerge soon.

66. Possibly it might be of interest to my colleagues to
know that in the Cabinet of Turkey three members are
closely linked with the United Nations. The Prime Minister
of Turkey, Mr. Erim, participated as a legal counsel at the
San Francisco Conference on the founding of the United
Nations, at which my country participated as one of the
founding Members, and contributed to the work of this
Organization. He participated in different organs as well as
serving in the International Law Commission. Another
member of the new Cabinet, the Minister of Justice,
Mr. Bilge, was a regular participant in the Sixth Committee
and has been newly elected to the International Law
Commission. I hope that my modest experience in this
Organization and these connexions I have cited as regards
the members of the Turkish Cabinet will prove how much
importance we attach to this Organization.

72. The PRESIDENT: There seems to be a general feeling
among the members that the interested parties should be
encouraged to agree on the modalities of reactivating the
talks, with the participation of, the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative and representatives of Turkey and
Greece, as suggested by the Secretary-General.

67. With regard to some of the points raised by
Mr. Kyprianou, the Foreign Minister of Cyprus, I will of
course take the same line and I shall not exercise my right
of reply. However, he quoted one paragraph of the
Secretary-General’s report, and I will quote from only one
paragraph of the same report, about the difficulties that
exist. In paragraph 98, where the Secretary-General speaks
of the tension, uneasiness and frustration, he says the
following:

73. I hope that the feeling of optimism that has been
raised at this session in that connexion will bear fruit and
that by the time this Council convenes at the end of this
six-month period final peace and understanding will be very
near, if not fully established. The Council has now
concluded consideration of this item.
4fr. Kyprianou (~prus), Mr. Bayiilken
Mr. Bitsios (Greece) withdrew.

“This tension has been recently deepened by rumours
of the presence of General Grivas in the island and a
related resurgence of the pro-en&s campaign among
some sections of the Greek Cypriot population.”

(Turkey) and

Letter dated 12 December 1971 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 0444)

68. The Foreign Minister, Mr. Kyprianou, asked, “What is
the people of Cyprus? ” I think he himself gave the answer.
He said: “the Greek people of Cyprus and the Turkish
people of Cyprus”. Those are his words. Those are the

74. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council will recall
that at a previous meeting 11606th meeting] the Council
7

the serious political crisis and suffered all the conditions c$
hardship created in East Pakistan, and who, if one may w
a figurative expression, voted with their hands and by th&
ballot-papers in which appear to have been the fir%
parliamentary elections in the history of Pakistan in
December of last year, and then, as a result of the acts of
aggression and terror committed by the armed forcesti
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Swaran Singh
East Pakistan, they voted with their feet; in other words:
(India) and Mr. 2. A. Bhutto (Pakistan) took places at the
they were forced to flee their own country to another,
Council table.
neighbouring country in order to save their lives. That is a
sort of vote with one’s feet against the people who created
75. The PRESIDENT:
The Council had also decided
such conditions. All this is undoubtedly a reality and a
[1407th meeting] to extend invitations to the representafactual situation and it would be useful for each member of
tives of Tunisia and Saudi Arabia to take the places reserved the Security Council, as an individual, and for the Council
for them in the Council chamber, on the understanding that
as a whole to hear these representatives in accordancewith
they would be invited to take a place at the Council table
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. Under this
when it was their turn to address the Council. Accordingly,
rule, the Security Council may invite to a meeting andhear
I shall, with the consent of the Council, invite the
persons who are competent to speak on the matter under
representatives of Tunisia and Saudi Arabia to take the
discussion. Surely no one can deny that these people are,in
seats reserved for them in the Council chamber.
fact, competent to speak on the question under discussion,
or that it would be useful to give them a hearing, But
At the invitation of the President, Mr, R. Driss (lI&sia)
judging by the question which was raised some time agoby
and Mr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took places in the
the distinguished representative of Argentina, when the
Council chamber.
Council first discussed this problem, there was uncertainty
about the category in which to place them. Place thetn in
76. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
any category you like. I have before me a note about
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on a point or order.
invitations issued by the Council to individuals so that they
could be heard on matters on which those persons were
77. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
competent to speak. There have been 10 casesduring the
(translation JClom Russian): As you will recall, at’ the
whole history;so to speak, of the Security Council. I do
meetings when the situation on the Indian subcontinent
not know how complete this list is and whether it mentions
was first discussed, the wish was expressed and a formal
all cases, but such casesthere have been. It is sufficient to
proposal was made that we should invite the representatives
recall such incidents as that on 3 May 1968 [1421sr
of Bangla Desh to the meeting of the Security Council.
meeting] when the Council heard the Mayor of Jerusalem.
Yesterday [Idllth
meetingJ, as we were all able to hear,
And quite recently, on 2 December this year [1604rh
the distinguished representative of India, Mr. Singh, the
meeting], the Council took a decision to invite the two
Minister for Foreign Affairs, also expressed the wish that
well-known leaders of Southern Rhodesia, Mr. Joshua
the representatives of Bangla Desh should be invited to the
Nkomo
and Mr. Ndabaningi Sithole. So, there have been
Security Council meeting.
casesin the past when the Council has applied rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure and this provides a basis
78. The point is that, as a result of the recent development
for applying this rule in the present case in respect of the
of events, this circumstance has become a reality and there
representatives of Bangla Desh. We are firmly convinced
has arisen, if I may put it that way, a definite and real third
that it would be extremely useful to invite and to hear
force. Indeed, as we learned from the statement by the
those
representatives and that to hear them might throw
distinguished Foreign Minister of India, the force is an
light
on
many aspects of the cause, the main cause,the
impressive one-approximately
150,000 partisans. If they
consequence of which was the conflict on the Indian
constitute Bangla De&, it would be appropriate for the
Security Council to issue an invitation to the representa- subcontinent, a conflict which has grow&&no an international problem and with which both the Security Council
tives of Bangla Desh and to hear their opinion and
and the General Assembly now have to deal.
assessment of the events which have occurred in recent
months in East Pakistan and which have led to, or, if I may
80. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of the
say so, have been the consequence of the tragic mistakes
USSR who has raised a point of order and under rule 3bof
which the distinguished Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign
the provisional rules of procedure I have to give a ruling
Minister of Pakistan, Mr. Bhutto, admitted in his statement
immediately
on the point of order. The point is that certain
yesterday [ibid.]. Of course, I think the members of the
persons should be invited under rule 39 of the provisiefial
Security Council expected to hear more from the Deputy
rules of procedure to participate.
Prime Minister of Pakistan about what has happened in East
Pakistan. But he merely limited himself at the beginning of
81. Members will recall that the representative of India, by
his statement to the word “mistakes” or “mistake” and
a letter dated 4 December (S/10415/, had forwardeds
subsequently used the two words “tragic mistake” or
letter from Mr. Abu Sayeed Chowdhury, requesting te
“tragic mistakes”; he did not disclose the true nature of the
make a statement before the Council. In that respect1
situation.
might also point out that at the 1606th mekting representa
79. Under these conditions it would be especially useful to
tive of the USSR proposed that the Council should granta
hear the representatives of those who have lived through
hearing to a representative of Bangla Desh and he has.
decided to invite the representatives of India and Pakistan
to participate, without vote, in the consideration of the
item currently under discussion before the Council. In
accordance with that decision, and with the consent of the
Council, I shall invite the representatives of India and
Pakistan to take places at the Council table.

8

repeated this proposal now. The Council, in accordance
with the suggestion made there by its President, had then
decided to defer a decision on this matter,

certain elections had been held or because certain elections
had not been held, to claim later that we must hear ‘the
representatives of those sectors which have not been
listened to in their own country. That is to say, if we are in
the process of recognising realities, we must recognize that
this precedent is a very serious reality.

82. Now a decision has to be taken. I should like to give a
ruling but I notice that the, representative of Argentina
would like to take the floor. I call on the representative of
Argentina.

88. Considering the entire debate, it is my impression that
one delegation of one country which is directly concerned
has not only stated its own views on the crisis but has also,
with great eloquence and a wealth of detail, reported to us
on what is happening in the other country which is directly
concerned. And if it can speak for the second country, I
wonder why it could not then state the views of that
movement which the Council would have to hear if it
accepted the proposal made by the representative of the
Soviet Union.

83. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
porn Spanish): It is precisely to the point of order raised by
the representative of the Soviet Union that I wish to refer.
Indeed, Mr. President, you were correctly guiding our
deliberations when you recalled that at a recent meeting the
Council had decided to postpone consideration of this
question. Strictly speaking this postponement came about
because the representative of the Soviet Union himself
explained to us that it was necessaryto continue consultations on this problem. My delegation has not been
consulted nor are we aware that in the meantime, since
Sunday a week ago, any consultations have been held. But,
in any case, I think I will repeat the points of view
expressed by my delegation at the time when the same
proposal was made by the representative of the Soviet
Union,

89. For all the reasons which.1 have now stated and which
I also had an opportunity to state on another occasion
before the Council, my delegation continues to be against
any invitation to the representatives of a Government
which, to my knowledge in any case, has not been
recognized by more than two countries,
90. The PRESIDENT: For the benefit of members, I shall
read rule 30 of the provisional rules of procedure:

84. The proposal we have is born of document S/10415, a
request submitted to the Council for consideration, which
is signed by the head of the delegation of Bangla Desh to
the United Nations, In the last paragraph of that submission
he requests to be heard as the representative of the people
and Government of Bangla Desh. Now, it is really rather
difficult to dissociate the individual from the request made
on behalf of the people of Bangla Desh. Does that person
renounce the role of representative of the Government and
people of Bangla Desh to be heard by the Security
Council? That is my first question,

“If a representative raises a point of order, the President
shall immediately state his ruling. If it is challenged, the
President shall submit his ruling to the Security Council
for immediate decision and it shall stand unless overruled.”
91. The representative of the Soviet Union has raised a
point of order. I propose immediately to give my ruling on
his point of order and if my ruling is overruled I shall then
put it forward to the Council.

85. Secondly, a great deal has been said here about
realities. The term “realities” or “realism” is the one which
has most been used in the tragic debate which is now under
way in the Council. Since that is the term which two or
three delegations use most, let us refer to “realities”. I
submit that to accede to the request made by the
representative of the Soviet Union also constitutes, if it is a
reality, a serious and very dangerous precedent which the
Council should take into account. Why is this? Becausethe
reality is-even though it may be said that there are no two
situations which are identical-that it would be enough if in
the convulsed world of today secessionwere encouraged in
any country in the world, and then we were told that we
must hear one of the representatives of that secessionist
movement for the Council to have to proceed in the same
manner once a precedent such as we are now analysing was
established.

92. In giving my ruling under rule 30, I want to make it
clear that there is a difference in international law between
the recognition of a Government and the recognition of a
State, Before a new State is recognized in accordancewith
international law, certain basic criteria must be in existence.
This is the difference from the recognition of a Government
in an existing State. A new State known as Bangla Desh has
been mentioned in this Council and the representative of
the USSR has asked, not that individuals should come or be
invited under rule 39, but that representatives of this new
St ate should be invited.
93. I am not satisfied from the points adduced that a new
State with the necessary criteria for recognition exists,
known as Bangla Desh. Accordingly, I rule that in accordance with rule 39, I cannot allow the presence in the
Security Council of any representatives from a State, the
criteria of existence of which have not fully satisfied my
mind. This does not mean that, if individuals who are
concerned in the matter before the Council wish to be
heard, they cannot be heard in accordance with the
provisions of rule 39.

86. Thirdly, it would be enough for subversion to be
encouraged in one country for us to be told we must hear
the representatives of that .subversive movement evoking
this precedent.
87. Fourthly, it would be sufficient for a country to
interfere in the internal affairs of another State, saying that
it was pIeased or displeased with the manner in which

94. I therefore overrule the point
representative of the USSR.
9

of order of the

-9.5. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(frmslation fionz Russim): Mr. President, I would request
you to read the verbatim record of my statement. You will
not find the word “State” there. I spoke of inviting the
representatives as “competent persons”, and in thisrespect
I based myself solely on rule 39. I should like to make this
clear, since in making your ruling you made an assumption
which is not entirely accurate. For my part, I spoke of
hearing competent persons, and not the representatives of a.
State, in the Security Council. Your ruling refers to ‘a State.
I, therefore, submit that there has been a misunderstanding.
It is not my intention to challenge your ruling or your right
to introduce any ruling which you consider appropriate in
view of your rights and prerogatives and of the importance
‘of the post you occupy. But I reserve nonetheless my right
to revert to this matter at some later stage and to explain
once again that I am talking about inviting competent
people who might enlighten the Security Council and give it
some consistent and useful explanations, some information
which would be of use in the consideration by the Council
of the matter under discussion. I am deeply convinced that
this would cause no harm to anyone, but that it would, on
the contrary, be of benefit to all.
96. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of the
USSR and I note his statement that he is not challenging
the decision of the Chair but that it is his intention to bring
the matter forward, when I do trust he will come strictly
within rule 39 so that, if we are inviting persons, we should
identify them by whatever means we have to identify
persons, so as to reach a proper decision at that stage,
97. I have on my list the Foreign Minister of India, I do
not know whether he wishes to talk on the matter decided
upon or on the item on the agenda. He has the floor.
98. Mr. Swaran SINGH (India): Mr. President, it is not my
intention to challenge your ruling, but I thought it better
that the position should be clarified. You stated that your
ruling did not mean that persons who might be competent
to give information about what is happening there would be
barred. The representative of the Soviet Union has pointed
out that he had not suggested that they should be invited as
representatives of the State, but under rule 39 as persons
competent to supply the Council with information or to
give other assistance in examining matters within its
bompetence.

countries may not recognize them, but the reality is there,
and in that capacity persons who might be competent to
give information regarding what is happening in the m,
information which will enable the Security Council lo
decide on adequate measures in accordance with whatewr
may be the wish and desire of the Council, should give&as
information within the meaning of rule 39. Those decjsiem
will actually have to be implemented in the area. By tjks(
process those persons will also be involved in establishinga
-durable peace. It appears to be absolutely essential that m
opportunity should be given to such persons to enable&
Security Council to understand the issues involved and&u
to allow them to assist the Security Council in enforciq
any decisions that it may take to restore peace and to bting
about normalcy in that region.
100. With these observations, I would strongly urge tie
Security Council or you, Mr. President, to consider the
desirability of affording an opportunity to such persoas,
within the meaning of rule 39.
101. The PRESIDENT: I want to make my ruling clear.
My ruling is that all persons who can assist the Council, if
they are properly identified, can, with the consent of th
Council, be admitted. But we cannot invite personsof
whose existence we are unaware. We do not have any
concrete proposal for the invitation of Mr. X or Mr. Y DIUC
someone who might even be designated by a function se
that he can be identified. The only application we have,and
I have consulted the record, is for representatives of Ban@
Desh. I have given my reasons why I cannot admit that
application. My reasons have not been challenged. If nowor
at any subsequent occasion a concrete proposal is madete
invite Mr. X or Mr. Y, or for a certain type of person who
can assist us to come here, that matter will be put before
the Council.
102. Mr. KU$AGA
(Poland)
[interpretation
fim
fienchj: I should like to state very briefly that I, too,lud
understood the proposal of the representative of the So\ieI
Union as one based on rule 39 of the provisional rules01
procedure. I supported that proposal last week, and I
continue to consider it to be a proposal which is important
for the work of the Security Council.
103. The fact: that the persons mentioned are competent
to bring information to the Security Council, information
which can assist it in its work, does not give rise to any
doubt on the part of anyone. I think that no one can
dispute that. That they are concerned in the matter is no1
doubted either. That they constitute a political movenlent
is in the opinion of my delegation also beyond doubt.

99. This is a matter which is not denied by anyone-and I
suppose it will not be denied even by the representative of
Pakistan-that apart from the armed forces of India and
Pakistan being engaged in the conflict in Bangla Desh, there
is also a large number of persons armed, organized and
accepting the orders of the Government of Bangla Desh
who are participating in partisan activities and carrying on
their fight for maintaining their freedom. Whereas I can
understand the reluctance to invite them as representatives
of the State, any discussion which is calculated to restore
normalcy in that area and create conditions in which the
hostile armed activities shouId come to an end is not
practical and does not have any content or meaning unless a
group which is functioning there, according to us in their
capacity as persons who belong to the armed forces of the
Government of Bangla Desh, is heard by the Council. Other

104. For all these reasons, my delegation, as already stated
at the beginning of our debate on this item, is in favouraf
the proposal and we shall continue to be in favour of tMr
proposal. I have taken note of what the President hassaid
today.
105. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the Deputy Pritn~
Minister and Foreign Minister of Pakistan.
106. Mr. BHUTTO (Pakistan): Usually States invited by
the Security Council to participate in debates of fit
10

Security Council do not take part in nrocedural discussions.
This has been the practice in the past and I presume it
continues to be the practice. However, even if we werenot
invited and we had to participate in our own right as a
non-permanent member of the Security CounciI at this
moment of time I would think that every minute is vital.
Precious lives are being lost in my country. There is
hand-to-hand fighting going on. If the Security Council is
not conscious of the priorities involved, I would feel that it
is not conscious of the magnitude of the crisis and is not
aware of the bloodshed and atrocities that are being
committed in my country. My country is bleeding, If the
Security Council could proceed with the debate, we would
appreciate it very much. Yesterday also we bowed to the
will of the Security Council. We adjourned for almost 18
hours. I would request the Security Council, and you,
Mr. President, that we proceed with the debate. An
important draft resolution is before the members of the
Security Council. I would appreciate it if this point of view
is taken into consideration,

111. But here, in peace time, 10 million people have
moved from one State to another. That is an unprecedented, extraordinary event. It is completely impossible to
understand or to explain why certain members of the
Security Council close their eyes to this reality, to this
unprecedented situation and attempt to disregard it.
112. Given such an approach, it is impossible to fiid the
correct solution either in procedural terms or in terms of
the substance of the matter under discussion. We can
already see the consequences of this, when, under the
pressure and influence of two permanent members of the
Security Council, the Council has not followed the course it
should have taken in the light of this reality, the unprecedented event we are discussing and the consequences of
that event.
113. Therefore, to claim here that it will create a
precedent, that it is. dangerous for other States, is to
employ a trumped-up argument. But let us leave this
argument aside since it wasconnected with the concept of a
State. The President has given his ruling on that basis. At
the same time he stated that, if it wasa question of inviting
an individual, a competent person who .could help the
Council, he would consider the matter.

107. The PRESIDENT: I want to make it clear that I have
already given a ruling, and we are now on the debate of the
substance of the agenda item before the Council.
108. Mr. MALIK

especially peopIe. That was a war, a horrible, unprece.
dented war.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translation from Russian): I have already stated that I am

not challenging your ruling. For your part, you have stated
that you will consider the question if a concrete proposal is
introduced and a specific person named. So be it. Before
proceeding on this matter, I should like to say a few words
for the benefit of the distinguished representative of
Argentina, who raised an objection on this point. I should
like to draw his attention to the fact that he attempted, if I
may so put it, to frighten us into thinking that this would
create a dangerous precedent. I think that such a dangeris
purely hypothetical, The point is that the events in East
Pakistan, which by their development have outgrown the
confines of that region and spilled over the borders of East
Pakistan, have become a major cause of inter-State conflict,
of a conflict between two States and this, in its turn, has
transformed the conflict into an international problem
which is now before the Security Council. Consequently, it
is an unusual event, unusual in both character and form.
Who can cite a similar situation, where 10 million people,
figuratively speaking, voted with their feet as a sign of
protest against the intolerable conditions created for them
in their own homeland and moved to another country?

114. I am naming such a competent person, namely,
Justice Abu Sayeed Chowdhury, who was mentioned by
the distinguished Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations in his letter to the President of the Security
Council. I am not linking him with anyone or anything; 1
am mentioning his name and raising the possibility of
inviting him as a person competent to speak on the matter
under discussion, and that is all.
115. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Soviet
Union has put forward a definite proposal-I would take it
as a point of order-that someone whom he has named,
Justice Abu Sayeed Chowdhury, should be invited as an
individual because he has information which will assist the
Security Council in coming to a decision on this matter. I
must make a decision on this point of order, an individual
having been named, However, I notice that the representative of China would like to speak, I would call attention to
rule 30 of the provisional rules of procedure in calling on
him.

109. In any case, it can be stated with confidence that no
such danger threatens 88 States Members of the United
Nations, since in 88 States Members of the United Nations,
as has already been pointed out during the discussion in the
Security Council, the population comprises less than 10
million people.

116. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (transiu tion from Chinese):
Mr. Malik, from the time when the question of the conflict
between India and Pakistan on the subcontinent first came
up, has continuously raised the question of the so-called
representative of Bangla Desh in this debate. A 1o.t of time
has been wasted and the proceedings of this meeting are
being obstructed. We all know, we can see clearly, that his
purpose is to obstruct the course of the meeting of the
Security Council from substantive discussions on the
current tension between India and Pakistan. His purpose is
to use this toy in his pocket which is called Bangla Desh-in
essence really a mere puppet-to obstruct the proceedings
of the Security Council. The delegation of China resoluteIy
opposes this. Furthermore, we consider it deeply regret-,

110. Here eve have a case which is unusual and without
precedent in peace time, There are well-known casesin
history of populations fleeing before an advancing enemy.
Millions moved their homes within my own country when
the Hitlerite hordes approached the centres of the Ukraine,
which is my homeland, and Moscow, the capital of the
Soviet Union. Millions of people fled from the enemy who
burnt all in his path and destroyed all living things,
11

table that the Soviet representative should adopt these
tactics. What is the so-called Bangla Desh? It is nothing but
a toy in the pocket of the Indian expansionists and the
Soviet social&nperialists. BY conferring on these rebels for
armed subversion the title of prime minister or foreign
minister can they turn the “Bangla Desh” into a State?
117. Mr. Malik goes so far as to suggestthat we recognize
them asthe representatives of a so-called national liberation
movement. It would be an insult to the national liberation
movement to call the national traitor of Pakistan, the rebels
for armed subversion reared by the Indian expansionists
and the Soviet social-imperialists, the representatives of a
national liberation movement.
118. Not long ago the Soviet agency TASS called the
establishment of “Ban&la Desh” a most important milestone in the history of the national liberation movement.
This is a sheer lie. On one occasion you consider them as
the representatives of “Ban&la De&“. On another occasion,
you call them Mr. X and Mr. Y in order to impose this
person on the Security Council, What you have in mind is
to move this farce which you and the Government of India
staged in Calcutta and New Delhi to the forum of the
Security Council. This is impermissible. Therefore, I request
that the Council stop the discussion and waste of time of
this question and immediately proceed with the substantive
discussions.
119. The PRESIDENT: There is a saying: Nero fiddles
while Rome burns. It is not my intention to allow the
Security Council to fiddle while the grave situation deteriorates in the Hindustani subcontinent. Therefore, I shall
proceed in accordance with rule 39 of the provisional rules
of procedure which reads: “The Security Council may
invite members of the Secretariat or other persons, whom it
considers competent for the purpose”. It is not the
President who invites, it is the Security Council. The
President merely decides on a point of order as to whether
the matter comes before the Council or not. On this
occasion I am satisfied that the representative of the Soviet
Union has named a person who, he assuresme, can be of
assistanceto the Council in examining the matter within its
competence. I therefore propose to put the matter immediately before the Council as to whether it is disposed to
invite an individual known as Mr. Justice Abu Sayeed
Chowdhury.
120. Is the Soviet representative challenging my decision
on Ms point of order to allow Mr. Justice Chowdhury to
come to the table?
121. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translation porn Russian): I am not casting doubt on the

manner in which you are conducting the meeting, but I
would ask you to give me the opportunity, in exercise of
the right of reply, to make some comments about the
routine attack on the Soviet Union made by Mr. Huang
Hua.

to my inviting Mr. Justice Chowdhury to participate, c*
whether it has to be decided by a vote. It ia a prWX
question-the veto does not apply. I CXI see an ohje
already, so the matter will have to be put to the Vok
123. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Rep
I am not insisting on a
think my proposal should be studied more carefully.

(translation from Russian):

124. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of PIti
Soviet Union. My understanding is that when MembePa: d
the United Nations which are not members of
Council are invited, it is a purely procedural ma
the President sees no objection, such and SUCK
invited. It implies a vote. If the representative 0
Union is withdrawing his point of order with regard &Q
Justice Abu Sayeed Chowdhury’s being invited ta &e
Council table under rule 39 of the provisional r&s @’
procedure, I shall be disposed to act accordingly.
125. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Repubtia~

(translation j?om Russian): I do not insist on a vote.

126. Mr. BHUTTO (Pakistan): Mr. President . . .
127. The PRBSIDBNT: I am sorry, but I am not going 12
give the floor to anyone until we have decided on the
of procedure. We cannot have a point of order on a pain! ~5
order. I believe you suggested, your Excellency, that it *a
not proper for India to have participated in the discutii~
on procedure, and you want to do the same thing,
128. Mr. BHUTTO (Pakistan): This individual mcntir?n$
by the representative of the Soviet Union does not, in sr>
case, fall under rule 39. He styles himself as a reprcsentatrsc
of the Government of so-called Bangla Desh. You Iaa~
already ruled, Mr. President, that there is ‘a differeax
between recognizing a State or a Government, and tktl
comes under another article. The person mentioned styin
himself as a representative of the Government of P!X
so-called Bangla Desh State, so this does not fall within a&
terms of rule 39. But this is without prejudice to Iny atk~
name that might be proposed.
129. The PRESIDENT: I have listened with interest to t&
Deputy Prime Minister of Pakistan. I maintain that it is not
for the Council to look into the qualifications when sir;&
identification has been made by a member of the Cound.B
therefore proceed, on the point of order, to put to tla~r
council whether Mr. Justice Abu Sayeed Chowdbur+*
should be invited to participate in the discussion. I repaa
Ms, because the gavel will go down if I see no objection..?
can see objections. I call on the representative of China.
130. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation jkonz &~MEW~
~1 You be kind enough, Mr. President, to repeat yo;;r
ruling?
131. The PRESIDENT: I shall repeat the ruling aFtar I
have heard the representative of Argentina.

122. The PRESIDENT: I realize that the representative of
the Soviet Union wishes to exercise the right of reply. I
shall give him that opportunity later. Let us first deal with
the matter before us, which is whether the Council agrees

132. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretatic~
from Spanish): Mr. Prest‘d en t , since you had asked wfietbcr
there were any objections, I would like to remind you that
12

OI
Id
OEl

he
of
tY
if
is
et
IO

le
sf

in my statement I said I objected to the proposal which had
been’made. So that if it is to be decided, let it be by a vote.
Later I shall request you to give me the floor too, so asto
exercise my right of reply,
133. The PRESIDENT:
The matter of explanations of
vote and rights of reply will be taken care of.

representative of the United States of America and the
Foreign, Ministers of India and Pakistan spoke at the last
meeting. But the members of the Security Council had no
opportunity to express their views. I consider that no one
has the right to deprive them of the opportunity to express
themselves, whether it be on the United States draft
resolution or on the matter under discussion as a’whole.

134. There is no objection, and the representative of
China wishes me to repeat my ruling, My ruling is to the
following effect. The recognition of a new State is different
from the recognition of a new Government within an
existing State. For the recognition of a new State, certain
basic principles have been hammered out throughout the
years in international law. A new State known as Bangla
Desh has been mentioned here. I am not satisfied that the
principles of international law concerning the recognition
of a new State have been fulfied, and therefore I rule
against admitting any representative of a State known as
Bangla Desh to the Security Council table.

140. The PRESIDENT: I am certain we are on the same
wave length. I was saying that we left off early this morning
with this draft resolution. Unless I have any objections or
indications to the contrary, I propose that we now have the
opportunity of a further discussion of the draft resolution.
We have already heard the representative of the United
States, the Foreign Minister of India, and the Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister of Pakistan, and it is my
belief that other members of the Security Council would
now want to participate in the discussion of this draft
resolution. I can see no objections to this procedure. It is
therefore so decided.

135. If there had been any objection to my ruling, under
rule 30 I would have had to put my ruling to the Council
without further debate. There was no objection and the
ruling stands. I made it clear, however, that any individual
properly identified by name, function or other description
might be considered under rule 39. The representative of
the Soviet Union has properly identified an individual
known as Mr. Justice Abu Sayeed Chowdhury. I have ruled
that he comes within rule 39 as an individual, and unlessI
hear any objection, I would invite him to the deliberations.

141. Before we call on the first speaker on the draft
resolution, the representative of the United States has
indicated that he has something to say.

136. I have heard an objection, and in accordance with the
conventions of the Security Council, having had an objection, I now put the matter to a vote.
137. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Mr. President, I made a proposal, but since you are putting the matter to a vote, I am
not insisting on a vote. And if the person who makes a
proposal does not ask for a vote, then there is no point in
voting.
(translation

ftom

Rx&n):

138. The PRESIDENT:
I take this to mean that the
representative of the Soviet Union has withdrawn his
proposal. I should like to draw the attention of the
members of the Security Council to the fact that when we
adjourned early this morning, we had document S/10446,
the draft resolution submitted by the United States, before
us. It was our intention in coming here this afternoon
-possibly this morning-that we would resume the discussion of this draft resolution. Bearing in mind that the Soviet
Union has already closed this matter, unless I have any
indication to the contrary I now propose that we start a
discussion on the draft resolution contained in document
S/10446.
139.

Mr. MALIK (TJnion of Soviet Socialist Republics)
from Russian): At the last meeting the question
did not arise that we should discuss only the United States
draft resolution. If any delegation expressesthe wish to
speak on the substance of the matter under discussion, I
submit that there are no grounds for depriving any member
of the Security Council of such an opportunity. Only the
(translation

142. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): I will be very
brief because I understand that our distinguished colleague
from Nicaragua, in a most gracious way, has permitted me a
minute to explain that the United States has accepted the
suggestion for a change in our draft resolution, which I
believe was originated by the representative of Japan. We
have asked that that change be circulated. In essence,
without going into the substance and thus keeping the floor
away from the representative of Nicaragua any longer, I
would simply point out that what it does is to delete
operative paragraph 1, and it inserts a new preambular
paragraph which will go in as the fourth preambular
paragraph. It will read:
“Regretting that the Government of India has not yet
accepted an unconditional and immediate cease-fire and
withdrawal as set forth in General Assembly resolution
2793 (XXVI),,‘.

143. The United States has accepted this suggestion for a
change, and it will be incorporated in the revised draft
resolution which should be before the members as this
matter is discussed. I think we need not speck on the
substance of this change. It is a helpful suggestion by the
Government of Japan and it meets with our full approval.
144. The PRESIDENT: I note that the representative of
the United States has in essence deleted the operative
paragraph 1 of his draft resolution and inserted a new
preambular paragraph which will now be the fourth
preambular paragraph.
145. The first speaker on my list this afternoon for the
substantive discussion is the representative of Nicaragua,
146. Mr. SEVILLA SACASA (Nicaragua) (interpretation
from Spanish): At the meeting on 6 December (1608th
meeting/ we were the first to recall the resolution “Uniting
for peace” [General Assembly resolution 377(V)]. We

.

recalled it on observing that it was impossible for the
Security Council to adopt a resolution, or, to be exact, the
resolution, to which the vast majority of the members of
the Security Council aspired. We quoted the resolution with
personal pleasure because the honour fell to us to participate as a representative of Nicaragua in the fifth session of
the General Assembly which adopted it on 3 November
1950 at Lake Success. In order to adopt this resolution, it
was rightly adduced that if the Security Council were to be
paralysed because of the use of the veto, the General
Assembly should take action at an extraordinary session in
order to adopt the measures it deems appropriate to impose
order and maintain international peace and security.

151. The delegation of Nicaragua firmly supports the &aft
resolution submitted by the representative of the United
States of America, because we consider that this is the
minimum the Council should do in order to fulfil the sacred
mission entrusted to it under the Charter. The cas,eis so
grave that we can affirm without fear of contradiction that
the Organization is subject to a hard trial in this month of
December. Let us say so bravely and without any fear,it is
on trial during this month of December. Therefore let us
saveits prestige. We have the right to saveits prestige, and it
is also an obligation for us. This is the voice of Nicaragua ln
/these difficult hours our Organization is living through.

lJ152. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Soci$st Republics)
/+‘j’ (translation from Russian): Once more the Security Council
147. The draft resolution submitted on 6 December by j’j
has met to consider the situation in the I$industan
the representative of Somalia immediately won the support
peninsula
where, as a result of well-known causesof which
of several delegations, among them the delegation of
many
delegations
have spoken in detail in their statements
Nicaragua. Thus it was that the Council adopted the
at
previous
meetings
of the Security Council, there has
resolution (303 /1971J whereby it immediately transarisen
acute
international
tension which has grown into an
mitted consideration of the crisis to the General Assembly
armed
conflict
between
two
States in the Indian subcontinin accordance with the procedure established in the
ent.
The
States
Members
of
the United Nations and the
“Uniting for peace” resolution. The Security Council
entire
world
community
are
now
well aware of the causes
transmitted the problem to the General Assembly, which,
of
the
complications
which
have
arisen. As was convinas we said yesterday, is the most representative and
cingly
demonstrated
at
earlier
meetings
of the Council and
democratic organ of the Organization, and this is so because
in the General Assembly vetoes are not operative. What in yesterday’s statement (1611th meetingJ by the Foreign
Minister of India, Mr. Singh, the main cause of the
prevail in the General Assembly are the votes of the
constantly
increasing strain on relations between India and
majority, precisely because they are a majority.
Pakistan, which has led to armed conflict, was the situation
brought about in East Pakistan as a result of the anti148. The General Assembly at its 2002nd and 2003rd
democratic, violent actions of ‘the Pakistan authorities
meetings of 7 December adopted, by 104 votes to 11 with
against the people of East Pakistan. As a result of the use of
10 abstentions, resolution 2793 (XXVI} which called upon
the armed forces and the inhuman oppression of the
India and Pakistan to arrange a cease-fire and to withdraw
population of East Pakistan, hundreds of thousands of its
their troops to their respective territories. The number of
peaceful inhabitants have perished and almost 10 million
votes in favour speaks volumes: one hundred and four votes people have been forced to flee to neighbouring India in
of the General Assembly speak for themselves.
order to escape deadly danger, The opposition of the
population of East Pakistan to the punitive and terrorist
149. Since that resolution has not been complied with so actions of the Pakistan armed forces wasnot caused by any
far, the delegation of the United States, quite rightly, once intrigues on the part of India, but is the natural reaction of
again has called on the Security Council to assume its
people who are being subjected to cruel methods of
responsibility in this serious case, which beyond any doubt
terrorism, violence and repression.
constitutes a threat 1;o peace-and not only peace in the
153. India, as a neighbouring State, became the victim of
area but also peace in -the world. Why not say it? Why not
the consequences of the unprecedented and monstrous
say that the tragedy which overwhelms the Indo-Pakistani
events in East Pakistan. Into its te,&ory there poured a
subcontinent is being talked about throughout the world
with pain and also with suprise as something that cannot be
lOmillion-strong flood of refugees f&m East Pakistan. This
event, which, as has already been pointed out, is without
understood or apprehended? I repeat, the world cannot
precedent in peace time, placed India in an extremely
understand or apprehend it. And, of course, far less will it
difficult situation. And only those who are capable of
understand tomorrow that the legal political system which
closing their eyes to reality could fail to understand the
we built in San Francisco with such great effort does not
true tragedy of these events.
adopt concrete measures in the case of two States Members
of the Organization.
154. The fundamental position of the Soviet Union has
always been and still is based on the desire to maintain and
150. Ambassador Bush was very clear and explicit and he
has been so again, when he explained the purpose of his
develop good and friendly relations with both India and
Pakistan. Guided by the desire to maintain peace in the
Government in regard to the grave problem before us. The
Indian subcontinent, the Soviet Government more than
revised draft resolution which he has submitted to us for
consideration is in itself important. It was preceded by his
once expressed to the President of Pakistan, Mr. Yahya
letter of 12 December addressed to the President of the
Khan, and to the Pakistan Government its concern at the
Security Council, in which Ambassador Bush states, when
situation which was developing as a rest& of the aggravarequesting an immediate meeting of the Security Council,
tion of the political crisis in East Pakistan. A message from
that the Council “has an obligation to end this threat to
the President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the
world peace on a most urgent basis” [S/l 04441.
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Comrade N. V.

I
4
!
1
(

Podgomy, was sent to the Government of Pakistan and to
President Yahya Khan in person as early as April, immediately following the commencement of these events in
March,
155. As we learned from yesterday’s statement in the.
Security Council by the representative of the United States,
Mr. Bush, the need for a political settlement in East
Pakistan was also recognized by the United States Government. The members of the Security Council heard such a
statement by the United States representative for the first
t&e; during previous discussions on this matter in the
Security Council there had been no such statement. It is
clear, therefore, that the Government of the United States
also advised the Government of Pakistan to take the
measures necessary for a political settlement. The Governments of other countries also offered similar advice.
However, the Government of Pakistan ignored those
appeals from many countries, and the military authorities
in East Pakistan continued their bloody orgy, sowing death,
violence, and destruction.
156. Millions of people found themselves faced with a
fearful dilemma: to perish or to flee to a neighbouring
country to save their lives. Ten million people-a number
which, as has already been pointed out, represents the
population of an entire State-fled from their birthplaces to
another country. That is an unusual expression of political
distrust and protest against the Government and regime,
that is one of the unusual phenomena of the struggle of the
national liberation movement against bloody repression and
terror. And, in point of fact, the Deputy Prime Minister of
Pakistan failed to mention any of this in his statement in
the Security Council (ibid.]. In December of last year that
population expressed its will and its protest by voting, as I
have already pointed out, with its hands and ballot-papers,
and then “voted with its feet”-almost
10 million people
fled from East Pakistan. And that is the will of the people.
157. The distinguished Mr. Bhutto talked about everything, beginning with the Roman Empire; he talked about
anything and everything, he talked loud and long, but he
mentioned this fearful tragedy only in passing. He limited
himself to the single word “mistakes”, and then he added
“tragic mistakes”. But to say this is to say nothing, it is to
side-step the real crux of the matter, the substance of the
question. But without that it &impossible to understand
the true nature of the events, the root of the evil, and to
find the correct solution to the problem, whether on the
spot or in the United Nations. And that should be
completely obvious and intelligible to such an experienced
politician as Mr. Bhutto.
158. The Soviet Union is and always has been firmly
opposed to repression and persecution as a method of
settling serious political problems. It favours a political
settlement in East Pakistan in accordance with the will of
its population as expressedin the electionsin December
1970. The delegation of the Soviet Union has held and
defended this view in the Se&&y Councilandthe General
Assembly during the considerationof the situation in the
Indian subcontinent. Life itself and the further development of eventshave fully confirmedthe correctnessof this
attitude, the correctnessof the Soviet position.

159. We insist on a simultaneouscease-fire,the cessation
of hostilities and a political settlement. United States
propagandaattempts to’ distort our position, As I pointed
out yesterday, such attempts are now being made even
from White House circles. But the documentsavailableto
the Security Council do not confirm the slanderous
accusation that the Soviet Union is againsta cease-fire,If
Mr. Bush had suppliedMr. Ziegler1 at the appropriatetime
with the text of the So& proposal in the Security
Council, Mr. Zieglerwould, no doubt, not have madesucha
fanciful and unfounded statementas the one he madeon
Sunday.
160. In this way, the United States and its propaganda
have embarked on the path of distorting reality. As you
know, the Soviet delegation to the Security Council itself
first introduced an amendment[S/J0426/Rev.l]
and then
a draft resolution[S/10428] calling for a cease-fireand for
the cessationof hostilities. It wasalsointroducing another
proposal, calling for an immediatepolitical settlement in
East Pakistan on the basis‘of the people’swill, asexpressed
in the elections in 1970. This was opposedby the United
States, China and certain others. It wasfor this very reason
that the Security Council could not find the correct and
realistic approach,the correct and realisticcoursetowards a
solution of this problem. By its wordsthe United States,as
Mr. Bush saidyesterday, recognizedthe need for a political
settlement in East Pakistan,but by its deeds,by its failure
to support the Soviet Union’s proposalon this matter, it
rejected such a solution. It is this very position which has
brought the Security Council and the GeneralAssemblyto
an impasse.
161. Now the delegation of the United Stateshas introduced its own new proposal.But what is there about it that
is new? In actual fact it is a repetition of the old approach
and an attempt to push through the old solution. Once
again, for the secondtime, the United States is trying to
push the Security Council &to an incorect and unrealistic
course of action. For example, the United States is
proposing to the refugees that they should voluntarily
return to East Pakistan. I should like to ask Mr. Bush a
direct question: where, and to whom should they voluntarily return? To the people who were killing them and
from whom they fled to savetheir lives? Can the sponsor
of such a proposalconsiderit seriouslyor believethat what
he suggestsis possibleor realistic? No one who has fled
from a place where he is threatenedwith death “qill return
unlessthere hasbeen a fundamentalchangein conditions
and his safety is guaranteed.There is no mention of a
political settlement in any of the draft resolutionssub- _
mitted so far, or in the draft resalution submitted by
Mr. Bush. There is not a singleword about any kind of
political settlement. But none the less,the United States
representative has informed the Council that his Government long ago approached the Government of Pakistan
concerning the needfor a political settlement.
162. Consequently, we have groundsfor statingthat there
is a discrepancy between the words and the deedsof the
United States. Instead of a relaxation of tension and the
adoption of measuresto bring about a political settlement,
1 Press secretary to the President of the United States of America.

there has been further aggravation of the political crisis in
Qst Pakistan, which has led to armed conflict in that
region. The hostilities between Pakistan and India broke
out because the Government of Pakistan, unable to cope
with the opposition of the East Pakistan population in its
just struggle for its life and freedom, instead of removing
the real causes of the crisis, made an armed attack on India,
began bombing Indian towns, attacking Indian posts and
shelling Indian territory. It was indeed Pakistan which
began military action against India, as has been convincingly shown by the facts and documentary evidence and,
above all, the statements by the representative of India, the
report of the Secretary-General, the statements by other
delegations and yesterday’s statement by the Indian Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Singh,
163. India did not want a war. The military conflict was
thrust upon it by the tragic development of events in East
Pakistan, on its eastern frontier. The constructive and
thorough discussion of the events in that region has left no
doubt that the main cause and the source of the outbreak
of the conflict there are the acts of violence and repression
committed against the population of East Pakistan and the
subsequent military actions against India.
164. In these circumstances the Soviet Union, whether in
the Security Council or in the General Assembly, was
unable to support the adoption of draft resolutions which
touched upon only one side of the problem, which
mentioned only a cease-fire and the cessation of hostilities
between the two parties in complete isolation from the
other question, which is indissolubly linked with it, that of
a political settlement in East Pakistan.
165. From the very outset we have been entirely convinced that the detailed way, the only proper way, to
eliminate the causes leading to the aggravation of the
situation and the armed conflict could only be a course
which led simultaneously and unswervingly to a cease-fire,
the cessation of hostilities and a solution of the question
which is indissolubly linked with this, namely, the question
of a political settlement in East Pakistan on the basis of
respect for the lawful rights, the interests and the will of its
75 million people. Any other approach would be one-sided
and unrealistic and would only give an illusory impression
that the United Nations had taken measures towards such a
settlement.
166. The new proposals introduced by the representative
of ,tlie United States avoid this fundamental question, as
before. For this reason they are totally unacceptable. The
real elimination of the armed conflict and the cessation of
bloodshed in this region cannot be achieved without
bearing in mind that the question of a cease-fire must be
closely, indissolubly and organically linked with the solution of the question of a political settlement in East
Pakistan.
167. The members of the Council are well aware of who
really expresses the will of the 75 million people of East
Pakistan. As events have shown, the spokesman for their
interests is the Awami League party, which received
unanimous support at the elections in December 1970 and
won 167 of the 313 seats in the Parliament, as the Council

has already been informed by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of India. Mr. Singh [I611th
meeting]. If this
decisive politic+ fact is not borne in mind, if this reality is
overlooked, it will be impossible to achieve the rapid and
effective elimination of the conflict in the Hindustan
subcontinent and.a political solution to the problem of East
Pakistan.
168. In his statement yesterday, Mr. Bhutto touched on
the matter of the Leninist principle of the self-determination of peoples [ibid.], Yes, there is such a principle and we
consider it one of Lenin’s greatest legacies. But Mr. Bhutto
did not go far enough. He did not mention the second part
of that Leninist principle. And incidentally that principle is
based on the proclamation by the revolutionary proletariat
of the right of nations to self-determination, that is to say,
on the right of the workers of each nationality to organize
their own State unit and to decide whether it should, as
before, be included within a multinational State or whether
it should secede and become a separate State. Lenin wrote
in “The right of nations to self-determination”: “. . . the
self-determination of nations means the political separation
of these nations from alien national bodies, and the
formation of an independent national state .”
169, Lenin’s understanding of the principle of self-determination places the matter in the sphere of social and class
liberation. Self-determination right up to the stage of the
formation of an independent State-that is the essence of
the Leninist principle of self-determination. That principle
lies at the, very basis of the creation of the Soviet State,
which was founded by the great Lenin. We are honoured,
fortunate and proud that more than 100 nationalities are
united within the Soviet Union. Article 17 of the All-Union
Constitution, the Constitution of the USSR, states that
every Union Republic shall retain the right of free secession
from the USSR.
170. That is how the Leninist principle is embodied in the
Constitution of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
That is how we understand and interpret that Leninist
principle, the principle of self-determination of peoples.
Consequently, only the people of East Pakistan, in the
person of their elected representatives can decide their own
fate, can decide whether East Pakistan will remain part of
Pakistan or whethir it will form a separate and independent
State. In the person of their elected representatives, the
people of East Pakistan are also free to settle the question
of the resumption of contacts, talks or any form of
relations with the Pakistan Government.
171. It is this same approach to the settlement of the
conflict which has broken out that has invariably guided
the Soviet Union, both in the organs of the United Nations,
and outside this Organization. The Soviet Union has
unfailingly supported and continues to support an immedia? cessation of the bloodshed and the implementation of
a political settlement in East Pakistan on the basis of
respect for the lawful rights and interests of its people. This
position was set forth yet again with complete clarity and
lack of ambiguity in the statement by the General Secretary
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union, Comrade A. I. Brezhnev, at the Sixth
Congress of the Polish United Workers’ Party on

7 December at Warsaw, and also in the official TASS
communique, published on 6 December. The members of
the Security Council are familiar with this document
(S/10422] and there is no need for me to repeat or to
describe its contents in detail here,
172. The events of the last few days have fully confirmed
and, as we note with great satisfaction, have convinced
some of those who were confused and in doubt that this
same approach of the Soviet Union to the matter of finding
ways to settle the conflict in the Indian subcontinent is
correct and just and is based on an awarenessof the true
political situation which has arisen in East Pakistan and in
that region as a whole. To tell the truth, one of those
members of the Security Council who was confused about
this point admitted as much in a conversation with us,
directly, openly and honestly. He acknowledged the correctness and realistic nature of the position and approach of
the Soviet Union, the correctness and realism of the
proposals introduced by the Soviet delegation at that stage
in our discussion of the matter and in the development of
events. Judging from press reports, some important military
and political figures, Pakistan officials in East Pakistan
itself, are now inclined to approach the situation realistically. This is shown, for example, by the statement of
General Farman to the Secretary-General, of which the
whole world has now learned through the American press.
If the Pakistan Government, too, will now adopt the
position of taking reality into account, it might be possible
to come to an agreement relatively quickly on the adoption
by the Security Council of a decision on the two
interconnected questions-the cessation of bloodshed and a
political settlement in East Pakistan.
173. No one who cherishes peace and the fundamental
rights of peoples can overlook the demands of the 75
million people of East Pakistan or close his eyes to their
legitimate national liberation struggle for their civil rights
and freedom. It is, however, to be regretted that some
members of the Council, either because of their failure to
understand the true situation or under the influence and
pressure of the two permanent members of the Security
Council who from the beginning of the events in East
Pakistan and throughout the discussion of this matter in the
Council have taken a one-sided and unrealistic position,
have agreed to separate the question of the cessation of
hostilities and bloodshed from that of the need for an
urgent and simultaneous political settlement in East
Pakistan. Such a position has from the very beginning been
unrealistic and one-sided, since both those questions have
formed and still do form one indivisible whole.
~
174. What did those two great Powers do in practical
terms in order to put an end to the violence, terror and acts
of repression in East Pakistan, to halt the dangerous
development of events there and to avert the outbreak and
spread of a conflict between India and Pakistan? In
practical terms, they did nothing. By their position they
merely helped to arouse passions and aggravate the situation; they poured oil on the fire.
175. The United States, by continuing to grant military
aid to Pakistan throughout the many months during which
the crisis was becoming more acute, in effect encouraged

the Pakistan military authorities to continue their policy of
armed repression and violence against the East Pakistan
population. United States military aid to Pakistan was only
formally cut off literally on the eve of the beginning of
military actions against India. It is obviously not necessary
to explain to members of the Council the role played by
such a policy in aggravating the situation in the subcontinent. By lavishing praise upon the United States position as
an allegedly “just” position, Mr. Bhutto is justifying United
States aggression in Indo-China.
176. In the aggravation of the situation in the Indian
peninsula the Peking leadership has constantly played the
unseemly role of the instigator. Peking is directly connected
with these events and plays in them a two-faced, provocative role. On the one hand, the Maoist clique has tried by all
possible means to insinuate itself into East Pakistan where
it has, with the help of its agents, propagated its own
conception of a “people’s war”, inflated the situation and
promoted and assisted the aggravation of the political crisis
in East Pakistan. On the other hand, this clique has widely
proclaimed its support for Pakistan, attempting to turn it
into a weapon of its own ultra-chauvinistic, great-Power
policy in Asia, for the purpose of strengthening i&s own
influence and control both in the Indian subcontinent and
in South-East Asia as a whole.
177. It is not hard to see that the essence of Peking’s
policy lies in stirring up the conflict between India and
Pakistan, pouring oil on the fire and striving to reach its
own expansionist, selfish, great-Power chauvinistic goals.
The Maoists are profoundly indifferent to the genuine
national interests both of the people of East Pakistan and
of the people of Pakistan as a whole. They look upon
Pakistan merely as a springboard and puppet in the
unscrupulous game they are playing in that region and in
the whole of the international arena.
178. The efforts of the current Chinese leadership are
aimed at attempting by all possible means to strengthen
their own position in Asia. Peking is constantly stepping up
its military aid to Pakistan; it has frequently made
statements about its willingness to give unlimited assistance
to Pakistan in its struggle against India. It is appropriate to
recall that even at the current stage in the aggravation of
relations between India and Pakistan, the Peking clique has
taken steps to give military aid to Pakistan. At the
beginning of November of this year a delegation, headed by
the same Mr. Bhutto who is present here, was invited to
Peking. The members of that delegation also included the
Commander of the Air Force, the Chief of the General
Staff, and the Chief of Staff of the Navy of Pakistan. It is
not surprising that Mr. Bhutto has lavished such praise on
the position of Peking. But it is in vain, it is a mistaken
interpretation of Peking’s position, In actual fact, by
provoking the intensification of the crisis in East Pakistan
and by inflaming the India-Pakistan conflict, the Maoists
are in essence attempting to implement a policy of setting
Asians against Asians in order to achieve their own
great-Power goals in South-East Asia. As everyone now
understands, this is not a policy which they invented for
themselves; they have borrowed it from the United States;which long ago proclaimed the notorious “Guam doctrine”,
the essence of which is expressed in the slogan “Use Asians
against Asians”.

179. It is not hard to see that this hypocritical, two-faced
policy and the actions of the Maoists in East Pakistan and
in the India-Pakistan conflict are directed against the
interests both of the peoples of India and of the peoples of
Pakistan and of the other countries of South-East Asia.
Such a policy is an open ‘betrayal of the struggle of the
people of East Pakistan for their fundamental rights and
interests, for their national freedom. Such actions by
Peking divert the attention of international public opinion
from the anti-imperialist national liberation struggle in
Indo-China and the Middle East and play into the hands of
imperialism and reaction. That is something which really
deserves to be termed social treachery.
180. In the light of this, how can anyone really be
surprised at the fact that China shares a common approach
in the Security Council with another permanent member of
the Security Council? The Peking delegation has found
itself in the same camp as the United States delegation in
the discussion in the United Nations of the question of the
events in the Indian subcontinent. The fact that the
positions of the United States and China on this matter
coincide confirms the truth of the Russian saying: “If you
go too far to the left, you will find yourself too far to the
right .” The Chinese and United States delegations have
tried to lead the Security Council and the entire United
Nations along a false path and have attempted to impose
upon the Security Council a solution to the problem which
would mean in practice a “freezing” of the conflict in the
Indian subcontinent, its endless continuation with all the
tragic consequences that implies, since it would not deal
with or solve the main cause of the conflict, namely, the
question of the position of the millions and millions of
inhabitants of East Pakistan, the question of a political
settlement.
181. The Soviet Union firmly and consistently favours the
adoption by the Security Council of effective measures to
provide for an immediate halt to the bloodshed and the
implementation of a political settlement in East Pakistan on
the basis of respect for the lawful rights and interests of its
people and the implementation of the will of its people.
182. At the same time, the Soviet Union considers it
extremely important that the Governments of all countries
should refrain in the current highly critical situation from
any measures which in one way or another would mean
their involvement in the conflict and would lead to the
further complication of the situation in the Indian subcontinent. It is, however, no secret that some people would like
to warm their hands by fanning the military conflagration
in that region. In this connexion, it is impossible not to feel
alarm at the dissemination by the press in several countries
of nonsensical fables to the effect that some Indian military
aircraft and naval vessels are manned by Soviet military
personnel. There can .be no doubt about the malicious
nature of such insinuations, which are hostile to India and
the Soviet Union. Permit me in this respect to read the
official statement issued by TASS on 10 December 1971, in
which these fables and fabrications of imperialist propaganda are categorically rejected:
“Moscow, 10 December (TASS)-On 9 December the
official representative of Pakistan asserted at a press

conference in Rawalpindi that Indian military aircraft and
missile-carrying launches were manned by Soviet per.
sonnel.
“TASS is authorized to state that the above remarks are
entirely unfounded and are from beginning to end
nothing but a provocatory invention.”
183. The same could be said with equal justification about
the fantastic statement by Mr. Bhutto to the effect that the
Soviet Union is participating “in the dismemberment of
Pakistan”. That is nothing other than a provocatory
invention. His aim is to distort the truth of the matter, to
slander the Soviet Union and to side-step the real issue
under discussion. The East Pakistan people, in answer to
the “mistakes” admitted by Mr. Bhutto, have begun to
express their own will. Mr. Bhutto, blame yourself and your
Government, and do not shift the blame on to others. You
have tried here to shift the blame onto the Soviet Union,
onto France, the United Kingdom and many other coun.
tries. But that is not an argument.
184. We should like to stress once again in this connexion
that no attempts to distort or to slander the clear, just and
realistic position of the Soviet Union on the question of the
events in the Indian subcontinent will be successful. They
merely unmask and expose those who are stirring up and
carrying on this slanderous campaign against the Soviet
Union.
185. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Security Council
now have before them the revised text of the draft
resolution which appears in document S/10446/Rev.l.
186. Mr. KU$AGA
(Poland) (interpretation
from
French): I should like to speak before the draft resolution
is put to the vote in order to present the position of my
delegation once again on this question, because in fact once
again the Security Council is being called upon to consider
the consequences of the conflict to which we are witnesses,
setting aside the fundamental facts of the problem and
closing its eyes to the essential part of the problem.
187. -As we see it, the conflict is fundamentally and
without any doubt within East Pakistan. It is part of the
process which started with the crisis of confidence. It grew
into a political crisis and it then became an internal military
conflict. Finally, the international consequences which we
know occurred.
188. The solution of the conflict must therefore start and
end with the solution of this fundamental internal conflict
on the basis of political realities, that is to say, on the basis
of the existing balance of power. If the latest events in East
Bengal have proved anything, it is the completion of the
process which we described a few days ago as a process of
alienation of Pakistani authorites from the people of East
Bengal; from the entire population of East Bengal. The
information that we have recently received through the
press clearly indicates how far this process of disintegration
has advanced. It demonstrates once again the absolute need
for a political solution based on the balance of political
forces in East Bengal.

J
i

’

189. The relationship between these forces seems to me
clear; even the representatives of the Central Government
of Pakistan recognize the strength and the representative
character of Bangla Desh. Any solution that fails to take
account of this fact seems to us unrealistic and incapable, a
priori, of leading to a political settlement. Any other
approach to the problem would be mistaken. What is more,
it would be dangerous, for it would imply recognition of
the right of the Pakistani authorities to continue repression
that has already caused so many victims and would
inevitably lead to an intensification of that repression and
the resistance against it on a scale the vastnessof which we
do not even dare to imagine. Furthermore, it would be
impossible, for it is impossible to change politica realities,
to reverse the irreversible.
190. We listened with the greatest interest to the statements made during our meeting yesterday [1611th meeting]. The Foreign Minister of India, in his very sober
statement, stressed precisely this problem,. >after having
described the slow process of alienation of the Pakistani
authorities from the people of East Bengal. The analysis he
gave of the causesand effects of that processconfirms us in
the view that we have held since the beginning of the
conflict-and by “beginning” we mean not December 1973,
but December 1970. We likewise listened to the statement
of the Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of
Pakistan. He spoke with a great deal of ideas, which led him
to cite certain historical parallels that are erroneous, out of
place and obsolete. On the other hand, he avoided what we
consider to be the substance of the problem, namely the
situation in East Bengal.
191. We have said, and we repeat it, that our principal
concern is to see a solution come about at the earliest
possible moment on the Indian subcontinent. We have said,
and we repeat it, we do not intervene in this debate in a
spirit of acrimony and recrimination. It is rather our
view-and events have borne this out-that the source of
conflict is not to be found, as some have sought to make us
believe again yesterday, everywhere but in East Pakistan,
but precisely in East Pakistan. It is only starting from these
realities that we can arrive at a viable solution, a realistic
solution, a lasting solution to a conflict which my delegation profoundly regrets and which we would like to see
resolved in conformity with the expressed wishes of the
people of East Pakistan. This attitude determines our active
support for any realistic, fair and lasting solution to the
conflict with which we are confronted, a solution that
would take into account the development of the present
situation, the will and the legitimate interests of all the
parties; for, we are firmly convinced, this is the only
possible way to restore peace and security to the Indian
subcontinent in the interests of all the peoples of that
regios;i
p
192. &‘The PRESIDENT:

I call on the Foreign Minister of

India.

193. Mr. Swaran SINGH (India): I listened with great
attention to the speakers and the interventions made
yesterday I161 1 t/z meetirzg] . I wasdeeply impressed by the
anxiety and sincere desire of the Security Council to find a
lasting and durable solution to the tragic situation that has

developed in the subcontinent. I should like to pay a special
tribute to you, Mr. President, for the able manner in which
you conducted the deliberations on such an important and
delicate subject. I should also like to say that whether we
agree with the points made by various delegations or not,
we appreciate their efforts to find a solution that is
acceptable, to the parties concerned as well as to the
members of this Council. It is in this spirit of co-operation
and understanding of the necessity of viewing all aspects of
this problem that I should like to place before you the
point of view of the Government of India on some of the
issuesthat have been rfised.
194. I hope I shall not be misunderstood if I refer to some
of the points made so vehemently and rhetorically by my
friend the Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of
Pakistan. I have admiration for his ability, and we in India
recognize him as the democratically elected leader of the
largest single party of West Pakistan. We hope that the time
is not far off when the military rulers of West Pakistan will
also respect the verdict of their people and give Mr. Bhutto
an opportunity to form a representative Government with
whom, we hope, it will be possible for us to deal in order to
remove the root-causes of tension existing between our two
countries and usher in an era of peace, friendship and
mutual co-operation.
195. I should like to emphasize that we have nothing but
the friendliest feelings for the people of Pakistan. We wish
them well. There are many historical links that bind us
together. Geography makes us close neighbours. I was,
therefore, very happy to hear from my friend the Foreign
Minister of Pakistan, when he said that both India and
Pakistan, which are poor countries in spite of their vast
natural resources, could work together towards social and
economic progress of both of their peoples and for peace
on the subcontinent. I wish to assurehim that we sincerely
share those feelings.
196. While it is necessary and laudable to cherish these
common objectives, it is not enough. We have to work
together in order to achieve them. Let us examine what are
the impediments in our way. If India has done anything to
hamper the development of friendly relations between our
two countries and peoples, I would be the first to admit it.
If Pakistan or other countries have wittingly or unwittingly
created conditions which have made it difficult for our two
countries to come closer in peace and friendship, they must
make amends so that the situation improves.
197. We accepted the partition of the subcontinent in
1947 without reservations; We respected the sovereignty
and independence of Pakistan and made every possible
effort to come closer to it. I need not go into past history
to prove this. What is much more important is the present
and the future relationship of our two countries.
198. Taking the present situation, let us examine how and
why it has arisen and come to its present dangerous pass.
The distinguished Foreign Minister of Pakistan rightly
emphasized the pr’inciple of respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity. But what is Pakistan’s record in this
respect? May I ask him who armed and trained some of the
tribal dissidents on our eastern frontiers for a number of

years? May I also ask him who started the war in Kashmir
in 1947? It is well known that up to May 1948, Pakistan
had denied the presence of its troops in Kashmir, and it was
only when the United Nations Commission discovered their
presence that the then Foreign Minister of Pakistan, Sir
Zafrulla Khan, had to admit that Pakistani regular troops
had been sent into Kashmir. I am referring to this fact not
because I wish to convert the present debate into adebate
on Kashmir, but’ only to remind the members of this
Council that it is necessary to bear in mind the past history
of the relations between India and Pakistan in order to
assessthe present situation.
199. I was somewhat shocked, but not surprised, to hear
from my friend, Mr. Bhutto, references to the past 1,000
years and more in which he mentioned the incursion by
Mohammad Bin Qasim. I was shocked to hear from him
that, according to his reading of history’, Pakistan had been
denied areas or territories in the subcontinent at the time of
partition. However, I was not surprised to hear Mr. Bhutto’s
threat about 1,000 years of war because we have heard
these threats from him from time to time. Is Mr. Bhutto
still harbouring dreams and visions of conquering India and
coming to Delhi as a victor? He made the astonishing
statement yesterday that if Pakistan had received half the
military aid that India had received, Mr. Bhutto’would be
sitting in Delhi today. May I remind him of the $2,000
million worth of military hardware that Pakistan received
from its great benefactor and ally from 1954 onwards,
which enabled Pakistan to invade India in 1965 and which
is being used again today against both Bangla Desh and
India. I do not wish to go into all these facts, but I think it
necessary to do so because Mr. Bhutto’s reading of history
throws more light on his dreams and ambitions than on
historical facts.

I

200. I shall not take it upon myself to reply to the charges
which he has levelled against the USSR. The representative
of the Soviet Union has already made some comments in
this respect. I, however, feel duty-bound to answersome of
these uncalled-for attacks that he has made about the
implications of the Indo-Soviet treaty of peace, friendship
and co-operation which was signed on 9 August of this
year. It hardly lies with the Foreign Minister of Pakistan to
shed crocodile tears on the so-called abandonment of
India’s policy of non-alignment when, according to
Mr. Bhutto himself, Pakistan is still a member of two
military alliances. However, just to set the record straight, I
should like to draw his attention to article IV in the
Indo-Soviet treaty, which expresses the Soviet Union’s
respect for India’s policy of non-alignment as an important
factor for peace. Mr. Bhutto’s concept of non-alignment
does not carry conviction. The Indo-Soviet treaty of peace
and friendship is not aimed against any country. It seems,
however, that Mr. Bhutto, who perhaps harbours dreams
and visions of conquering the whole subcontinent, regards
this treaty as an impediment in the achievement of these
aims.
201. Mr, Bhutto made a reference to the United States
Seventh Fleet. I do not wish to take this up with him. That
is a matter for the representative of the United States of
America to deal with. But I should like to correct him on
an incorrect statement that he made, perhaps out of

ignorance, or maybe deliberately. India has not made a
declaration about the blockade of the Bay of Bengal, as
Mr. Bhutto asserted. India has issued only a contraband
control order, which every country against which a state of
war has been proclaimed by another country is entitled to
do under international law. India has no desire to interfere
with the freedom of the high seas, or genuine trade a,nd
commerce, or the shipments of food and relief goods to
Bangla Desh. But India has the right to ensure that no
contraband goods reach Pakistan, which has declared wat
on India. Nothing in the Charter or in international law
prevents a country from taking steps to safeguard its
security and defend its territorial integrity if another
country declares war on it.
202. We should like to assure all Governments of the
world that India will do everything possible to protect the
persons and properties of their nationals who are entrapped
in the areas of conflict. We are signatories to the Geneva
Conventions relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War
and the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. We
have issued strict instructions to our armed forces to adhere
faithfully to the letter and spirit of these Conventions. We
do not think that there is any reason for any Government
to feel unduly concerned about the safety and security of
their nationals in this area so far as India is concerned. It is
for them to consider whether they should apprdach the
authorities of Bangla Desh, who are in effective control of
most of these areas, and ask the forces of West Pakistan not
to take any steps which may endanger the lives of their
nationals there.
203. In this connexion I should like to inform the
members of this Council that India, on more than three
occasions, had given categorical assurances to the Secretary-General that India would give facilities for foreign and
United Nations personnel to be evacuated from Karachi as
well as Dacca. It was not India, but Pakistan, which put
obstacles to this operation. However, we are glad that
almost all the persons have been safely evacuated from
those areasand only a handful remain, at their own wish.
204. May I revert to some other observations made by the
Foreign Minister of Pakistan. Mr. Bhutto seems to be
suffering from some imaginary fears. No one’ has asked
Pakistan not to be friendly with other countries. We would
ourselves like to be friends with Pakistan. But we will not
give up our friendship with other countries if Pakistan
demands this as the price for our friendship with it. We
welcome the trends towards lessening of tension and
normalization of relations between all countries of the
world. It is our earnest desire to be able to normalize our
own relations with Pakistan in the not too distant future,
205. The Foreign Minister of Pakistan referred to a
number of countries, neighbours of India, with which India
has the friendliest of relations. He took it upon himself to
insinuate that they were in danger of being gobbled up, as
he described it, by India. I do not know who gave him the
authority to speak on behalf of these friendly neighbours of
India. However, it is Mr. Bhutto’s privilege to speak as he
likes and I should not like to reply to these baseless and
deliberate calumnies levelled against my country. Suffice it
to say that India harbours no designs on the Territory,

sovereignty or integrity of any of its neighbours.
Mr. Bhutto is perhaps irked by the fact that these countries
do not see eye to eye with him about the genesis and the
solution of the situation in Bangla Desh.
206. Mr. Bhutto gave a long discourse on secession and
autonomy. He even went so far as to threaten the creation
of Bangla Deshes in Europe, in Africa, Asia and elsewhere.
If the majority population of any country is oppressed by a
militant minority, as is the case in Bangla Desh and in
southern Africa, or in Palestine, it is the inalienable right of
the majority population to overthrow the tyranny of the
minority rulers and decide its destiny according to the
wishes of its own people. The birthright of the majority of
the population of a country to revolt against the tyranny
and oppression of a militant minority cannot be denied
under the principles and purposes of the Charter or
according to international law.
207. Mr. Bhutto has painted a picture of India as a big
predatory Power which is trying to bulldoze small nations.
He has argued that Pakistan which is smaller than India
could not possibly have any aggressivedesignsagainst its big
neighbour. Perhaps Mr. Bhutto is deliberately forgetting
that there are instances in history-if I may add, recent
history-where military dictatorships of smaller countries
have launched aggressive wars against larger countries. I
need quote only the example of Hitler’s Germany and its
aggression on the Western alhes and the Soviet Union.

freedom of the 75 millioq people of Bangla Desh, which has
now been crowned with success,speaks for itself. History is
replete with examples of people’s struggles to form new
States free from domination by others. This is what the
freedom of Bangla Desh represents. No one can twist the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations to deny the
rights of the majority of a nation to assertits independence
from a minority military dictatorship which denies them
fundamental freedoms, human rights and democratic
liberties.
211, An attempt has been made by the representative of
Pakistan to Say today that,if Bangla Desh is accepted and
recognized, every other country will be threatened with
dismemberment. This is a grave misrepresentation of the
issues at stake. Of course, there are in every country some
people who are discontented or dissatisfied. But what holds
a nation together is a spirit of understanding and accommodation, which is a political process, and not tanks or
machine guns. What is distinctive and unique about the
Bangla Desh situation is that it represents the majority of
the people of Pakistan as a whole, and its demands for
autonomy expressed through approved constitutional
channels were met by a military repression which killed
more people than the Viet-Nam war or the Middle East war
and resulted in 10 million human beings fleeing to a
neighbouring country for refuge.
212. The representative of the United States raised a
number of points yesterday and addressed some questions
to me. I answered some of them very briefly yesterday. I
should like to answer him in greater detail now.

208. I do not wish to elaborate on the brief description I
gave yesterday of how the present tragedy started. I should,
however, like to re-emphasize that India did not start this
war and is prepared to stop it if Pakistan is also prepared to
do so and remove the root causesof this conflict so that we
will
not have to go from cease-fire to cease-fireand from
one war to another war. The people of Bangla Desh, who
formed a majority of the population of what was Pakistan
and who have today declared their independence, have to
be a necessary party to any cease-fire or withdrawal of
troops. This must be recognized. There cannot be any
effective cease-fire or durable peace in the subcontinent
without this. Whether Pakistan likes it or not, whether we
like it or not, the reality of the sovereign State of Bangla
Desh is there for all to see.

213. The representative of the United States tried to argue
that the United States efforts towards a political settlement
had been making good progress and seemed to imply that
India had impatiently precipitated the conflict and therefore bore the major responsibility for it. This one-sided and
partisan attitude of the representative of the United States
has shocked and surprised’us. The United States is entitled
to its own opinions and interpretations. So are we. But
facts are facts and must be stated.
214. Right from the beginning of this unfortunate situation that has arisen in the subcontinent, India had been
asking for a political settlement acceptable to the elected
and acknowledged representatives of the people of Bangla
Desh. Last September I had the honour of urging this on
the President of the United States, when he was good
enough to grant me an audience. More than a month ago,
our Prime Minister came to re-emphasize the urgency of
this problem, We went so far as to suggest that a gesture by
President Yahya Khan to release Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
would automatically defuse the situation and pave the way
for a peaceful political settlement. But after all these
months of so-called quiet diplomacy by the United States,
what has been the result? According to the statements of
the United States Government itself, no United States
representatives have been allowed to catch even a glimpse
of Sheikb Mujibur Rahman. All that the United States got
from President Yahya Khan was permission to have access
to the defence counsel of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. We do
not know whether they have so far been able to use this
privilege granted to them by President Yahya Khan, and if

209. The Foreign Minister of Pakistan waxed eloquent
about the principle of non-interference in the internal
affairs of a sovereign country. Was it India that drove 10
million refugees into another country or was it Pakistan
that drove them out of East Bengal at the point of the
bayonet? Is this interference or not in India’s internal
affairs? Who trained the Nagas and the Mizos whose cause
Mr. Bhutto chose to champion? Who violated our borders
on the land and in the air before the present conflict
escalated? Who flouted the will of the 7.5million people of
Bangla Desh? Certainly not India. It was Pakistan and not
India. And yet Mr. Bhutto waxed eloquent and praised the
Bandung principles and Pancha Shila. Deeds surely are
much more eloquent than Cords.
210. It was not India that sought to dismember Pakistan.
It is the oppressive regime of West Pakistan which has
dismembered Pakistan by its own actions. The struggle for
21

219. It was not India that did not wait but Pakistan which
thought it ,necessary to start military aggression against
India on 3 December in order to cover up its failure in the
East and to internationalize the conflict. Far from being
able to persuade President Yahya Khan to agree to a
political settlement or to the withdrawal of West Pakistani
forces from East Bengal, we are now being accused by the
United States of intransigence. It is indeed strange logic to
put the blame on India for the intransigence of President
Yahya Khan or for the United States failure to persuade
him to come to the pathof peace and reason.

so, with what results. Nothing has been told to us. We are
entitled, to ask this question of the representative of the
United States.
215. The second declaration made by the representative of
the United States was that the President of Pakistan was
prepared to consider-only consider-appointing a nominee
who would have a dialogue with a nominee of Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman, while Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, who
could have been either the Prime Minister or the President
of the whole of Pakistan, remained incommunicado in
prison, unaware of what is happening, and while no one
would know if the nominee was really his or that of
President Yahya Khan. This generous offer of President
Yahya Khan speaks for itself and needs no comment. The
United States Government may have been satisfied with it,
but no one in Bangla Desh was.

220. The representative of the United States wanted to
ask me a few more questions about India’s intentions. I
should like to ask the representative of the United States
whether he has asked Pakistan what its intentions are, and
what were its intentions in declaring a war, as President
Yahya Khan did on 4 December, and in committing
aggression against our land and air frontiers. I shall refrain
from asking the representative of the United States some
questions about the intentions of the United States in other
parts of the world, thousands of miles away from America,
where United States troops have been engaged for years in
bloody conflict which has not been brought to the Security
Council, where appeals have been rejected and where
withdrawal of foreign forces has been resisted. I shall
refrain from asking those questions, because this is not the
occasion to do so. I shall, however, not hesitate to answer
the three questions that he asked me.

216. The third proposal conveyed to us by the United
States Government was that President Yahya Khan was
willing to appoint a nominee who would talk to an
approved Awami League leader in Bangla Desh against
whom there was no major charge levelled by Pakistan. I
need hardly remind the representative of the United States
that such a member of the Awami League hand-picked by
President Yahya Khan could hardly be expected to speak
on behalf of the 75 million people of Bangla Desh. In fact
the President, the Prime Minister and other leaders of the
Bangla Desh Government have all been charged with
heinous crimes. No wonder this so-called proposal was not
taken ‘seriously by anyone.

221. Let me reiterate what I stated yesterday. First, we
have no intention whatsoever of acquiring any part of West
Pakistan or of Bangla Desh by conquest or otherwise. Our
recognition of the People’s Republic of Bangla Desh makes
it quite clear that we have no territorial designs on Bangla
Desh. Secondly, if Pakistan removes the threat to our
security, we shall be glad to consider any reasonable
proposals for a cease-fine and mutual withdrawals in the
wake of a political settlement in the East acceptable to the
elected representatives of Bangla Desh.

217. While these were the proposals which the United
States Government had been able to extract from President
Yahya Khan for a political settlement, the realities were
quite different. There was a deliberate attempt by President
Yahya Khan to obstruct and defy the will of the people
through a number of measures that he undertook, such as
banning the Awami League as a political party, declaring 78
out of the 167 elected leaders of the Awami League as
disqualified, as having lost their membership, holding
farcical by-elections and declaring 58 discredited and
previously defeated candidates as having been elected
unopposed to these very seats. What is more, he had
promised to hand over power to these stooges and quislings
and to hold a session of the National Assembly represented
by these people by 27 December 197 1. This was the “one
month more” to which the Foreign Minister of Pakistan
was referring so frequently yesterday. He asked with his
usual rhetoric, if India could wait patiently for nine
months, why it could not wait for one month more.

222. As for Pakistan-occupied Kashmir, I would suggest to
the representative of the United States that he put a
question to Pakistan concerning its intentions, because it
appears to be concentrating only on that part of Jammu
and Kashmir which is on our side of the cease-fire line.
Pakistan has used force against our territory of Kashmir on
two occasions in the past, in 1947 and 1965, and is at this
very time concentrating practically all its infantry, artillery,
armour and air force in a massive attack across the
cease-fire line in order to extend its occupation and
aggression in Kashmir. We shall certainly use force to repel
Pakistan’s renewed aggression, whether it is in Kashmir or
anywhere else in India. Let there be no mistake about it. It
is Pakistan that has violated, and is violating, the cease-fire
line, as is proved by the fact that we had to lodge about
,000 complaints of violations of the cease-fire line by
f akistani forces with the military observers of the United
Nations between the end of March and the end of
November this year. The violation of the cease-fire line by
Pakistan on 3 December, by the mounting of a massive
attack on the Indian part of Jammu and Kashmir, which is
on our side of the cease-fire line, was confirmed by the
report by the United Nations Military Observer Group in
India and Pakistan in document S/10412.

218. I should like to tell the representatives of both the
United States and Pakistan that all these proposals were
categorically rejected by the elected leaders of the people
of Bangla Desh, who now form the Government of Bangla
Desh. A Government formed by stooges and quislings could
not exist even for a single day except with the help of the
West Pakistan army in Bangla Desh. In fact the people’s
wrath was roused to such an extent that some of those
quislings and stooges had to be given protection by the
Pakistani police and armed forces in their very homes. They
cannot even move about.
22

cease-fire or to a withdrawal. However, there can be no
viable cease-fire or durable peace without going into the
reasons, the origin and the development of the situation
which has resulted in an arme.d conflict. No two situations
are exactly simihr. Nor can a simple formula be applied to
all situations some of which are more complex than others.
I have already stated that India has no desire or intention to
continue this armed conflict’ a day longer than necessaryin
the right of our self-defence. Any assessment, any resolution, any recommendation on the present situation must,
therefore, take into account all the basic factors which have
led to the present situation. I would, therefore, earnestly
urge this august Council to consider the following important suggestions for dealing with the situation effectively:
first, the right of the people of Bangla Desh to be heard in
any discussion of the problem; secondly, the right of the
people of Bangla Desh to be made a party to any cease-fire
arrangements that may be proposed; thirdly, a political
solution of the situation in Bangla Desh in accordance with
the wishes of the people of Bangla Desh as already declared
by their representatives elected in the December 1970
elections.

223. We are shocked and surprised that, instead of
tackling the basic cause of this grim tragedy and its
consequences, the United States Government should think
fit to apportion blame without ascertaining the correct
facts and to lay the major responsibility for this situation
on India and not on Pakistan, on which the entire
responsibility for the situation rests.
224. We hope that, even at this late stage, a great country
like the United States will not try to score debating points
and thereby further complicate the already complicated
situation and make it even more difficult to defuse the
situation and thus de-escalate the conflict.
225. I now turn to the draft resolution in document
S/10446, which is before the Council. The one-sided
approach in the statement of the representative of the
United States to which I have referred is amply reflected in
this draft. While the sixth preambular paragraph pays lip
’ service to the desirability of finding a political solution,
there is nothing in the operative paragraphs to implement
this pious wish,. No resolution which does not recognize the
existence and the rights and obligations of the people of
Bangla Desh in any cease-fire agreement can be effective or
of any practical value.

229. If the above three essential ingredients are accepted
as an integrated whole then we are confident that a
cease-fire can be brought about without any further delay
and withdrawals of the armed forces of Pakistan from
Bangla Desh as well as the armed forces of India from there
and mutual withdrawals of both India and Pakistan from
each other’s territory arranged through appropriate consultations.

226. The draft resolution is also defective in that it applies
principles of the Charter selectively, instead of applying
them consistently. For example, it totally ignores those
principles of the Charter, as well as other instruments,
which prohibit the massive violations of human rights. The
world has not so far seen such a massive violation of human
rights since the Charter was promulgated asin Bangla Desh
during the past nine months. This has been recognized by
the world. Even the other instruments suggested in the
draft resolution are selectively applied. For example, the
eighth preambular paragraph recalls the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security adopted unanimously
last year [General Assembly
resolution
2734 (XXV)]. I should like to point out that paragraph 22
of that Declaration makes it clear that the massive violation
of human rights is a direct threat to the security of nations.
And yet, this principle accepted by us all last year and SO
relevant to the Bangla Desh situation finds no place in the
draft resolution.

230. In order to achieve the above objectives it is
necessary to recognize the fact that Golden Bengal, as
graphically described by the Deputy Prime Minister of
Pakistan, belongs neither to Pakistan nor to India. Golden
Bengal belongs to the people of Bangla Desh and to nobody
else.
I)
231. The PRESIDENT:
Since no other representative
wishes to speak at this stage, I shall put to the vote the
United States draft resolution as revised, contained in
document S/10446/Rev.l.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

227. It has been suggested that the vote in the General
Assembly is a vote against the Indian position OSI this
question. We do not regard it as such; the resohrtion in the
General Assembly acknowledged that the root causeof the
trouble lay inside East Pakistan, even though no effective
formula to solve the basic problem was suggested. It
therefore becomes the duty of the Security Council to
ensure that this is incorporated in the operative part of any
resolution that the Security Council might adopt. Furthermore, a vast majority of the delegations which supported
the resolution did not take a position on Bangla Desh, as
Mr. Bhutto has asserted.

In favour: Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, Italy,
Japan, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, United States of America.
Against: Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Abstentions: France, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland.
The result of the vote was II in favour, 2 against and
2 abstentions.
The draft resolution was not adopted, one of the negative
votes being that of a permanent member of the Council.

228. A cease-fire and withdrawal in any resolution of the
General Assembly dealing with the situation of the armed
conflict is natural and understandable, and we respect these
sentiments, We have ourselves advocated such measures in
other appropriate situations. We are not opposed either to a

232. The PRESIDENT: I now call on those representatives
who wish to explain their vote after the vote.
23

in West Pakistan? I feel that question was very positively
answeredhere by the Foreign Minister, if I understood the
answercorrectly.

233. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): I will try to
be brief. I do want to reply to the comments by the
Ambassador of the Soviet Union that the United States
Government slandered him in a statement issued yesterday.
There is no slander in that statement. I think the only
mention of the representative from the Soviet Union in it
was a recitation of the fact that the resolution had
previously been vetoed. I do not believe that this should be
interpreted as a slander. In fact, I am not even clear that it
said that. So, I would reject the contention that the United
States Government has slandered our distinguished colleague.

238. As to the third question: is it India’s aim to take
parts of Pakistan-controlled Kashmir? -regretfully I did not
get a clear answer to that question-not that the Foreign
Minister owes us an answer. But again I will read the record
carefully to see if there was a total rejection to any claim to
any territory in Pakistan-controlled Kashmir. I did want to
clarify this because I do feel the Foreign Minister endeavoured to answer our inquiry. I simply must say at this
preliminary listening that I should like to have further
information on questions one and three.

234. I should like to reply very briefly to the Foreign
Minister of India. He asked a question of me about whether
we ,had-appropriately, I might add-inquired of Pakistan as
to whether they sought territory and, Mr. Minister, our
answer is that we felt when they replied affirmatively to the
resolution of the General Assembly, when indeed they did
accept that resolution calling for a cease-fire and withdrawal, that they had positively replied. I could indeed
endeavour to see bilaterally if such an inquiry has been
made and I would be happy to do it and I would be happy
to furnish the Foreign Minister with the results of our
fmdings. But, let me say here and now that what the United
States endeavoured to do bilaterally, we did, not to seek
advantage of one party over another but simply because we
thought we might be helpful in bringing about a peace. We
did it in the hope, the frail hope it seemed certainly at
times, that we could be useful in ending before it began the
kind of war that now engulfs the subcontinent. The
American people look at this war miles away with horror at
the suffering and I think it was this that guided and moved
our Government to take the steps that it tried to.

239. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My delegation voted in
favour of the draft resolution contained in document
S/10446/Rev.l because it reflected almost in its entirety
the text of a draft resolution which my delegation
co-sponsored both in this Council and in the General
Assembly. The ,present draft resolution in the view of my
delegation, as in the case of the other two which I have
mentioned, did not apportion blame to either of the parties
involved in the conflict. It did not prejudge the issues
involved in the situation. It is in accord with the principles
of international law and the principles and purposes of the
Charter, Finally, it has a positive and concerned approach
to the question since it recognizes the overriding need for a
political solution, not only to the situation between the
Pakistan Government and East Pakistan but also between
Pakistan and India.
240. When this regrettable conflict came formally to the
attention of this Council the majority view of members was
that hostilities should be brought to an immediate halt and
that the armed forces of both sides should be withdrawn to
their own national territories. My delegation wasconcerned
not only with adopting a course of action consonant with
the Charter of the United Nations but to prevent East
Pakistan and other areas from becoming a battlefield where
only the civilian population-and they number more than
5.5 million in East Pakistan alone-would suffer. We tried to
prevent, or halt, a situation involving the mortal combat
between two powerful armies using all modem conven.
tional armaments. There is an African saying which says
that when two elephants fight only the grass suffers. The
civilian population in the areas of conflict-and these areas
are not only confined to East Pakistan-has become,
figuratively speaking, “the grass”.

235. As for the blame: it is true that we made certain
allegations and I think it is most appropriate that the
Foreign Minister bring this up. But I think it is only fair
that the statement be read very carefully and you will see
that where we felt Pakistan was in error, admissions of error
that Minister Bhutto very frankly faced up to in this
Council, we levelled the blame in those areas. We laid that
at the door of Pakistan. So, it was not a unilateral attempt
to lay blame. What our business here in the United Nations
has been is to try to end the war; if our statements seem
harsh it is because Pakistan was being-it appeared to us and
I think to an overwhelming number of the members of the
Council-dismantled.
It is East Pakistan that is subject to a
massive invasion and so I would simply and very respectfully request of the Minister, in reply to this question, that
the statement be reviewed in its full context.

241. Our duty to the parties to the dispute must be to
bring to a halt this tragedy, this suffering, this destruction
and to establish without delay the modalities for effecting a
reconciliation.

236. As to the three questions that the United States
Government did ask: I am not sure that we have yet
received an answer to the question about destroying the
Pakistan army in the West. I am not sure that the Minister’s
answer-and I will read the text very carefully tomorrowaddressed itself to that question: does India intend to use
the present situation to destroy the Pakistan army in the
West? I will review the record carefully to see if that
question was indeed answered.

242. Mr. VAN USSEL (Belgium) (intetpretution front
French): Once again my delegation has supported a draft
resolution the objective of which is to put an end without
any delay to hostilities and fighting in the Indian subcontinent and which calls for the withdrawal of armed forces. In
the course of our earlier meetings, I have had occasion to
convey to you the great concern of Belgium over the tragic
events dividing two countries at the present time which,
because of their geographical position, their spiritual

237. The second question: does India intend to use as a
pretext the counter-attacks in the West to annex territory
24

affwties and especially their desire to contribute to
international peace and security and the improvement of
the living conditions of hundreds of millions of men and
women, should now share trials and tribulations rather than
fight and destroy each other.

heeded and that we shall soon see reconciled two fraternal
countries who are friends.
248, Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from Chinese):
The Chinese delegation has just voted in favour of the draft
resolution contained in document S/10446/Rev.l. However; it deems it necessary to state that this resolution has
failed to draw a line of distinction between the aggressor
and the victim of aggression, It has failed to condemn the
Indian Government which is carrying out barefaced aggression and has failed to voice support for Pakistan which is a
victim of the aggression. Therefore this resolution is highly
unsatisfactory.

243. Once again I should like to bear witness to the firm
determination of my country not to miss any opportunity
to make a contribution to all attempts made by the United
Nations to restore peace in the Indian subcontinent. We will
not conceal the fact, however, that we had entertained
certain doubts about the effectiveness of the draft resolution which has just been rejected. My delegation would
have preferred to have had the Council presented with
perhaps a less ambitious but more realistic text, one which,
at the present time, would have been confined to requiring
that there be an immediate cessation of hostilities, a text
asking the combatants scrupulously to respect all the
Geneva Conventions and, finally, deciding that the Council
should continue its deliberations and consideration of the
question of the withdrawal of forces in the light of the
action taken by the Government of Pakistan to normalize
the situation in its eastern province.

249. Secondly, the sixth preambular paragraph of this
resolution mentions:
“the need to deal appropriately at a subsequent stage,
within the framework of the Charter of the United
Nations, with the issues which have given rise to the
hostilities”.
The seventh preambular paragraph expresses the conviction:
“that an early political solution would be necessary for
the restoration of conditions of normalcy in the area of
conflict and for the return of the refugees to their
homes”.

244. I should like to make it perfectly clear in this
connexion that my delegation has absolutely no intention
of dissociating the military and humanitarian aspects on the
one hand from political imperatives on the other in this
matter which is before the Council, That is why I suggested
that, while requiring that the hostilities be ended immediately, we should remain in session to study realistically
and constructively the ways and means of restoring political
peace in East Pakistan, and in so doing to reconcile all the
combating parties. Perhaps we should have had a private
meeting to consider the second part of my suggestion.

250. In view of the fact that India and a certain big Power
have absolutely insisted on interfering in the internal affairs
of Pakistan, the Chinese delegation declares that at no time
and under no conditions should the above clauses in any
way be distorted as a pretext for any interference in the
internal affairs of Pakistan.
251. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): The reasons
for my delegation’s abstention on the draft resolution in
S/10446/Rev.l
are essentially the same as those that
underlay our attitude to the two previous draft resolutions
in this Council and to the General Assembly resolution
2793 (XXVI) of 7 December 1971. We sympatbize with the
feeling of urgency expressed by the representative of the
United States. We appreciated his readiness nevertheless to
allow the Council time to reflect on the draft resolution
which he tabled yesterday. That time has not been wasted
and many efforts are currently being made involving many
delegations, as well as my own, to find the basis for
agreement that has so far eluded us.

245. Thus far we have on a number of occasions discussed
the problems dividing Pakistan and India, but, unfortunately, the Council has been unabIe to reach an agreement.
Time is of the essence,however. Day by day, hour by hour,
men fall as innocent victims in a land which should be a
land of peace, not one of war, a land which should be a
united land and not a divided land. We must not, however,
allow ourselves to lose heart, for we owe it to the
international community to pursue our work in the search
for a solution.
246. We still recall various conflicts in other areas of the
world which, while not having the same features, while
perhaps not even being analogous to the serious crisis at
present before us, can to some extent be compared,
especially in terms of their causesand roots. In one of these
situations a concerted international initiative was SucCeSSfUl
in preparing’ and implementing a lasting settlement in
accordance with the desires of the people concerned.

252. But the draft resolution in S/10446/Rev.l does not
represent agreement. As long as that agreement remains a
reasonable possibility, and until it has been reached, my
delegation does not believe that there is any practical
advantage, and it does not bring a cease-fire any nearer to
achievement, to support resdlutions that it is clear from the
outset have no chance of success.We shall rather continue
and intensify our efforts to find a formula that will be
acceptable to all concerned, since this alone can bring about
the practical end we desire in the cessation of fighting and
suffering.

247. Yesterday evening we heard a statement by the Vice.
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Pakistan. He
referred to Pancha Shila. For three and a half years I was
ambassador in Jakarta and so I am very familiar with the
five principles of Pancha Shila. One of those principles, the
second and the most important, the one which has been the
force and the greatness of Indonesia, is the principle of
fraternity. I hope that this lesson of Pancha Shila will be

253. Mr. DE LA GORCE (France) (interpretation from
In ,pplitics as in physics the same causesproduce ,,

French):
25

misinterpretation of our action. We are very deeply touched
and profoundly saddened by the fratricidal war which is
exacting an untold number of’lives and suffering on the
part of both parties, both indeed brothers to us. We were
no less profoundly saddened to watch the deterioration of
the previous situation, in which a fratricidal conflict also
pitted brothers against each other and inflicted an enor.
mous and unnecessary loss of life and resources.

the same effects, and we have once again seen this fact
proved. My delegation has just now abstained for the same
reasons as it abstained in the Council’s vote on a draft
resolution, which was almost identical to the one that the
American delegation presented this time, as indeed we did
in the vote in the General Assembly on a draft resolution
that was also almost identical. On each occasion we
explained our position, What we wish is to see the Security
Council take a position conducive to a settlement, conducive to serving the cause of peace, a position therefore
which takes into account all aspects of the problem as it
appears today. Therefore this position must be acceptable
to the Council itself, taking a stand in accordance with the
conditions of the Charter. It must also be acceptable to the
parties. The vote held a few minutes ago has shown that the
contents of the draft just rejected did not meet those
conditions. We do not see this vote as either a justification
or a reason to abandon all action. Qn the contrary, this vote
must pave the way to further unanimous and positive
action.

261. We did our best to mediate and to ameliorate the
situation. Since we felt seriously handicapped, our sorrow
was increased. How then were we going to vote for the
draft which, as was clear, satisfied one brother but did not
satisfy the other brother? We voted in favour of it because
we understood the sixth and seventh paragraphs of the
preamble to emphasize very strongly the need for a rapid
political solution, without which no settlement can be
achieved, a settlement which would be conducive to the
normalization of relations and to the return of the refugees.
Likewise, we understood paragraph 2 to be an emphatic
insistence on creating conditions for the return of the
refugees, not to the midst of hostilities, but to a peaceful
climate where they could fully enjoy their human and
political rights, without any infringement of those rights,

254. We are convinced that other initiatives are necessary
and that they are possible, They are necessary if we wish to
stop the fighting, effect disengagement and ensure justice,
that is to say, the political settlement mentioned by ail
here. This is possible since a growing number of delegations
agree on the need to reach together the objectives which I
have just mentioned.

262. The imperfection of the draft resolution lay in its
failure to detail the measures to create those favourable
conditions for the political solution which we urged. But
our anxiety for the bloodshed to stop forthwith on all
fronts and our confidence that Pakistan was indeed now
serious about repairing the tragic mistakes, as the Deputy
Prime Minister assured us last night, made us set the Wgher
consideration of peace above even the highest consideration
of perfection.

255. That hope exists if we take into account not one
single principle, as we were asked to do, but all the
principles which are at issue and all the facts, even though it
may appear awkward to ensure respect for them simultaneously. We must make that hope a reality, and that is why
we have met here.

263. We most emphatically recognize the intolerable
burden which India has had to bear because of the flight of
the refugees. We experienced a flight of refugees in our own
land, although on a minor scale: toutes proportions @r&es,
as the French say. The resulting wounds have so far not
been healed. But we hope that there is now a definitive
opportunity to eliminate this burden from the shoulders of
India. We still see an opportunity to harmonize East and
West, normalizing the relations between the two big brother
States of the subcontinent.

256. Mr, NAKAGAWA (Japan): My delegation voted in
favour of the draft resolution contained in document
S/10446/Rev.l because it is essentially the same as the
draft resolution that we co-sponsored both in the Security
Council and in the General Assembly.
257. My delegation asked the United States delegation to
revise the original text of the draft, because in the view of
my delegation what was needed at this juncture was not to
put blame on one party or the,other to the conflict, but to
induce the parties concerned to agree to a comprehensive
political settlement of the problem. My delegation is
grateful to the United States delegation for kindly accepting our request.
i

264, Last but not least, our interpretation of the draft
resolution is that it is a whole-cease-tire is accompanied by
withdrawal; withdrawal is &nttl&aneous with effective
political remedies for the political turmoil in East Pakistan
and with better conditions immediately conducive to the
pacific and voluntary return of the refugees. This was a
political as well as a humanitarian solution. The draft, in
our view, did not admit of division. It was with this
understanding that we voted for it, and we hope that no
party will misunderstand our genuine motives of principle.

258. We think that the Security Council should not stop
its work in the search for a formula that would be
acceptable to the parties concerned to solve this very
difficult problem. My delegation is ready to contribute its
share in that direction.
259. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): I wish to
explain at this stage what our preoccupations were before
the vote was taken, since I was not able to do so at that
time because of the ruling of the President.

265. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretatiorr
from Spanish): My delegation voted in favour of draft
resolution S/10446/Rev.l. We did so for the same reasons
that we co-sponsored and supported a similar draft resolu.
tion which was adopted by an overwhelming majority at
the meeting of the General Assembly on 7 December
[resolutkw 2793 (XXVI)].

260. I should like to explain why my delegation voted in
the way it did,, in the hope that there will be no
26

266. The purpose of the draft was to restore peace in the
area on the basis of three preliminary points: first, the
cease-fire; secondly, the withdrawal of troops to both sides
of the border, which is an indispensable complement of the
first point; and thirdly, the creation of conditions necessary
for the return of the refugees to their homes,
267. Argentina is dismayed to witness the tragedy which is
pitting two nations against each other, nations with which
we have close and friendly relations, For this reason, we
shall support every effort to restore peace and to have
proclaimed a spirit of co-operation between these two
countries instead of hostility,
268. As we have done in recent days, we shall continue to
give our support to any draft resolution that will resolve the
dilemma before the Security Council and reconcile the
differences between these two nations which are our
friends.
269. The PRESIDENT: The Deputy Foreign Minister of
Pakistan did not participate in the vote and has no right of
explanation of vote. He did, however, indicate that he
would like to have the right of reply, and I am quite certain
the members of the Security Council will not deny him that
right. I now therefore call upon him to exercise the right of
reply,
270. Mr. BHUTTO (Pakistan): I made the request to
exercise the right of reply after the voting because of the
urgency of the dispute before the Security Council. Now
that the Council has taken its decision on the draft
resolution sponsored by the United States of America, I
deem it appropriate to exercise the right of reply, but again
taking into account the urgency of the matter, as it affects
us most directly, We are the ones most concerned, as our
people are shedding their blood, fighting heroically, As I
said earlier, there is street fighting going on, from house to
house. Therefore, on account of the urgency of the matter,
I shall confine myself to the main points raised yesterday
by the Foreign Minister of India, and also briefly touch
upon some of the main points he raised today in his right of
reply.
27 1. I said last night that there were many points in the
Indian Foreign Minister’s statement which needed detailed
rebuttal. When I consulted the text this morning I found
that it was mostly a restatement of the characteristically
self-righteous position which India has adopted during this
crisis and also in the past. However, one thing was quite
obvious. After committing a brazen aggression against
Pakistan, after assaulting our territorial integrity and
political independence, after defying the United Nations
openly and blatantly, after ignoring the fervent appeal of
104 Member States, India is attempting to assume a pOSture
of reasonableness. The gist of the Indian Foreign Minister’s
statement was this: a situation arose in Pakistan which was
not of our creation. We were inundated with refugees. We
sought nothing more than that these refugees be repatriated. Pakistan refused to allow this repatriation. We had
therefore no choice but to invade Pakistan.
27% Shorn of all verbiage, stripped of its sanctimoniousness, the whole Indian argument amounts to saying that
,27

India had the right to invade Pakistan in order to bring
about a settlement of refugees. I leave it to any fair-minded
person to judge how hollow the pretence is. Even if the
principle be disregarded that nothing can justify invasion,
the reality remains that the armed attack has multiplied
rather than eased the poignant humanitarian problem of
East Pakistan; that it has resulted in vastly greater destruction and devastation than had been brought about‘during
the civil strife; that it has done a damage to the infrastructure of East Pakistan that will take decades to repair;
and that a calamity has been turned into a catastrophe.
Forget the legal rights and wrongs of the conflict for a
moment; consider only the human problems in their
concreteness, and you cannot but be appalled. Nobody can
be more grieved at the desolation caused in East Pakistan
by Indian aggression, than the people of West Pakistan. I
must stress that the problem cannot be rightly appraised if
the picture is not correctly visualized or if it is put in a
wrong focus. The picture that India presents is that of sn
invading army coming to the ,rescue of those who are
fighting for their freedom. This picture has no resemblance
to reality, Let me mention some basic facts. Among the
Pakistani soldiers today who are fighting with their backs to
the wall in East Pakistan there are a considerable number of
East Pakistanis. A good part of the personnel of the East
Bengal Regiment and the East Pakistan Rifles are fighting
side by side with their comrades from West Pakistan for the
unity of their country. A hundred thousand volunteers
representing the flower of East Pakistan youth are laying
down their lives at this very moment for the honour and
freedom and integrity of Pakistan, from which the honour
and freedom and integrity of Bangla Desh are totally
inseparable.
273. Much has been said about the Mukti Bahini as if it
were an army of freedom fighters. India itself admits that it
is an army raised in India, trained in India, armed by India,
directed by India, and that through all these nine months it
operated from bases in -India. What else is it therefore
except an irregular Indian army? People will say that there
is no use in dubbing them as Indian agents and dismissing
them at that, But I do not call them Indian agents. I
consider them nothing more than Indian auxiliaries, and no
one who bears in mind their origin and organization and
command can consider them as anything else. It is true that
some among them have been recruited from those persons
who were uprooted from East Pakistan. Whatever their
proportion might be, whether it is high or low, it cannot
change the character of this army; because a fighting group
armed and equipped and trained, financed and directed by
India is nothing but an Indian force. There is ampleevidence that many among the refugees joined that force
because they had no choice; you either starve or you join
the Mukti Bahini. What wonder that many joined.
274. So the first important requirement for an objective
assessment of the situation is to dismiss the myth that has
been artfully propagated by India, the myth that India has
been moved by sympathy and solicitude for the welfare of
Muslim Bengal or East Pakistan. If India had so much
feeling for the Bengalis, what explains its indiscriminate
raids on purely civilian targets? Even an orphanage situated
in a residential area of Dacca, with 300 innocent children
inside, was not spared. What explains a blockade which

prevents even the supplies of food and medicine from
reaching the people of East Pakistan? What explains India’s
approval of the slaughter of thousands of innocent people,
men, women and children, and even newborn babies, which
was rampant in East Pakistan from 2 March to 25 March
1971? And finally, what explains India’s direct encouragement of terror and sabotage and destruction in an area
where the margin of survival is lower perhaps than
anywhere else in the world?

280. The immediate issue before and after the elections
was of a constitutional nature. No heads need be broken
over co@itutional issues. The crisis may have been severe
for Pakistan, but there is not the slightest ground to
suppose that the people of Pakistan were incapable of the
dynamic adjustments that were necessary.
281. It was Indian intervention and Indian manipulation
that so aggravated the crisis as to cause a most tragic strife,
Therefore, when you talk of the root cause of the problem,
you have to consider India’s persistent hostility against
Pakistan. When you talk of the context, you have to bear in
mind the multitude of aggressions that have been committed by India,

275. In my statement yesterday and on previous occasions
the Pakistan delegation has dwelt extensively on the legal
issues involved in the conflict with which the Security
Council is confronted. Those real issues are of paramount
importance because they directly involve the fundamental
principles of the territorial integrity of States, non-intervention in domestic affairs of other States, and the non-use of
force in international relations, which constitute the very
basis of a peaceful world order. If you compromise them, if
you qualify them, if you impose conditions on their
validity, you usher in total anarchy in the world. But today
I would rather stress the human peculiarity of the IndoPakistan situation.

282. In October 1947, just two months after the establishment of India and Pakistan as independent States, India
invaded Kashmir which, as a Muslim majority state, should
have acceded to Pakistan. In early November 1947, India
marched into Junagar, an area whose future would have
been settled amicably. In September 1948 India sent its
armies into Hyderabad, again an area whose problem would
have been solved peacefully and not by invasion. In
October 1962 India launched a forward policy of incursions
across the Chinese frontier. It was Chinese magnanimity
that halted the conflict, but India persisted in rejecting
negotiations towards concluding a boundary agreement
with China. In September 1965 India invaded Pakistan, an
act which it repeated six years later.

276, A colossal human wrong is being perpetrated in East
Pakistan today by Indian invasion, and it cries to be
righted. It can be righted by the collective will of the world
community. If that fails, then other forces or a combiaation of forces will inevitably set in.

283. Even in the very early years of India’s independence
a most distinguished and far-sighted British statesman, the
late Mr. Ernest Bevin, said about India that “this young
State has pronounced war-like proclivities”. His apprehension has been proved entirely justified. What other State in
the contemporary world has committed as many as six
major invasions during the last 24 years?

277. The first process would be corrective and of immediate effect. The second would take longer and would
inevitably involve larger conflicts entailing much hardship
for all the peoples of the subcontinent. What course the
events will take will depend in great part on the wisdom
and the courage of the Security Council today.
278. It has been said during this debate that the problem
is to be viewed in context and that its root cause should not
be forgotten. Let me make it clear that such an approach, if
sincere and genuine, is entirely consistent with Pakistan’s
point of view, In fact, it is the approach which Pakistan
urges; in fact, it is the approach that my party, which is the
single largest party of West Pakistan, has been advocating
since 27 March. We have made many statements on these
matters and on the mistakes that have been committed; and
from 27 March right up to the present we have been talking
about them. On 29 September I issued a policy statement
of my party spelling out,these problems and also suggesting
how they could be resolved. So I have no hesitation
whatsoever in saying that these matters are urgent and that
they require to be tackled realistically.

284. I have not mentioned India’s invasion of Goa because
India often pretends that it has placed all African States
under some kind of obligation by expelling Portugal by
force from that tiny enclave. Be that as it may, the fact
remains that after ousting Portugal, India has not treated
the inhabitants of Goa with justice, but has sought to
obliterate their identity.
285. Much-more infamous is India’s campaign in Nagaland, which was begun in the middle of the 1950s and
whose aim is the subjugation of a people which are
culturally and racially distinct from India and whose
homeland wasnever juridically a part of India.
286. So this is the, context of the problem: India’s record
of one aggression after another, its fatal tendency to have
recourse to arms and its aims of establishing a hegemony
over South Asia. Had it not been for this, no internal
problem of Pakistan, however acute, could possibly have
led to a violent explosion.

279. If India and Pakistan had been two friendly States,
two neighbours with a co-operative relationship, is it
imaginable that an internal conflict in Pakistan would have
assumed such dimensions? After all, the discontent of the
people of East Pakistan was not a new problem which arose
suddenly. It has been there and though I acknowledge that
it was not approached with the courage and resolution
which were required and which only a democratic Government in Pakistan could have surmounted, it had received
considerable attention, and many adjustments and readjustments were made or contemplated for its solution.

287. India alleges that Pakistan has been planning a war in
order to draw attention from its democratic crisis, If this
were true, why would Pakistan have initiated or accepted
every proposal by which hostilities would have been
averted?
28

288. Let me mention briefly the moves that were made or
supported by Pakistan during the last five months. First,
Pakistan sought the good offices of the Security Council in
August. *What was wrong with that proposal? But India
blocked the move. Secondly, Pakistan accepted the proposal for a pull-back of Indian and Pakistani armed forces
from the borders to peace-time stations. India rejected it.
Who was seeking peace, and who was plotting a war?
Thirdly, Pakistan proposed that the two sides withdraw
their armed forces at least to agreed safe distances, to meet
India’s contention that its lines of communication were
longer. This was the proposal made by Pakistan in October.
Could it be the proposal of a Government that wasplanning
a war? India’s Prime Minister dismissed it summarily. Did
she intend to prevent a war by doing that? Fourtbly, when
the Secretary-General offered his ,good offices in October,
Pakistan promptly welcomed the offer. How did India
respond? The Indian Prime Minister gave a lecture to the
Secretary-General. The message was: if you, Mr. SecretaryGeneral, are prepared to exceed your competence, see the
problem as we view it and execute our designs, you are
welcome; otherwise, not. Fifthly, Pakistan also asked for
United Nations observers to be stationed on both sides of
the border to prevent any encroachment from either side,
Does a Government planning a war ask for observers? And
does a Government which seeksto prevent a war reject such
a proposal? But India spurned that suggestion also. Sixthly,
on 29 November, eight days after India’s massive invasion
of East Pakistan, Pakistan went so far as to signify its
willingness to accept United Nations observerson its own
side of the East Pakistan borders. Did we want the
observers to witness our preparations for war?
289. All these moves for peace made by Pakistan are
apparent from the Secretary-General’s reports of 3 and
4 December [S/10410 and Add.]]. Let any representative
seated around this table disregard any partisan sympathies
and considerations of expediency and come to an impartial
judgement on this question. Does not this whole sequence
bear out the premeditated nature of India’s aggression?

293. As regards the political settlement, it need hardly be
said that Pakistan ‘will spare no effort in achieving a
solution of its Internal problem consistent with the will of
the people and its sovereignty and territorial integrity. The
sine qua non of the successof the efforts towards a political
solution is that they should be free from any outside
pressure and foreign participation, It is also an inescapable
essential that the negotiations must be without preconditions from either side. Given such an atmosphere, there is
not the slightest warrant to suppose that a political solution
will not emerge which will end the nightmare of the last
nine months and induce the speedy repatriation of the
people who have been uprooted from East Pakistan,
294. This is Pakistan’s attitude even in this hour of
destructive conflict. If the Security Council responds to it
positively, the conflict will be ended. In doing so, the
Council will uphold the principles of the United Nations. It
will show that it is not swayedby power politics but moved
by compassion and courage. It will demonstrate that it has
the resources to bring about a reconciliation. If it bears in
mind the principles involved, the Security Council can feel
assured of Pakistan’s co-operation. I have come here to seek
peace, a peace with honour and justice. I do not want to go
back a disappointed man. Should my mission fail, it will be
the defeat of not only our hopes but those. of the entire
people of Pakistan, both in the East and in the West. The
disruptive impact of such disappointment on the fabric of
peace can hardly be exaggerated I
295. So I reiterate Pakistan’s earnest desire to seek a
peaceful solution, a peaceful settlement of the internal
problems of Pakistan, Within the concept of one united
Pakistan, we are prepared to spare no measures to find a
peaceful solution of the problems that have aggravated the
present tension. This is our hope and we believe that given
the determination, vision and confidence, the democratic,
elected elements of Pakistan who have the support of the
people of Pakistan can come to a correct and just solution
in the interests of the whole nation of Pakistan.
296. 1 repeat, this has been our point of view right from
the day the crisis arose. From 25 March we have been
pressing for this, that there must be a political solution.
Again and again we have been impressing on the present
military regime that there must be a political solution to
the problems of Pakistan. I repeat, on 29 September we
issued a policy statement on this matter. Today I represent
my nation. I have come in this hour of trial. I have been
summoned at the last moment to be at the call of Pakistan,
I have responded to this because my nation needs my
services, and that is why, at the eIeventh hour, I have been
summoned by my country to come and represent it in its
gravest crisis.

290. I know that members of the Security Council are not
always free to state their positions candidly, but I shall be
content if they make an impartial judgement about the
origin and causes of this war. Let them face the issue in the
privacy of their own minds, If they do, they cannot but
realize what the imperatives of the situation are.
291. These imperatives are, first, a cease-fire; secondly,
withdrawal from Pakistani territory of Indian forces and
other armed personnel which entered Pakistan from India;
thirdly, the stationing of United Nations observers to
supervise the cease-fire and withdrawal; . fourthly, the
devising of means to ensure that the Geneva Conventions
on armed conflict are scrupulously adhered to and that no
reprisals take place in East Pakistan. The withdrawal of
forces is, of course, a reciprocal obligation; therefore,
Pakistani forces also have to withdraw from Indian territory
simultaneously.

297. We want a political settlement. The Foreign Minister
of India talks about a political solution but has applied a
military solution to the problem. He wants the repatriation
of refugees but he has brought those refugees on Indian
tanks and poised on Indian bayonets back into East
Pakistan. It is India that is seeking a military solution to the
problem. Pakistan wants a political solution and Pakistan
will have a political solution once Indian intervention is
removed from the soil of Pakistan.

292. Let me make it clear that if these imperatives are
fulfiIled, Pakistan will heed the appeal of its friends for a
cessation of all military activity in East Pakistan, provided
that no sabotage, massacre or large-scaleviolence continues.
29

298. Mr. VINCI (Italy): The delegations of Japan and
Italy have decided to introduce a new draft resolution in a
new attempt to break the deadlock which we were afraid
we would face again, Before presenting our text I would
start with a foreword. My delegation voted in favour of the
draft resolution contained in document S/10446/Rev.l
mainly because it embodied all the provisions contained in
the eight-Power draft resolution [S/10423/ of which Italy
was a sponsor in the Security Council and resolution
2793 (XXVI) adopted by the General Assembly by 104
votes in favour, a resolution of which we were equally a
sponsor with more than 30 other Member States. We could
not fail to stand by a General Assembly resolution which
supported positions of principle which are of vital importance for any country in the world, big or small.
299. As I stated in the General Assembly, in acting as we
did throughout all this tragic crisis involving the lives of
millions of men, women and children, we were not taking
sides. We were siding with the United Nations. I added on
another occasion that this resolution had great moral value
since it showed that most Member States, when confronted
with a choice between their friends or allies and the
principles of the Charter, choose the Charter. This is a very
encouraging factor, in our view, and we believe that this
moral message should not be forgotten or weakened. On
the contrary, it should be kept intact and alive. The moral
message should be spread throughout the world.

well-being of their people, by their reiterated will to
reconcile their differences, to leave the path of war and to
turn to peaceful means in order to restore peace in the area
and to pave the way towards a peaceful solution of their
dispute. Finally, we detected in their statements less
intransigence, a desire for reconciliation.
304. The delegations of Japan and Italy were moved, for
all these reasons, to draft a text which has also tried to take
into full account these encouraging developments and
attempts to be as realistic as possible, as advocated by India
and some members of the Council. Our main objective is to
set up machinery which would strengthen these encouraging new trends that we have detected, and to assist the
parties in turning their backs to war and finding a way to
reconciliation and a political settlement based on justice
and on respect for the rights and interests of all the peoples
involved.
305. This draft has been circulated, but I will, with your
permission, read out the text, which will require very few
comments after what I have said. At the same time I will
draw the attention of the Council to the fact that it will be
followed by the circulation of a modified text, since,
following consultations, we have already introduced some
changes. The modified text reads as follows:
“The Security Council,

‘Noting the reports of the Secretary-General of 3 and
4 December 1971 and Security Council resolution
303 (1971) of 6 December 1971,

300. Now, when the same text was introduced, with some
additions, in the Security Council, in the light of some
developments we were not so sure that this was the best
course to follow. However, since the representative of the
United States had improved the text by accepting the
suggestion of the representative of Japan, we decided to
vote in favour of it, Nevertheless, since we foresaw the
outcome of the vote we, with our Japanese friends,
prepared the draft, resolution which is being circulated right
now [S/l 04.511,

“Mindful of the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter and of the Security Council’s responsibilities under the relevant provisions of the Charter,

‘Noting General Assembly resolution 2793 (XXVI) of
7 December 1971,
‘Noting with appreciation the reply of the Government
of Pakistan to the letter of the Secretary-General concerning General Assembly resolution 2793 (XXVI) contained in document S/10440,

301. We do not pretend that this draft resolution will
receive at once the consent of all members of the Council
and of the main parties concerned. It was drafted rather
hurriedly and will show some imperfections.

“Notingfurther
the reply of the Government of India,
contained in document S/10445,

302. Since last summer my delegation has tried very hard
to prevent the tragedy which has involved two friendly
countries and which has brought untold suffering, misery
and destruction on millions of innocent people. We were
and are moved by the conviction that war should be not
only limited but eliminated forever, In the present world
the Clausewitz doctrine must be repudiated once and for
all. It is no longer possible or admissible to achieve political
ends by force wherever and for whichever reason force is
used. It is against the conscience of mankind; it is against
the aspirations,. hopes and expectations of all peoples,
especially of the developing countries, as it was so
forcefully stated in this chamber and in the General
Assembly by so many representatives.

“Gravely concerned that hostilities continue between
India and Pakistan which constitute an immediate threat
to international peace and security,
“Recogn&g
the need to deal also, within the framework of the Charter, with the issueswhich have given rise
to these hostilities,
‘Recognizing that a lasting solution must be based on a
political settlement in Pakistan which respects the rights
and interests of its people,
“Recalling the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security, particularly paragraphs 4, 5 and 6,

303. We were very impressed indeed yesterday and today
by the statements of the Foreign Minister of India and the
Deputy Prime Minister of Pakistan. We were especially
moved by the concern they have both shown for the

“Recognizing Arther
the need to take immediate
measures to bring about an immediate cessation of
hostilities and withdrawal of all armed forces,

30

“1. Calls upon all Member States, in conformity with
their obligations under the Charter of the United Nations,
to refrain from any action or threat of action likely to
worsen the situation in the Indo-Pakistan subcontinent or
to endanger international peace;

and in the hands of the whole Council, We could have a
short suspension or an adjournment for a few hours. For
our part we shall abide by the will of the Council.
308. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Italy has
carefully explained the version of the draft resolution
[S/10451] prepared by the delegations of Italy and Japan
and he has explained the reasons for presenting the draft
resolution and interpreted clearly what it means. We have
already had sufficient experience in the past to know that
we should not do too much at once. I think we should not
rush. Perhqps it would be the view of members that we
should sleep on this draft resolution and come back
tomorrow by 3.30 p.m, to consider it. If that is agreed
upon, we may perhaps also consider holding consultations
between 11.30 a.m. and 1 p.m. tomorrow and also between
3 p.m. and 3.30 p.m. before the meeting.

“2. ‘Calls upon all parties concerned to take forthwith,
as a first step, all measures to bring about an immediate
cease-fire and cessation of all hostilities;
“3. Urges India and Pakistan both to carry on operations of disengagement and withdrawal so as to bring
about the end of confrontation and the return to
normalcy in the area of conflict;
“4. Calls for immediate steps aimed at achieving a
comprehensive political settlement;
“5. calls for the full co-operation of all States with the
Secretary-General for rendering as$stance to and relieving
the distress of the East Pakistan refugees;

309. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (tmns2utio~ from Chinese):
In view of the fact that Indian troops are still committing
aggression against East Pakistan and large-scale slaughter is
still continuing, we feel that the members of the Security
Council must go on with their work and should convene a
meeting as soon as possible. Therefore we suggest that the
Security Council should be convened for consultations
from 9 a.m. to 11 a.m. tomorrow, and after 11 a.m. we
should have a formal meeting of the Council.

“6. Calls upon all parties concerned to take all possible
measures and precautions to safeguard the lives and
well-being of the civilian population in the area and to
ensure the full observation of all the Geneva Conventions;
“7. Decides to appoint, with the consent of India and
Pakistan, a Committee composed of three members of the
Security Council to assist them in their efforts to bring
about normalcy in the ‘area of conflict as well as to
achieve reconciliation in accordance with the principles of
the Charter and in keeping with the aforesaid resolutions
and to report to the Council:‘.

310. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I should like to have a
clarification from the sponsors of the draft, in particular, of
course, Ambassador Vinci. In the eighth preambular paragraph of the draft the words “East Pakistan” appear. When
Ambassador Vinci was introducing the draft he used only
the one word “Pakistan”. Was that an inadvertence, or did
he deliberately omit the word “East”?
(translation

At this point 1 would draw attention to the fact that,
although we have introduced the words “three members”,
this
is not the final text, It is intended that we should put
the names of the members of the Security Council or
whatever other formulation we may find in order to
establish this committee, ,It is just a reminder of what we
have in mind.

from

Russian):

311. There is another question. HOW is it that operative
paragraph 4 of the text reads ‘Ymmediate opening of
negoti&ons with a view to achieving” but Ambassador
Vinci in his statement changed those ,words,replacing them
by “steps aimed at”. I should like a precise explanation of
this, a clarification.

“8. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Security Council promptly and currently informed on the
implementation of the present resolution;

312. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I hope that I, can answer
satisfactorily the questions put to me by Ambassador
Malik. As I have stated, I said in presenting this draft
resolution that the text I was going to read was alieady a
revised draft, in which we had introduced some changes
following upon consultations with some of the members of
the Council, but not all, I must acknowledge. We did not
have enough time to consult all the members of the Council
and the main parties concerned. So I have to say that it is
true that in the modified text, in the eighth preambular
paragraph, the word “East” has been deleted.

“9. Decides to remain seized of the matter and to
meet again as circumstances warrant.”
306. As I have mentioned in the course of my statement,
our two delegations have drafted this text in haste, because
of the pressure of our work in this body and in other bodies
of the United Nations. We do not regard this text as a final
one. We understand that members of the Council and the
main parties concerned will wish to study the draft and let
US know their views and their suggestions. These views and
suggestions will be most welcome.

313. Secondly, it is also true that operative paragraph 4
has been changed following those consultations with which,
I believe, the Soviet delegation was at least acquainted. It
reads:

307. In our view, the Security Council cannot remain at a
standstill while bloodshed is going on, while soldiers and
men, women and children are dying and while millions Of
innocent people are subject to increasing misery and
suffering. We ar!, of course, in your hands, Mr. President,

“Calls for immediate steps aimed at achieving a comprehensive political settlement ;r’.
31

314. But again I would reiterate that the sponsors of the
draft resolution are willing to hold consultations and are
willing to consider the views and suggestions of all the
members of the Council and of the main parties concerned.
Our common will is to draft a text which, we hope, could
gain the consent of all the members as well as the main
parties concerned in order that we can take a step forward
to stop the war which is still going on and to set up
machinery which will enable the United Nations to help the
main parties concerned to pave the way towards a final
political settlement.

We made our statement earlier concerning this point.
Therefore, what the representative of the Soviet Union said
was inaccurate. I just suggested that we should proceed
with con::ultations ffom 9 a.m. to 11 a.m. tomorrow
morning. If that is too early perhaps 9.30 a.m. would be a
better time and then the formal meeting ‘of the Security
Council could be convened at 11 a.m. I hope Ghat this will
be acceptable to the representative
of the Soviet Union.
,

315. The PRESIDENT: I listened carefully to the suggestion of the representative of China. As a result of
consultations, however, the majority of the members seem
to agree to a meeting for 3.30 tomorrow afternoon.
316. Mr. BENNETT (United ‘States of America): I just
wanted to say that we will support any move for an earlier
meeting. We feel that the situation is urgent and we are
ready to meet at an earlier time.
317. The PRESIDENT:
earlier time?

What would you consider to be an

318. Mr. BENNETT (United States of America): The
suggestion of 9 a.m. has been made. As this is perhaps a
little early for some members, 10.30 a.m. would be
acceptable to us.
319. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My delegation has no objection to the proposal that we meet tomorrow morning rather
than tomorrow afternoon.

325. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from Chinese):
I think there is a misunderstanding between us. I mentioned
the statement made by the representative of the Soviet
Union because he just mentioned that an understanding was
reached among all the members of the Security Council. I
said that during the process of the consultations we did not
agree to this understanding. We did not agree to convene
the meeting at such a late hour. We suggested that the
meeting could be held earlier. I did not mean what you
said, Mr. President.

320. Mr. OGISO (Japan): My delegation also has no
objection to an early meeting tomorrow morning.
321. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
As far as I know, an understanding was reached during the meeting that consultations
would begin at 11 a.m., and that the Council meeting
would start at 3.30 p.m. However, it could be convened
earlier, half an hour earlier, at 3 pm. It would hardly be
appropriate, however, to change the understanding, especially as there is no certainty that all of us will be able to
receive a reply and instructions on this new and very
important draft resolution by 9 a.m. That would be
unrealistic. While the United States delegation can receive
such information in an hour, as I am always pointing out,
we are in a less privileged position in this respect, and I
cannot guarantee that I shall be able to receive instructions
by 9 o’clock in order to participate in the consultations.
(translation

324. The PRESIDENT: I may add that yesterday there
was much talk about “understanding” or “misunderstanding”, and some talk today about “understanding”.
The members of the Council will realize that no one here is
responsible for the interpretation of the interpreters. Thus,
when we speak English our statements are interpreted into
either Spanish, Chinese, French or Russian. I am almost
certain that the words I use in my statements are not
exactly reflected during the interpretation of those words
in the other languages. If a French translation happens to
be given, it might be an elegant interpretation, it might be a
rigid interpretation but we are not responsible. So, when
the word “understanding” is used it may take many
meanings. Just now I said: “As a result of consultations,
however, the majority of the members seem to agree to a
meeting for 3.30 tomorrow afternoon.” That is clear but it
may bring some difficulties to those who do not understand
English. Yesterday too, the word “understanding” wasused
but I had the impression that when “understanding” was
used, I interpreted it to mean “impression”. I understood
the Minister to say that he had an impression that a certain
course was to be taken.

from Russian):

326. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): I would rather
prefer that we stick to your original suggestion, understanding or not, because quite honestly we do in fact do
much more productive work *when we are not meeting
around this table but in coirsult&ons elsewhere and I think
the progress of finding a satisfactory resolution would be
vastly accelerated. Otherwise I am afraid what we may find
is that although we meet at 11 a.m. in fact nobody will
actually sit down at the table until’ 3 p.m.

322. In view of the importance of the draft resolution and
the seriousness of the question, I do not think that two
extra hours will settle matters, and it would, therefore, be
best to keep to the understanding reached earlier by all
members of the Council.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
I assume that by the end of
your term as President you will pronounce the name of my
country correctly.

323. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from Chinese):
The representative of the Soviet Union just mentioned that
an understanding had been reached in the Council. Such an
understanding should include all the members of the
Security Council. We did not agree to that understanding.

328. I submit that the Chinese representative has no
grounds for ascribing inaccuracy to me. I did not consult
him. I consulted the President of the Council and, when I
had heard his statement, I concluded that there was a
majority opinion, and that is what I told the Council.

327. Mr. MALIK

(translation from Russian):

32

329. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
from Spanish): I believe that the reasons which have been

336. Mr. ROMAN
(Nicaragua) (interpretation from ’
Spanish): I could not agree more with you, Sir. Tomorrow

put forward by both sides to justify different times are
perfectly justified and well-founded. On the one hand there
are those who are anxious to meet for they are aware of the
tragedy on the Indian suboontinent and of course they
want a solution as soon as possible. Then there are those
who want a meeting somewhat later, and they are anxious
to achieve a final settlement.

at 3.30 p.m. Otherwise we will not be through here until ;
3 a.m.

-330. Both arguments are very sound indeed, and I think
the best thing would be a compromise. The proposal by the
representative of China to have consultations in the
morning seems to me very helpful. We could do that at a
time perhaps somewhat later than the time he suggested,
perhaps around 11 a.m., and then have a formal meeting
early in the afternoon, at 3 p.m. say. That would give
delegations who need instructions time to receive them, and
then the consultations, which are the most fundamental
thing in achieving a unanimous settlement in the Council,
can take place in the morning. I believe that would be a
harmonious solution which would spare us a long procedural debate which could go on for a long time and keep
the Council, which is surely now somewhat weary, in
session longer than is necessary.
331. Mr. VINCI (Italy): In order to accommodate the
views of all members, including the representative of China,
I thought that perhaps we should start consultations
tomorrow at 9.30 a.m. or 10.00 a.m. and, in principle,
convene a meeting of the Council in the morning if
possible. But, I am ready also to go along with th.e
suggestion made by Ambassador Ortiz de Rozas-one of the
two, whichever can accommodate members of the Council,

337. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I do not see any incompatibility
between the two suggestions. What I had in mind was to say
that we could start consultations tomorrow morning and
plan a meeting for the morning if that is possible-in other
words, if consultations produce the results we ail hope for
in one or two hours then we can have a meeting in the
morning. If that does not happen then we will meet only at
3 p.m. We have it in your hands, in other words. You can
decide in view of the results of the consultations we have in
the morning to convene in the morning at 11 or even later,
or at 3 p.m. in the afternoon.
338. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretation
from FrenchJ: I just wish to say we are very flexible and
open to all suggestions, The wisest course would be to
confer tomorrow morning, and you might convene the
Council as soon as a solution appears likely, at the end of
the morning or the beginning of the afternoon. That should
leave matters very clear.
339. Mr. BENNETT (United States): I think the Italian
representative has made an eminently practical suggestion
and I would support it, that is, to meet for consultations.
340. The PRESIDENT: Subject to what you may say, I
am proposing that we hold consultations between 9 a.m.
and 1 p.m. tomorrow and then hold a meeting at 3 p.m. We
have to be realistic. I have been arranging to have
consultations here but unfortunately the representatives
have been so busy that they have not been turning up. I am
almost certain that if we arrange to hold a meeting
tomorrow morning it will not be possible for representatives to hold consultations before the meeting, and we
know what that means. I am providing for consultations
between 10 a.m. and 1 p,m. tomorrow, to give us sufficient
opportunity to look at the draft and seehow much we will
be able to revise it before the afternoon.

332. The PRESIDENT: Does the representative of China
wish to reply to the suggestion which has just been put
forward by the representative of Italy?
333. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation Porn Chinese):
I agree with the suggestion put forward by the representative of Italy.

341. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from Chinese):
Mr, President, I agree with what YOU have stated.

334. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
will you make up our minds for us, please?

342. The PRBSIDiNT:
I therefore adjourn the meeting
until 3.00 p.m. tomorrow.

335. The PRESIDENT: As far as I see it, it is still the
majority view that we should have a meeting at 3.30 p.m.
tomorrow unless there are more statements to the contrary,

22e meeting rose at 9.40 pam.

33

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et lea agencss
ddpbsitaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aup&
de votre libraire
ou adresaez-vous
b : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Genke.

COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Nkciones
Unidas eatin en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo. Cons@
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Seceicin de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Lltho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

82240-JUlY

1974-2,050
