Resolutions adoptecl on the reporte of the Thinl Committee

close as possible to those of the normal life of a
person of his or her age.
1O. Disabled persons shall be protected against
ali exploitation, all regulations and ali treatment of
a discriminatory, abusive or degrading nature.
11. Disabled persons shall be able to avail themselves of qualified legal aid when such aid proves indispensable for the protection of their persons and
property. If judicial proceedings are instituted against
them, the legal procedure applied shall take their
physical and mental condition fully into account.
12. Organizations of disabled persons may be usefully consulted in ali matters regarding the rights of
disabled persons.
·
13. Disabled persons, their families and communities shall be fully informed, by all appropriate means,
of the rights contained in this Declaration.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3448 (XXX).

Protection of human rights
in Chile18
The General Assembly,
Conscious of its responsibility under the Charter
of the United Nations to promote and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental fteedoms for
all,
Recalling that, in accordance with the Universal

Declaration of Human Rights, 19 everyone has the right
to life, liberty and the security of person and the right
not to be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or
exile, or to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment,
Recalling that, in its resolution 3219 (XXIX) of
6 November 1974, the General Assembly expressed its
deepest concem about reported constant and lagrant
violations of basic human rights and fundamental freedoms in Chile and urged the authorities in that country
to tak:e ali necessary steps to restore and safeguard
those rights and freedoms,
Noting that the General Conference of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its eighteenth session, the General Conference
of the Intemational Labour Organisation at its sixtieth
session, the World Conference of the Intemational
Women's Year and the Sub-Commission on Prevention
of Discri.min:ation and Protection of Minorities at its
iwenty-eighth session called for the cessation of violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in
Chile,
Noting that, in its resolution 8 (XXXI) of 27 February 1975,20 the Commission on Human Rights, after
expressing its serious concem about the continuing reports of violations of human rights in Chile, decided to
establish an ad hoc working group to inquire into the
present situation of human rights in that country on the
basis of ali available evidence, including a visit to
Chile, and appealed to the authorities of Chile to extend their full co-operation to the group,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General under General Assembly resolution 3219

(XXIX) 21 and, in particular, the progress report submitted by the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Situation of Human Rights in Chile,22
Convinced that the progress report contains evidence
from which to conclude that constant fl.agrant violations
of basic human rights and fundamental freedoms have
taken place and continue to take place in Chile,
Expressing its appreciation to the Chairman and the
members of the Ad Hoc Working Group for their report, which has been prepared in a commendable manner notwithstanding the refusal of the Chilean authorities to permit the Group to visit the country,
Reaffirming its condemnation of all forms of torture
and of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,

1. Expresses its profound distress at the constant
flagrant violations of human rights, including the institutionalized practice of torture, cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, arbitrary arrest,
detention and exile-to which the progress report of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on the Situation of Human
Rights in Chile, established under resolution 8 (XXXI)
of the Commission on Human Rights, brings additional
evidence-which have taken place and, according to
existing evidence, continue to take place in Chile;
2. Calls upon the Chilean authorities to take, without delay, all necessary measures to restore and saf~
guard basic human rights and fundamental fi:eedoms
and fully to respect the provisions of the intemational
instruments to which Chile is a party and, to this end,
to ensure that:
(a) The state of siege or emergency is not used for
the purpose of violating human rights and fundamental
freedoms, contrary to article 4 of the Intemational
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;28

(b) Adequate measures are talren to end the institutionalized practice of torture and other forms of
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
in full respect of article 7 of the Intemational Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights;

(e) The rights of all persons to liberty and security
of person, in particular the rights of those who have
been detainecl without charge or are in prison solely
for political reasons, as provided for in article 9 of the
Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
are fully guaranteed and steps are taken to clarify the
status of those individuals who are not accounted for;
(d) No one shall be held guilty of any criminal offence on account of any aot or omission which did not
constitute a criminal offence, under Játional or international law, at the time when it was committed, contrary to article 15 of the Intemational Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights;
(e) No one, in accorda.p.ce with article 15, paragraph 2, of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
shall be arbitrarily deprived of Chilean nationality;

(f) The right to freedom of association, including the
right to form and join trade uníons, shall be respected,
in accordance with article 22 of the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;

1s See also p. 99, itero 12.
111 Resolution 217 A (ill).
20 See Olficial Records of the Economic and Social Council,

Fifty-elghth Sesslon, Supplement No. 4 (B/S63S), cbap. XXDI.

89

21 A/10295.

22 A/1028S, annex.
23 Resolution 2:200 A (XXI), annex.

90

General Aleemhl;r-'lldrtieth SeHion

(g) The right to intellectual freedoms, as provided
for in article 19 of the Intemational Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, shall be guaranteed;
3. Deplores the refusal of the Chilean authorities to
allow the Ad Hoc Working Group to visit the country,
notwithstanding previous solemn assurances given by
the authorities in this regard, and urges them to honour
these assurances;
4. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to extend the mandate of ,the Ad Hoc Working Group, as
presently constituted, to enable it to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-füst session and to the Commission on Human Rights at its thirty-third session on
the situation of human rights in Chile and, in particular, on any developments which occur to re-establish
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms;
5. Requests the President of the thirtieth session of
the General Assembly and the Secretary-General to
assist in any way they may deem appropriate in the
re-establishment of basic human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Chile.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3449 (XXX). Measures to ensure the human
righ18 and dignity of ali migrant worken
The General Assembly,
Considering the Convention on Diplomatic Relations24 and ,the Convention on Consular Relations,211
Considering also its resolution 2920 (XXVII) of
15 November 1972 on the exploitation of labour
through illicit and clandestine trafficking,
Recalling its resolution 3224 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974 on measures to improve the situation of migrant workers,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1749 (LIV) of 16 May 1973, in which the Council affirmed the need for the United Nations to continue examining the situation of migrant workers,
taking into account economic, political, social and
cultural factors with respect to human rights and
dignity,
Noting with satisfaction the awareness of the international community of this problem and the necessity to
protect the human rights of migrant workers,
Noting with satisfaction the work being undertaken
by the specialized agencies in the field of migrant
workers,
Taking into consideration the urgent need carefully
to examine the problem of migrant workers who surreptitiously enter another country to obtain work,
l. Calls upon the United Nations organs active in
the ,fi.eld of human rights to continue devoting their
attention to this question;

2. Requests the United Nations organs and the specialized agencies concemed to ut~ in all official
documents the term "non-documented or irregular
-migrant workers" to define those wotkers that illegally
and/ or surreptitiously enter another country to obtain
work;
24 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 500, No. 7310, p. 95.
25 Jbid., vol. ·S96, No. 8638, p. 261.

3. Appeals to the Govemments of Member States
to remind their competent administrative authorities of
their obligation to respect ,the human rights of all
migrant worlrers, including those that are non-documented or irregular;
4. Urges the Govemments of Member States to
grant all facilities and help to diplomatic and consular
agents accredited in their countries so that they can
fulfil their functions in relation to the protection and
defence of the human rights of migrant workers, including those that are non-documented or irregular.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3450 (XXX).

Missing persons in Cyprua

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3212 (XXIX) of 1 November 1974,
Noting resolution 4 (XXXI) adopted by the Commission on Human Rights on 13 February 1975,26
Gravely concerned about the fate of a considerable
number of Cypriots who are missing as a result of armed
conflict in Cyprus,
Appreciating the work of the Initemational Committee of the Red Cross in this ,field,
Reaffirming the basic human need of families in
Cyprus to be informed about missing relatives,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to exert every
effort, in close co-operation with the · Intemational
Committee of the Red Cross, to assist in tracing
and accounting for persons missing as a result of armed
conflict in Cyprus;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Commission on Human Rights at its thirty-second
session with information relevant to the implementation of the present resolution.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975
3451 (XXX). Alternative approachea and ways
and means within the United Natiom syatem
for improving the e&ectlve enjoymmt of
human rights and fundamental freedoma

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3,136 (XXVID) of 14 December 1973 and 3221 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974,
Considering that the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights27 and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the
Optional Protocol theret<>27 will soon enter into force,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for bis report on altemative approaches and ways
and means within the United Nations system for improving the effective enioyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms; 28
2. Urges Member States that have not already done
so to submit their views to the Secretary-General in
accordance with paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution 3221 (XXIX);
26 Sce Official Records of the Economic anti Social Council,
Fifty-eighth ~ession, Supplement No. 4 (B/5635), cbap. xxm.
21 Resolutton 2200 A (XXI), annex.
28 A/10235.
