S/PV.7716

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7716th meeting

Tuesday, 14 June 2016, 4.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lamek. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Letter dated 8 June 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/510)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-17203 (E)
*1617203*

S/PV.7716

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 4.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Letter dated 8 June 2016 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/510)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/510, which congtains the text of
a letter dated 8 June 2016 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this new opportunity to present a
briefing to the Security Council on the situation in
Darfur and the activities of African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
The special report (see S/2016/510) of the SecretaryGeneral and of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission presents the results of the Darfur joint
assessment mission by the African Union and the
United Nations of the situation in Darfur and the steps
to be taken to implement the UNAMID mandate, as
well as the operational effectiveness of the military
and police components of the mission. I will present
the conclusions and recommendations that were the
outcome of the joint assessment and the major events
that have taken place since it was published, on 8 June.
The nature of the conflict in Darfur remains
unchanged since the renewal of the mandate of the
mission, for many reasons.
2/6

14/06/2016

First, little progress has been made in finding
a viable political solution to the conflict. The
Government of the Sudan and the non-signatory armed
movements have yet to reach consensus with regard
to the role of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
in the negotiation process led by the piece High-level
Implementation Panel of the African Union. On 30 and
31 May in Doha, UNAMID and the Government of
Qatar consulted with the Justice and Equality Movement
and the Sudan Liberation Army (SLA) to help achieve
a rapprochement of the positions of the two parties. It
is regrettable that the Abdul Wahid faction was absent
from the negotiating table, and it which should be urged
to engage constructively in achieving consensus. For
now, the United Nations and the African Union have
called on the Sudanese opposition to follow the road
map proposed by the High-level Panel and signed by the
Sudanese Government in April. If all stakeholders were
to abide by the road map, that would undoubtedly lead
to significant progress in the peace process, thereby
opening the way for progress with regard to ceasefire
negotiations in South Kordofan and Blue Nile states, the
political process in Darfur and the national dialogue.
Secondly, there is the element of intercommunal
violence, which are emanating from disputes over
access to land, water and grazing areas, remains a
major cause of insecurity in Darfur. That communal
violence has also been exacerbated by the politicization
of disputes, the degree to which communities are being
armed, inadequate efforts — it must be said — to restore
the rule of law, and the recurrent impunity enjoyed by
the perpetrators of acts of violence. There have been
four major incidents since January between Arab tribes
and their neighbours — the Gimir and Masalit — in
West Darfur, triggered by incidents of cattle rustling.
On 22 May, for example, a member of an Arab tribe
and a soldier of the Sudanese army were killed in
Azerni, east of El Geneina, following the escalation
of a dispute on the non-payment for services rendered,
which escalated into an attack on a mosque in which six
Masalit civilians were killed.
(spoke in English)
In the face of such violence, the Government,
particularly at the State level, has taken measures to
restore security by deploying additional forces to hot
spots, enhancing mediation efforts, including between
farmers and nomads, and planning a broad civilian
disarmament campaign. Despite such efforts, however,
the violence persists, as its underlying causes, which
16-17203

14/06/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

are inherently linked to those of the broader Darfur
conflict, are yet to be addressed.
Thirdly, while direct clashes between the
Government and the armed movement forces have
subsided as a whole, the fighting with the Sudan
Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction in Jebel Marra,
which rejects any negotiations with the Government,
has continued. In mid-January, the Government
launched an aerial and ground offensive in parts of
Central, North and South Darfur. The aim of that was to
dislodge the SLA/Abdul Wahid from its strongholds in
the mountainous area, which the latter resisted through
asymmetric warfare and the high mobility of its forces.
While the Government stated in April that the
rebellion had ended with the capture of Sorrong in
Central Darfur, reports of clashes have continued,
including indiscriminate attacks against the civilian
population, which UNAMID could not verify due to a
lack of access. Most recently, on 30 May, Abdul Wahid
forces reportedly attacked the Sudanese armed forces
positions east of Nertiti, in Guthrum in Central Darfur.
Ground fighting and aerial bombardments followed,
and continued until 5 June, with reports of casualties
on both sides, as well as among civilians.
As of today, while 2.6 million people remain
displaced across Darfur, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs has reported 80,000 verified
internally displaced persons (IDPs) since the resumption
of fighting in the Jebel Marra area in mid-January.
It has also received reports of as many as 127,000
additional displaced persons, but that number has not
been verified, due to the lack of humanitarian access,
particularly in Central Darfur. Furthermore, a total of
1.6 million civilians continue to reside in the region
in some 60 camps for internally displaced persons.
Although some of those displaced have returned to
their homes, many have chosen to remain in camps or
in urban areas. By the way, IDPs have largely voiced
their rejection of the Government’s plans to implement
a voluntary process to end displacement by 2017. They
cited for that the absence of security, stability, justice,
access to basic services, compensation and issues with
their land rights.
With respect to relations with the Government of
the Sudan, UNAMID continued to face considerable
challenges that impeded the implementation of its
mandate, including denials of access and freedom of
movement, particularly, as I already noted, to conflict

S/PV.7716

areas such as Jebel Marra. Denials and delays in
the issuance of visas and the clearance of shipment
containers at Port Sudan have also continued. Delays
in the clearance of military and police equipment, food
rations and sustainment supplies remain a significant
obstacle in that context. The African Union and
United Nations, with the support of Security Council
members, have consistently engaged the Government
of the Sudan on those matters. At the latest tripartite
meeting, held in Khartoum on 23 May, the Government
reiterated its commitment to continue working with
UNAMID on resolving those issues. More recently, the
Sudanese ForeignMinister reiterated his Government’s
commitment to address those challenges. We very much
hope that those assurances will result in much-needed
progress on the ground.
Further to the request of their two Councils, the
United Nations and African Union also continued their
discussions with the Government on the development
of an exit strategy for UNAMID based on the
benchmarks. The Joint Working Group met from 12 to
22 May. The Working Group, which is made up of the
three parties, visited the five states of Darfur and held
discussions in Khartoum. They agreed on a general
evaluation of the benchmarks and on recommendations
whose implementation would provide elements for a
gradual and phased exit strategy. However, the Joint
Working Group did not reach consensus on the issue of
the process leading to a possible reconfiguration of the
mission. On 23 May, during the twenty-first tripartite
meeting, which was also held in Khartoum, the three
parties endorsed the outcome of the Joint Working
Group and requested it to reconvene in four months to
review the implementation of its recommendations and
the benchmarks.
Given the current situation in Darfur, the joint
assessment mission concluded that the strategic
priorities of UNAMID and their corresponding
benchmarks remained valid. Within that framework,
the Chairperson and the Secretary-General therefore
recommended for UNAMID to focus its activities,
first, on protecting the displaced populations and,
secondly, on addressing intercommunal violence more
comprehensively.
In a situation of continuing armed conflict,
intercommunal violence and attacks against civilians,
the current security conditions in Darfur are not
conducive to a large-scale return of IDPs to their
places of origin. Any such return would have to be

16-172033/6

S/PV.7716

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

voluntary, consented to, safe and accompanied by
durable solutions. Building upon its current strategy
for the protection of civilians, UNAMID would
support the work of humanitarian partners and of the
Sudanese authorities by providing protection to the
displaced and prioritizing existing resources based on a
mapping of the situation in the camps, the areas at risk
for further displacement and potential areas of return
across Darfur.
The sustainable resolution of intercommunal
violence in Darfur would require a comprehensive
political agreement that should recognize fully
and uphold the rights of both farmers and nomads,
empower local-level conflict prevention and resolution
mechanisms and that should strengthen the capacity of
the criminal justice system to maintain law and order
and ensure accountability for crimes. UNAMID needs
to continue engaging the Government of the Sudan on
the need for those goals to be achieved. In the absence
of a more long-term solution, however, UNAMID would
build on its existing activities and develop a strategy
bringing together all the relevant mission components
to address some of the most pressing sources of violence
through prevention and mitigation and, with the United
Nations country team, support for the resolution of the
underlying causes.
As part of the joint assessment, the African Union
and the United Nations also conducted a review of the
effectiveness of the military and police components.
The review recommended for the current number of
military and police personnel to be retained and for
the mission to take measures to enhance its overall
flexibility through the reinforcement of troops at the
team sites having greater operational significance. In
parallel, the reduction or closure of other team sites
should take place and a highly mobile reserve military
capability should be established while increasing the
field presence of police officers from within existing
capabilities.
While focusing on those issues will serve to
enhance the impact of UNAMID’s conflict resolution
and protection mandated activities, their effect will
remain limited in scope in the absence of further
progress towards a comprehensive and sustainable
political solution. We therefore continue to call upon all
parties to continue efforts in good faith to achieve the
much-needed cessation of hostilities in Darfur and to
work towards ensuring a credible and inclusive national
dialogue process.
4/6

14/06/2016

Based on the status of the UNAMID benchmarks
and pending the implementation of the recommendations
of the Joint Working Group, the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
therefore recommended for the two Councils to consider
extending the mandate of UNAMID for 12 months,
until 30 June 2017, without modification to its priorities
or adjusting its authorized troop and police ceiling.
I would note that yesterday the African Union Peace
and Security Council endorsed that recommendation.
I therefore wish to reiterate the Secretary-General’s
request for the Security Council to also do so.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing and for his commitment.
I now give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to express my gratitude to the Secretary-General
for the report (see S/2016/510) presented to the Security
Council on his behalf and on behalf of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Ladsous for his briefing. We reiterate that we
will continue our full cooperation.
I would also like to express my sincere condolences
to the Governments and the peoples of the United States
and France for the terrorist attacks that happened in
both countries recently. We condemn terrorism in all
its forms. In that context, it gives us great pleasure
to convey to Council members who are following-up
that we will cooperate fully to defeat terrorism and
eradicate its threat, side by side with the international
community and the individual countries concerned.
That is know to everyone.
The reality on the ground in Darfur does not
conform with some of the contents of the report. The
best proof is the work of the Joint Working Group on
an exit strategy for UNAMID, which met on 24 May.
That tripartite Group, made up of the Government of
the Sudan, the African Union and the United Nations,
visited Darfur to assess the situation. The mission
travelled to all five states and met with representatives
of the Governments, the displaced, the local authorities
and the commanders of UNAMID.
In the report that was issued following its visit to
Darfur, the Joint Working Group attested to the great
improvement in the security situation following the
16-17203

14/06/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

success of the Sudanese military forces in defeating
the rebel movements and eradicating them from all the
states of Darfur, with the exception of one region in
western Jebel Marra. The report of the Joint Working
Group also confirms the great effort made by the
governors of all five Darfur states to provide security
and prevent inter-communal disputes. That had great
impact on decreasing the number of inter-communal
conflicts and limiting their consequences, especially
those occurring during the reporting period.
Thanks to the improved security situation, a huge
increase was seen in voluntary returns of the displaced
to their original villages. Statistics of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs show that
more than 400,000 displaced persons have returned
voluntarily and are benefiting from the security and
basic services available for the returnees in villages set
up by the brotherly State of Qatar and the League of
Arab States and in line with the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur.
In addition, the Government of the Sudan has
started implementing a plan to address the situation of
the displaced in the camps and to take all the measures
necessary for their voluntary return, or for transforming
the camps and the necessary resources for those who
want to remain.
Moreover, I would like to inform the Council that,
during his short visit to New York last week, the Sudanese
Minister for Foreign Affairs held a number of meetings
with the Secretary-General and various persons
interested in the situation in Darfur, during which he
referred to the full engagement of the Government of
the Sudan with the United Nations, UNAMID and all
other actors in ensuring a comprehensive response to
all the needs and demands of UNAMID and continue
working together to respond to such requests, inter
alia, involving visas, containers, customs duties and all
other measures that we have addressed so far.
The administrative referendum in Darfur
represented an important historical juncture with
regard to the legal requirements set out in the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, which set the proper
basis to bring about peace and security in Darfur. We
hope that the Council will adopt a supportive stance in
view of those results. As witnessed by the entire world,
the referendum took place in a conducive political
and security environment that enabled the citizens of
Darfur to exercise their right to register and to vote,

S/PV.7716

thereby choosing the administrative formula they
desire to govern Darfur. The process was conducted
completely peacefully without a single security
incident reported. That is yet further clear proof of the
sustained improvement of the political and security
situation there.
The Government of the Sudan has reiterated time
and again that the establishment of UNAMID was
the result of an agreement with the Government of
the Sudan. A stipulation was made that the mission
would consist mostly of African personnel to assist
in maintaining peace and security in the Sudan. After
almost a decade, we find that the need for UNAMID no
longer exists in many parts of Darfur, as attested to by
UNAMID commanders and forces. In that connection,
I would like to refer the Council to the report of the
Joint Working Group that was submitted to the strategic
tripartite mechanism following its members’ visit to
Darfur in May. That proves the success of the African
UNAMID force, which has achieved its objective by
providing peace and stability.
Moreover, the Government of the Sudan calls
for a drawing down of UNAMID forces in the areas
where they are no longer needed — of which there are
many. The starting point would be the areas agreed
upon by all parties in West, South and North Darfur
states. Such a drawdown could serve as a starting point
in the implementation of the exit strategy gradually
and smoothly, in phases. Following that, the duties of
UNAMID would be transferred to the United Nations
country team to implement the development projects to
promote stability and peace in Darfur.
The Government of the Sudan has spared no effort in
attempting to bring about comprehensive lasting peace
throughout the country, thereby avoiding the scepter of
war and conflict. In that context, the national dialogue
initiative, launched by the President of the Republic
last October, continued its meetings over more than
three months and covered various issues. The different
committees undertook their work in free and open
settings, and then submitted their recommendations
to the General Assembly for discussion. They are now
awaiting their adoption and the start of implementation.
We are also providing the opportunity and the time
for those who have abstained from joining the process.
We hope that they will join soon so that we can complete
the road map for building our nation on the basis of
consensus and unanimity, while rejecting division.

16-172035/6

S/PV.7716

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Accordingly, I hope that the international community,
foremost the Security Council, will bring pressure to
bear on those who have abstained from participating so
that they join the national dialogue, as well as to impose
sanctions on all of those who have hindered the process
or attacked UNAMID forces, as was the case involving
the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction on
1 January, during which it attacked UNAMID forces
with heavy weapons near Kutum, as described in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/268) on UNAMID
published on 22 March, which the Council considered
on 6 April (see S/PV.7666).
In cooperation with the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel, the Government of the
Sudan attempted to reach a peace agreement with
the opposition forces and the armed movements. The
Government therefore signed the road map presented
by the tripartite mechanism. However, the refusal
and intransigence of the other party portend further
violations and impediments to the peace process. The
Council must take a clear position aimed at returning the
opposition and the other remaining armed movements
to the negotiating table by accepting the road map as a
basis for the settling of all issues.
I see no alternative to giving full cognizance to the
fact that Darfur today is free from all organized armed
movements, as accurately defined in the 1977 Protocol
II additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949.
That fact has been recognized by the joint meetings
involving the Government of the Sudan and the African

6/6

14/06/2016

Union, on the one hand, and the United Nations, on the
other. Therefore, we must now allow any disassociation
between the verified facts recognized in such joint
meetings, as proved on the ground in Darfur, and
the decision to be taken in a few days by the Council
on UNAMID. We therefore call upon the Council
to recognize the great progress achieved after the
resumption of the Joint Working Group meeting on an
UNAMID exit strategy — a group that bases its work
primarily on resolution 1769 (2007), which established
the mission in 2007.
To conclude, I would like to stress the unequivocal
determination and readiness of my Government to
cooperate and coordinate with UNAMID and all of its
entities to enable the mission to fully undertake and
implement its mandate. It is worth mentioning that
the statistices included in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, although contested, bear out such cooperation
and the progress made with respect to the situation,
particularly regarding the return of displaced persons.
If issues remain in other areas, such as customs or other
matters, it has nothing to do with any premeditated
intention. We have demonstrated to the Council several
times and with statistics the volume of that great
cooperation.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

16-17203
