S/2003/855

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 September 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 2 September 2003 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo covering
the period from 1 to 31 July 2003 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-48705 (E)

040903

*
0
3
4
8
7
0
5
*

S/2003/855

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
Kosovo Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1-31 July 2003), the total strength of the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) was 22,487, including 3,936 from non-NATO countries.
Security
2.
The overall situation in Kosovo during July 2003 remained generally stable,
although there were an increasing number of incidents from the middle of July,
possibly owing, in part, to the Kosovo Albanian population’s reaction to the Llap
Zone trial sentences. At 25, the number of incidents of inter-ethnic violence reported
over the month of July was stable (24 in June) but reported cases of arson (8)
increased significantly. The primary target of intimidation was the Serbian
population, most incidents (42.3 per cent) occurring in Pristina.
Llap Zone trial
3.
On 16 July, four Kosovo Albanians belonging to the former Kosovo Liberation
Army (KLA) were convicted of war crimes by a court in Pristina composed of a
panel of international judges. This was the first time that former KLA members
were convicted of such crimes in Kosovo. All four individuals appealed to the
Kosovo Supreme Court, which is expected to review the cases by the end of August.
4.
Members of the Kosovo Assembly criticized the sentences; the Kosovo
Protection Corps issued a press release expressing shock and claiming that the
charges were absurd and an insult to all Kosovars; approximately 1,000 people took
part in a protest in Podujevo in support of the convicted war criminals; and three
grenades (only one of which exploded) were later thrown at the Podujevo police
station, causing no injuries.
Explosions in Pristina, Lipljan and Mitrovica
5.
Four days later, on 20 July, a district courthouse was hit by a rocket and an
UNMIK police station was hit by a hand grenade. Later, a hand grenade attack was
carried out in Lipljan, south of Pristina. There were no reported casualties and
damage was minor. On 24 July, two hand grenades were thrown at the UNMIK
police station in south Mitrovica. Two UNMIK police cars and one Kosovo Police
Service vehicle were seriously damaged. Three male Kosovo Albanians (2 adults
and one youth) were seriously injured and taken to the Moroccan military hospital.
One adult later died from his injuries. Following the incident in Mitrovica, on 25
July one hand grenade exploded in Pristina, seriously damaging an UNMIK vehicle
and causing no injuries. In all these cases, investigations continue.
The case of Shefket Musliu
6.
On 7 July, Shefket Musliu was transferred from the Bondsteel Detention
Facility into the custody of UNMIK police. He had been detained on 22 April 2003
for posing a threat to a safe and secure environment and arraigned on 9 July on
charges of intimidation and racketeering. With no trial date fixed, he received a 30-

2

S/2003/855

day detention order while trial preparations were initiated. Neither the arraignment
nor the trial is public, the aim being to protect witnesses and limit press coverage.
7.
The Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, Nebojsa Covic, continued to request
Musliu’s transfer to Serbian authorities to face charges, but the acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Charles Brayshaw, rejected the request.
Minority returns
8.
On 2 July, the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo issued a
joint declaration endorsing minority returns, which was signed by the President of
Kosovo, the Prime Minister, the Assembly President, the leader of the Democratic
Party of Kosovo (PDK), the leader of the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK),
the Commander of the Kosovo Protection Corps and representatives of the Turkish
and Bosniac communities.
9.
On 15 July, after that declaration, 24 Kosovo Serb families returned to their
homes in Belo-Polje.
10. On 16 July, a group of Kosovo Albanian political parties and others released
an open letter calling on Kosovo Albanians not to sell their homes in the northern
part of Mitrovica and northern Kosovo to Kosovo Serbs or to the Government of
Serbia. Among the signatories were members of the Democratic League of Kosovo
(LDK), PDK, AAK, the Party of Justice, the Kosova Democratic Turkish Party, the
Muslim community, and representatives of the Kosovo Albanians in Mitrovica
North and of Kosovo Albanian non-governmental organizations.
Attacks against KFOR and KFOR operational activities
11. During the reporting period, there were three direct attacks against KFOR cars
with locals throwing stones and smashing car windows.
12. During the period under review, KFOR units seized 68 assorted weapons, 20
rockets or missiles, one anti-tank weapon, 27 grenades or mines and 4,697 rounds of
ammunition. KFOR increased its presence operations to reduce tension among
Kosovo Serb citizens and near the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia a and
Presevo Valley border areas.
Compliance by the forces of Serbian and Montenegro and the Ministry of
Internal Affairs Special Police
13. The forces of Serbia and Montenegro and of the Ministry of Internal Affairs
remained compliant with the terms and conditions of the Military Technical
Agreement.
Kosovo Protection Corps
14. During the period under review, five roll-calls were conducted on short notice,
involving 33 KPC units. The results continue to show a reduction in absenteeism —
0.47 per cent — but the number of persons on leave is unacceptably high. At 61.5
per cent, the Corps does not currently meet the minimum required presence.
__________________
a Turkey recognizes the Republic of Macedonia with its constitutional name.

3

S/2003/855

15. Fifteen cases of non-compliance were reported during July 2003; 56 cases
remain open, 41 are due to be closed and three remain open pending further
information.
Conclusion
16. The general security situation in Kosovo, while stable, has been less secure
since the middle of July 2003.
17. The threat towards UNMIK is considered medium but no change in UNMIK
operations is foreseen. Sections of the population do not accept the measures
launched against former KLA members. Some isolated confrontations are expected
to continue but are unlikely to have a significant impact on overall public order.

4
