A

UNITED
NATIONS
-:'

General Assembly

J?ROVIS IONAL

A/S-!8/PV.l
:26 April 1990
,I.

'

ENGLISH

'l,"".

'f! '
~,

1

Eiqhteenth special session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
J?ROVISIONAL VERBATIM. RECORD OF THE FIRST MEETING

Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Monday, 23 April 1990, at 9.30 a.m.

President:

Mr. GARBA

(Nigeria)

Openinq of the session bV the Chairman of the deleqation of Nigeria
Minute of silent prayer or medi tation
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations
Credentials of representatives to the eiqhteenth special session of the
General Assembly
(a)

Appointment of members of the Credentials Committee

Election of the President of the General Assembly

I . ..

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in ~nqlish and
interpreta tions of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed
in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submi t t~d to orig inal speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week,
to the Chief, Official Records Edi tinq Section, Department of Conference Services,
room DC2-750, 2 Uni ted Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
90-60003

7230V (E)

'i

RH/2

A/S-18/PV.l
1 (a-z)

Address by Mr. Joseph N. Garba, President of the General Assembly at its
eiqhteenth special session
Report of the Preparatory Committee for the eiqhteenth special session of
the General Assembly
"
Orqanization of the session
Adoption of the agenda
Admission of new members to the United Nations [l0]
(a)

Letter from the President of the Security Council

(b)

Draft resol ution .

Sta tement by the Secretary-General

I

JI,

\

General debate [8 and 9]

.

~'.

,

RH/2

A/S-18/PV.l
2

The meeting was called to order at 9.45 a.m.
ITEM 1 OF THE PRO VIS IONAL A~NDA
OPENING OF THE SESSION BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE DELEGATION OF NIGERIA
The TEMOORARY PRES !DENT:

I declare open the eiqhteenth special ,sess ion

of the General Assembly, devoted to in terna tional economic co~pera tion, in
particular the revitalization of economic qrowth and del1elopment of thedevelopinq
countries.
ITEM 2 OF THE PROVIS IONAL AGENDA
MINUTE OF SILENT PRAYER OR MEDITATION
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT:

I invite representatives to stand and observe

one minu te of silent prayer or medi ta tion.
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silent prayer or
medi ta tion.
SCALE OF ASSESSMENT3 FOR THE APPORTIOtMENT OF 'nIB EXffiNSES OF THE UNITED NATIONS
(A/S-18/8)
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT:

Before turninq to the next item on our aqenda,

I should like, in keeping with the established practice,

to invite the attention of

the General Assembly to document A/S-18/8, which contains a letter addressed to me
by the Secretary-General in which he informs the Assemblv that 10 Member States are
in arrears in the payment of their financial contributions to the United Nations
within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
I should like to remind deleqatio ns that, under Article 19 of the Charter,
11

A Member of the Uni ted Na tions which is in arrears in the payment of its

financial contributions to the Organization shall have no vote in the General
Assembly if the amount of its arrears equals or exceeds the amount of the
contributions due from it for the precedinq two full years. 11

A/S-l8/PV.l

RH/2

3

(The Temporary President)
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes note of this information?
It was so decided.
ITEM 3 OF THE PROVIS IONAL ArnNDA
.:'1',.

CREDENTIALS OF REPRESENTATI VES
ASSEMBLY
(a)

'ID

THE EIGHTEENTH SPECIAL SFSS ION OF THE GENERAL

APPOIN'lMENT OF M.EMBERS OF THE CREDENTIALS OJMMI'I"I'EE
The TEMFORARY PRESIDENT:

We shall now proceed with the appointment of

the members of the Credentials Committee.
Rule 28 of the rules of procedure provides that the General Assembly at the
beginninq of each session shall apPoint, on the proposal of the President, a
Credentials Committee consistinq of nine members.
The Preparatory Committee of the Whole for this special session of the General
Assembly devoted to international co-operation has made a number of recommendations
in paragraphs 30 and 32 of its report (A!S-l8!7).
I invite members to turn their attention to the recommendation concerning the
appointment of the Credentials Committee.
In accordance with precedents, and takinq into account' the recommendation of
the Preparatory Committee, I would propose that the Credentials Committee of the
eiqhteenth special session should be the same as that of the forty-fourth reqular
session of the Assembly, namely An tigua and Barbuda, Aus tral ia, China, Colombia,
Malawi, the Philippines, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United States
of America and Zaire.
If there is no objection, I shall consider the Credentials Committee
cons ti tu ted acoordinglv.
It was so decided.

RH/2

A/S-18/PV.I
4-5

The TEMIDRARY PRESIDENT:

In this connection, may I invite the attention

of the member s of the Assembly to a no te verbale from the Sec re tary-Gen eral, da ted

2 April 1990, in which it was stated that credentials should be issued for all
representatives to the special session,
procedure of the General Assembly.

in accordance with rule 27 of the rules of

I would urge all members to submit the

credentials of representa tives to the se cretary-General as soon as poss ible.
ITEM 4 OF THE PRO VIS IONAL ACENDA
ELEcrION OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY'
The TEMIDRARY PRESIDENT:

I now invite the Assembly to proceed to the

election of the President of the General Assemblv.

In this connection, the

Preparatory Committee recommends that the special session should take place under
the presidency of the President of the forty-fourth reqular session, Mr. Joseph
Nanven Garba of Niqeria.
I take it that the Assembly wishes to elect him President of the General
Assembly at its eiqhteenth special session bY acclamation.
It was so decided.
The 'reMIDRARY' PRESIDENT:

I extend my sincere conqratulations to

Mr. Garba and invite him to assume the presidency.
I request the Chief of Protocol to escort the President to the podium.
Mr. Garba took the Chair.

A/S-l8/PV.l
6

JP/td

ADDRESS BY MR. JOSEPH N. GARBA, PRESIDENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY AT ITS EIGHTEENTH
S mCIAL SESS IDN

The PRESIDENT:

I

must express the profound appreciation of my country,

Nigeria, and my personal gratitude to the Member States of the Assembly for
elect ing

me to preside over this special session.

The confidence reposed in me by

the in terna tional communi ty continues to be a source of sa tisfaction and challenge
to me.
Today we meet to undertake two important assignments:

the admission of

Namibia and the beqinning of the eighteenth special session of the,General
Assembly.

There has -been much chanqe in the world since we decided here to convene

this special session.

It has been breathtakirq change.

Sometimes the scope and

direction of that change, and often its speed, has been unforeseen.

We have

salu ted new deoocrac ies in Eas tern Euro'pe and sou ther n Af rica as well as the
pledges of support to the fledgling democracies.

Among the wondrous

transformations of the world in recent months was the birth of a new nation in
Af rica.
Namibia, the country that we are about to welcome as the l60th Member State of
the Uni ted Na tions, will for ever remind us that usually even' :the most intractable
problems can be solved when all concerned States and interests muster sufficient
poli tica1 will and co-opera te in good faith, as envisaged in the United Na tions
Charter.
This year, 1990, has been remarkable.
decade with enormous hopes,

CertainlY we are entering the new

that the easinq of tensions and disarmament will open

up opportunities for dialogue and co-operation on the critical problems of the
world economy, and that development will become a priority on the international
agenda.

Our assembling here today is, therefore, an open and profound expression

of our collective hopes.

JP/td

A/S-18/PV.l
7

(The President)
As our secretary-General, Mr.

Perez de Cuellar, underlined in January at the

Moscow Global Forum on Environment and Development for Survival,
"we have to act on the real iza tion . that security has economic and social
dimensions no less demandinq of attention than its political and military
ones. "
This is, admittedly, a complex and difficult aqenda.

It implies eliminatinq

economic and soc ial condi tions that miqht qenera te conflict and insecuri ty for
all.

It means, further, that the peace and security purposes of the United

Nations, as expressed in Article 1 of the Charter, will also be pursued through
international co-operation to solve the most urgent development problems.
The opportuni ty to understand the interdependence. of the world and to build a
future that is beneficial to all mankind is before us.

But this opportunity qives

us almost daunting respons ibili ties.
The difficul ties that led us to convene this special sess ion - devoted to
interna tional economic co-opera tion and in particular the revi taliza tion of the
economic growth and development of developinq countries -

remain unresolved.

As

was stated very pointedly at the last session of the General Assemblv, if we had
sufficient and balanced growth of the world economy there would be nO need for a
special session devoted to growth and development.

Throuqh this special session we

want to give an impulse to international economic co-operation in order to overcome
the slowdown of the world economy in the 1980s and the dual-track development that
has left the majority of developing countries with retarded economies.
Even for the world economy as a whole the aggregate growth record of the 1980s
was lower than in the two previous decades.
become larger.

In addition, qrowth differentials have

The developinq countries bore the brunt of the decline in growth

during the 1980s, and the qap between developed and developing countries has

A/S-18/PV.1
8

JP/td

(The Pres ident)
increased.

The most sombre aspect of this reali ty is that it is not merely past

history, and we are alarmed that most of the forecasts for the 1990s are for much
of the same.

The prospect of another decade of stagna tion in most developinq

countries must therefore be a matter of grave COncern for the international
communi ty.
The developments in Eastern Europe represent a step further towards the
integra tion and interdependence of the world economy.

Interna tional co-opera tion

is confronted with the additional responsibility of helpinq
to overcome their economic woes.

f1edq1inq democracies

Under standablv, some concern has been voiced

about the short-term economic repercussions of a possible diversion of finance,
markets,

investments and a tten tion away from developinq countries.

sure of the answers at this moment.

No one can be

However, as the economies of the countries of

Easter n Europe re cove r, their integ ra tion into the world economy will provide new
impulses to trade and qrowth from which developinq countries miqht benefit.
There are other potential benefits.

Developments in Eastern Europe, while

constituting one element in a broader picture of the slowing down of the arms race,
are also part of a scenario in which increasinq resources should be released from
military budgets and shifted towards social expenditures and development.
Such a shift in expenditures and other sound domestic measures are expected
from all countries,

includinq the developing countries.

It is recognized that for

any country - developed or deve10pinq - to succeed it has to rely on adequate
domestic Policies, on 1iberatinq and mobilizinq the initiative and the savings of
its own private sector, on proqrammes to increase the competitiveness of its
aqriculture,

industry and services in the international markets, and on control of

the inflationary vogue or tendencies that,
budgets out of control.

in various countries, have left State

There are no doubt changed perceptions on the relative

A~-lWP~l

JP/td

9-10

(The President)
economic role of the private and the public sectors and the need to streamline the
State.

And there is certainly a need to link development to poverty alleviation,

to human resources development, to the enhancement of human riqhts, to scientific
and technological progress and to the protection of our physical environment.

For

such domestic policies to be feasible, they have to be able to mobilize their own
internal system of political support on a democratic basis - from the grassroots to
the leadership.

A/S-l8/PV.l

JSM/ad

11

(The President)
And yet, sound do'mestic policies are no longer sufficient - if they ever
were.

For better or for worse, interdependence and integration have made nations

more vulnerable to distortions, uncertainties and brisk alterations in the
international economic environment.
drawbacks.

But, obviously, interdependence has its

For all countries it imposes limits on the effectiveness of domestic

policy alone.

But these limits are not the same for all countries.

The economic

weiqht of a few countries is such that the reverse condition prevails, and the
impact of their domestic policies overflows their borders affecting the qlobal
international environment.

The reason for domestic adjustment then is not the same

as for vulnerable countries, namely the need to adapt to an unfavourable
international environment, but it is, on the contrary, the need to avoid
transborder consequences unfavourable to the international economic environment.
The reaU ties of interdependence are such that growth and development in
developing countries cannot recover without increased international economic
co-operation.

Such co-operation is needed to redress the development losses of the

1980s that came about through a particular conjunction of unfavourable external
factors.
These interrelated and mutually reinforcing factors - the hiqh level of
previously accumulated debt; the sudden rise in, and overall the unprecedented
levels of, interest rates in the 1980s; the dryinq up of new finance from private
sources since 1982; the deterioration in terms of trade of developinq countries and
their inability to increase exports to cope with the rapid rise in debt service all these factors toqether have brought us to debt levels that developinq countries
are simply unable to repay in the original conditions in which these debts were
contracted.

And this has been recoqnized since 1989 by the Brady ini tia tive, which

favoured debt reduct ion.

'1,.,......_-_--------.--------------~-~~

JSM/ad

A/S-18/PV.l

12
(The Pres ident)
I welcomed this shift in international policy towards debt reduction at the
opening of the last session of the General Assembly.

For many indebted countries,

the mobilization of domestic resources required by the presence of a net negative
transfer on account of financial flows is beyond economic feasibility with any
given set of domes tic policies.

The Brady ini tia tive has to be extended to more

countries and deepened, before growth and development can be restored in most
developi~

countries.

Debt reduction becomes therefore even more necessary at a

moment in which a worrying upward pressure on interest rates in the Organization
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries might reduce the effect
of painstakingly negotiated debt reduction accords.
One word only on the importance of external finance to support developing
countries in their development efforts.
debt crisis.

It cannot be limited to a solution for the

A large impulse would accrue to developing countries i f the

recommended tarqet of 0.7 per cent of gross domestic product for official
development assistance could be implemented by all.

The special official

development assistance tarqet is even more 'justified in the case of the least
developed countries.

And those coun tries that have reached and even surpassed this
j

tarqet have to be praised for their developmental responsibility and certainly
their solidarity.
It is my sincere belief that an improved market access or the further opening
up of world markets, in particular for products from developinq countries, is
another important development issue.
generating growth.

Internatio nal trade has an increas ing role in

This is true for all groups of countries. but even more so for

the economically weaker countries.

On this front also, there are mUltiple signs on

how necessary integrated and co-ordinated international action has become.

Import

contraction spreads the effects of the debt crisis to the trade partners of the
indebted countries.

Just to give the Assembly one instance presented by the

I

,,(

A/S-18/PV.l
13

JSM/ad

(The President)
Director-General of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), between 1981
and 1986, while world trade increased by 7.5 per cent, the imports of the 16 most
heavily indebted countries declined by almost a quarter.
With seven months to qo before the completion of the Uruguay Round of trade
negotiations, it is impera tive to emphas ize the importance of resul ts in the market
access area.

This means not only reduction of tariffs - and above all non-tariff

barriers in particular for tropical products; but it also means the elimina tion of
tariff escalations that do not favour diversification of the exports of developing
countries; it means bringinq back to the discipline of multilateral GATT rules
sectors such as textiles and clothing, as well as agricultural goods, and also the
mul tiplici ty of gray area arranqements in steel, cars, electronics and machine
tools, that put an unfair burden on the exports of the most competitive among
developin;J countries.

Addi tionally,

it means concerted efforts to stabil ize

commodity prices before diversification can take care of all other export
difficulties.

It equally means

undertaki~

special support measures for products

of particular export interest to the least developed countries.

But most of all it

means reinforcin;J mul tila teralism aga inst the danger of arbi trary and unila teral
action, and the establishment of predictable and equitable rules and conditions for
compe ti tion.
Much work went into the preparation of this special session.

Mindful of the

manpower hours expended so far in the prepara tions, I am particularly grateful to
Ambassador Zepos, Permanent Representative of Greece to the United Nations and
Chairman of the Preparatory Committee, for his persistent efforts to build a common
understanding and a common ground for action.

I am also grateful to all Member

States, and particularly to the Secretariat, for the co-operation extended to him.
I will not dwell further on all the major and complex development issues.

Suffice

it, however, to say that they are amply identified in a host of documents that have

JSM/ad

A/S-18/PV.l
14-15

(The Pres ident)
been so ably prepared by the Secretariat, and that we have indeed been actively
discussing durinq the past months.

I do not for one moment deny that there are

other ma jor areas in need of in terna tional co-operation, such as the protection of
human rights, to which I have made mention, the fight against hunqer, poverty and
disease, famine and the protection of the environment.

My remarks derive from my

personal conviction that many of these problems have their oriqin in and are
intertwined wi th the lack of development, particularly in the developirq countries.
Let me conclude by reiterating my wishes for the restoration of a pragmatic
and productive development dialogue in the United Nations.

The complexity and

gravity of development problems can only be solved throuqh complementary domestic
and international action.

Economic issues have not only become more interrelated

themselves, they have become more political and more intertwined with social and
environmental issues.

It bears repea ti~:

they have also become linked to the

construct io n of a future that is peaceful and secure for all natio ns and all
peoples.
us.

The chances are there for the construction of a better world for all of

I have no doubt that members are all resolute in their determination to

achieve that noble objective.
AGENDA ITEMS 5 AND 6
REPORT OF THE PREPARA'IDRY COMMITTEE FOR THE EIGHTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION OF THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY (A/S-18/7)
ORGAN IZATION OF THE S ESS 10 N
The PRESIDENT:

We turn now to the next order of business - the report of

the Preparatory Committee for the eighteenth special session of the General
Assembly, contained in parts I and II of document A/S-18/7, and the organization of
the sess ion.
In this connection I call on the Chairman of the Preparatory Committee,
Mr. Constantine Zepos of Greece.

A/S-18/PV.l
16

RM/5

Mr. ZEroS (Greece), Chairman of the Preparatory Committee of the Whole:
I have the honour to present to the General Assembly the report of the Preparatory
Committee of the Whole for the eighteenth special session devoted to international
economic co-operation, in particular the revitalization of economic qrowth and
development of the developing countries, issued as document A/S-18/7, parts I
and It.
The Preparatory Committee held its first session from 31 May to 2 June 1989,
its second session from 26 February to 2 March 1990 and its third session from 16
to 20 April 1990.

The decisions and recommendations of the Preparatory Committee

to the General Assembly are contained in section IV of part I of the report and
section V of part 11 of the report.

The Preparatory Committee submits a text as a

basis for the preparation of the final document of the General Assembly at its
eighteenth special session, conta ined in parag raph 33, on pages 8 through 15 of
part I1 of the report.

The Preparatory Committee also submits a compilation of

proposals for the introduct io n to the final document, conta ined in parag raph 33, on
pages 14 to 19 of part 11 of the report.
The PRESIDENT:
Commi ttee for his report.

I thank very warmly the Chairman of the Preparatory
The General Assembly is qra tefu1 to him, and to those

who participated in the Preparatory Committee, for their efforts to expedite our
work, and in particular to get the special session off to a good start.
May I take it that the General Assembly endorses the report of the Preparatory
Committee for the eighteenth special session, document A/S-l8/7, and the
recommendations contained in paragraphs 30 and 32, as a whole?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT:

On the basis of the decisions just taken by the General

Assembly and the practice of previous special sess ions, the Chairmen of the Main

RM/5

A/S-18/PV.l
17
(The President>

Committees of the forty-fourth regular session would serve in the same capacity at
the eiqhteenth special session.

Accordingly, I should like to inform the Assembly

that the following Chairmen are present at this special session:

the Chairman of

the Special Political Committee, His Excellency Mr. Guennadi Oudovenko of the
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic; the Chairman of the Second Committee, His
Excellency Mr. Ahmed Ghezal of Tunisia; the Chairman of the Fourth Committee, His
Excellency Mr. Robert Van Lierop of Vanuatu; the Chairman of the Fifth Committee,
His Excellency Mr. Ahmad Fathi Al-Masri of the Syrian Arab Republic.
In paragraph 30 of the report of the Preparatory Committee, which was endorsed
by the Assembly, it was recommended that the Chairmen of the Main Committees may be
replaced by members of their delegations or members of the delegations of States
belonqing to the same regional qroup.

Accordingly, the following replacements have

been communicated to the Secretariat:

for the Chairman of the First Committee, His

Excellency Mr. Andres Aquilar of Venezuela; for the Chairman of the Third
Committee, His Excellency Mr. Gaetan Rimwanguiya Ouedraoqo of Burkina Faso; for the
Chairman of the Sixth Committee, Mr. Thomas Hainoczi of Austria.
The Vice-Presidents of the forty-fourth regular session who will serve in the
same capacity at the eighteenth special session are the representatives of the
following Member States:

Antigua and Barbuda, Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, China,

Congo, Costa Rica, France, Gambia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Kuwait,
Luxembourg, Morocco, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Sudan, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kinqdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America and Zimbabwe.
In endorsing the recommendations of the Preparatory Committee the Assembly has
established an ad hoc committee of the whole, which will be designated as Ad Hoc
Committee of the eighteenth special session.

A/S-18/PV.l
18

RM/5

(The President)
In accordance with the recommendation of the Preparatory Committee the
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee will be a full member of the General Committee of
the eighteenth special session.
Concerning the election of the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee, the
Preparatory Committee recommends that the Chairman of the Preparatory Committee,
His Excellency Mr. Constantine Zepos of Greece, should serve in the same capacity
in the Ad Hoc Committee.
I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly at its eiqhteenth special
session to elect him by acclamation.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT:

I conqratulate His Excellency Mr. Constantine Zepos on

behalf of the General Assembly and on my own behalf and wish him well in the
important and onerous responsibilities that he has just assumed.
The General Committee of the eighteenth special session of the General
Assembly has now been fully constituted.
On the recommendation of the Preparatory Committee, the General Assembly has
just decided that, on the basis of specific requests, observer non-member States
should be invited to participate in the general debate in plenary meeting.
I would like to inform members that the Observers of the De I'lOC ra tic People's
Republic of Korea, the Holy See, the Republic of Korea and Switzerland have asked
to take part in the general debate in plenary meetin:J.

May I take it that the Assembly aqrees to invite those four Observers to
participate in the qeneral debate in plenary meetinq?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT:

On the basis of the decisions just taken by the General

Assembly on the recommendations of the Preparatory Committee, the executive heads

RM/5

A/S-18/PV.l
19-20

(The President)
of the United Nations specialized agencies concerned shall also be invited to
participate in the general debate in plenary meetinq, on condition that each
statement shall not exceed 10 minutes.
On the basis of the decisions just taken on the recommendations of the
Preparatory Committee, interested interqovernmental organizations that have
received a standinq invitation to participate in the special session and the work
of the General Assembly shall be invi ted to participa te in the qeneral debate in
plenary meeting.

Each statement shall not exceed 10 minutes.

On the basis of the decision just taken by the General Assembly on the
recommendations of the Preparatory Committee, a representative of one
non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council may address the Ad Hoc Committee on behalf of interested non-qovernmental
organizations.

Such statements shall not exceed 10 minutes.

The Preparatory Committee recommended that the General Assembly should take a
decision to invite, on the basis of specific requests, other relevant
intergovernmental and interregional organizations of an economic nature to
participate and speak on an ad hoc basis dudo:] the session.

Such statements

should not exceed 10 minutes.
May I take it that the General Assembly adopts those recommendations?
It was so decided.

Bcr /edd

A/S-l8/PV.l
21

The PRESIDENT:

It is proposed that these orqanizations may be heard in

the Ad Hoc Committee.
May I take it that the Assembly approves that proposal?
It

was so decided.
The PRESIDENT:

In view of the large number of representatives whose

names have already been inscribed in the list of speakers, it is proposed that
plenary meetings should start punctually at 10 a.m. and 3 p.m.
In this connection, I should like to assure the Assembly that I shall be in
the Chair punctu~lly at the scheduled time.

I sincerely hope that all deleqations

will make a special effort to co-opera te in this regard, as indeed they have done
at previous sessions.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Assembly agrees.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT:

Furthermore, it is proposed that, owing to time

constraints, the length of statements, with the exception of those
State or Government, should be limited to 15 minutes.

by

the Heads of

A white flashing liqht will

ne activated at the ros trum to let the speaker know that the l5-minu te limi t has
elapsed.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Assembly approves that
proposal.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT:

I indicated earlier that statements by executive heads of

specialized agencies and by intergovernmental organizations with a standing
invitation to participate in the work of the Assembly would be limited to
10 minutes.

Bcr/edd

A/S-18/PV.l

22

ITEM 7 OF THE PROVISIONAL AGENDA
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA (A/S-18/6)
The PRESIDENT:

The draft agenda of the eighteenth special session

cons is ts of the nine items of the provis ional agenda recommended by the Prepara tory
Commi ttee and a supplementary item, enti tIed "Admission of new Members to the
Dni ted Na tions", reques ted by the Securi ty Counc iL

In order to expedi te our wor k

the Assembly may wish to consider the draft agenda in plenary meetinq, without
referrin::! it to the General Committee.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to that procedure?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT:

Regarding the allocation of items, on the recommendation

of the Preparatory Committee the General Assembly has just decided to allocate
agenda item 9 to the Ad Hoc Committee; it has also decided that item 9 should also
be considered by the General Assembly in plenary meetings under agenda item 8,
"general debate".
Furthermore, may I take it that, bearing in mind the General Assembly's
practice, it is the Assembly's wish to consider item 10 directly in plenary meetinq?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT:

By adoptinq the report of the Preparatory Committee, the

Assembly endorsed the provisional agenda contained therein, which consists of nine
items.
The draft agenda as it appears in document A/S-IB/6 includes a supplementary
item, entitled "Admission of new Members to the United Nations", requested by the
Secur i ty Council.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft agenda as it appears in document A/S-l8/6 and now consistinq of la items.
The agenda was adopted.

-- ~--~'--------""''''''''''--_-_-'''__'iii-iiolIII

RH/2

A/S-l8/PV.l
23

The mESIDENT:

With the permission of the General Assembly, I should

like to proceed now to the consideration of aqenda item 10, "Admission of new
Members to the United Nations", in order to give the new Member the opportunity to
participate from the outset in the work of the special session.
AGENDA ITEM la
ACMI5S ION OF NEW MEMBERS 'ID THE UNITED NATIONS
(a)

LETTER FROM THE PRFS !DENT OF THE 5 EQJ'RITY COUNCIL (A/S-18/3)

(b)

DRAFT RESOUJ TION (A/S-18/L.l)
The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council has recommended, in document

A/S-18/3,

the admission of the Republic of Namibia to membership in the United

Nations.

In this connection, a draft resolution has been submitted in document

A/S-IB/L.l.

In addition to the countries listed in that document,

countries have become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Chile, Cuba,
Jamaica, Mongolia, Nicaraqua,

Pakistan,

the following

Albania, Belize, the

the Dominican Republic,

Panama, Saint Lucia and Saudi Arabia.

May I take it that the General Assembly adopts the draft resolution by
acclamation?
Draft resolution A/S-18/L.l was adopted (resolution 5-18/1).
The PRES IDENT:

I therefore have the honour to declare the Republic of

Namibia admitted to membership in the United Nations.
I request the Chief of Protocol to escort the delegation of Namibia to its
place in the General Assembly Hall.
The delegation of Namibia was escorted to its elace in the General Assemblx
Hall.

Bcr/edd

A/S-l8/PV.l
24-25

The PRESIDENT:

We have just witnessed a truly historic moment:

the

admission of Namibia as the one hundred and sixtieth Member Sta te of the Uni ted
Nations.

It is a special occasion for the United Nations each time a new State is

admitted.

The case of Namibia, however, is unique, since its independence is in

part the brainchild of the United Nations.

Namibia's accession to independent

nationhood and its entry in the United Nations is therefore a victory for the
international community as a whole:
Uni ted Na tions.

for the people of Namibia as well as for the

A/S-18/PV.l
26

JB/7

(The President)
It

is my honour and privilege on this occasion to welcome the Republic of

Namibia into the Uni ted Nations.

I wish to pay a warm tribute to the enti re people

of Namibi~ and in particular to His Excellency President Sam Nujoma and his
colleagues of the South West Af rica People's Orqanization (SWAPO), who have waqed a
historic s truqqle to vindicate the claim and riqht of Namibians to
self-determination.
This is also a moment to pay a tribute to the United Nations.

Our

Organization inherited the League of Nations Mandate over Namibia and has since its
establishment worked tirelessly to help the people of Namibia achieve its
independent nationhood.

All of the main organs of the Uni ted Na tions have played

their part - from the General Assembly to the Security Council, the Trusteeship
Council, the Economic and Social Council, the International Court of Justice and
the Secretariat.

When the moment became necessary, in 1966, the General Assembly

took the remarkable step of assuming direct responsiblity for the administration of
Namibia.
Thereafter, the Council for Namibia and a succession of Uni ted Nations
Commissioners played a pivotal role in the discharqe of the responsibilities of the
United Nations for the administration of the Territory.

Our appreciation is

therefore also due to the Council for Namibia and to each of the Commissioners, the
late Mr. Sean MacBride, Mr. Marti Ahtisaari, Mr. Brajesh Mishra and the late Mr.
Brent Carlson, who, the General Assembly will recall, gave his life in the course
of the discharge of his duties.
A special tribute is also due today to our Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez
de Cuellar, who,

just a few days after his assumption of office, emphasized his

determination to work tirelessly for the independence of Namibia.

It was,

therefore, with great pride, Sir, that we read your report to the Security Council
in which you informed the Council that:

JB/7

A/S-18/PV.l
27

(The President)
"On 22 March 1990 the South African Administrator-General, Advocate Louis
Peinaar, left Namibia and was seen off by President Nujoma."
Mr. Secretary-General, you have earned the gratitude of the people of Namibia
and of the international community for your personal efforts to bring Namibia to
independence.

In acknowledging your role today, I should like also to commend all

the members of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG), particularly
your Special Representative for Namibia, Mr. Ahtisaari, his Deputy, Ambassador
Legwaila of Botswana, and the Force Commander of UN TAG, General Pr en Chand, as well
as all those States that contributed personnel and resources to UNTAG.
But I would be failing in my duty today i f I did not pay a very special and
particular tribute to my own continent, Africa, which has shown such determined
solidarity to bring about the results we are celebrating today.

The Organization

of African Unity and its member States, particularly the front-line States, gave
their unstinting support to the struggle of the Namibian people.

The front-line

States, in particular, paid a heavy price for their commitment to the principles of
equality and self-determination in Namibia.

For me personally, this long-awaited

moment is most gratifying, asI was one of the African Foreign Minister who was
lucky enough to help negotiate Security Council resolution 435 (1978).

The

privileqe of being part of the final actualization of resolution 435 (1978) has
been, to say the least, most enriching and, indeed, most satisfying for me.
As I said earlier, Namibia will forever remind us of what can be achieved when
there is political will among nations.

The settlement leading to the independence

of Namibia required that poli tical will as well as great negotia ting skills on the
part of the members of the Security Council, the final Contact Group on Namibia,
the Secretary-General and other leading negotia tors, such as Uni ted States
Assistant Secretaries of State Mr. Chester Cracker and Mr. Herman Cohen.

It is

A/S-l8/PV.l

JB/7

28
(The Pres ident)
fitting that I should acknowledge today the contribution of all of those people for
their roles.
As Namibia joins the United Nations,

I should like to make a solemn appeal to

all members of the in terna tional communi ty to assist and support this new na tion.
Namibia has shown that the path 1s open to neqotiation for the achievement of a
mul ti-racial society commi tted to derrocraev, the rule of law and respect for
inalienable human rights, ordered liberties and fundamental freedoms.
5 incere

It is my

hope that, as we celebra te the admiss ion of Namib ia to the Un i ted Na tions,

we shall recommit ourselves to the immediate, swift and total eradication of the
abhorrent apartheid system in South Africa.
On behalf of the General Assembly, and on my own behalf, I should like to
reiterate my congratualtions tQ the new Member State, the Republic of Namibia.

I

ask the Prime Minister of Namibia to convey to his compatriots our warmest
felici ta tions and best wishes always.

Long live the Republic fo Namibia.

I now have the honour and the privilege to call on the Secretary-General,
Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, who wishes to address the General Assembly on this
important occas ion.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL:

It is with considerable emotion and pride that I

welcome the independent State of Namibia to membership of the United Nations.

In

doinq so, I should like to say how happy I am that Prime Minister Geinqob and
Foreiqn Min is ter Ben-Gur ir ab are here today.

It is a special pl easure for me to

see you, Sir, a distinguished SOn of Africa, presidinq over this moving session of
the General Assembly.
Decades of struqqle and sacrifice by the Namibian people and its political
leadership, and decades of support by the international community, have made this
very happy occasion possible.

In the Course of the process that has ensued, the

world Organiza tion developed a very special bond wi th the people of Namib ia.

It is

JB/7

A/S-18/PV.l
29-30

(The Secretary-General)
therefore a source of exceptional sa tisfaction in this house that they were finally
able to exercise their right to self-determination in accordance with Security
Council resolution 435 (1978) and that the new State is now taking its rightful
place in the community of nations.

Just as, over the past month, the entire world

community has rejoiced with the people of Namibia in its accession to independence,
so, in the period ahead, the Government of Namibia, led by its President,
Mr. Sam Nujoma, must receive the support of the international community in the
great task of nation building.
None of us will have failed to note that the constructive atmosphere that
attended Namibia1s final steps to independence holds significant lessons not only
for the region, but more broadly.
The success of the United Nations operation in Namibia has encouraqed other
parties to call for similar peace-making and peace-keeping assistance in their
regions.

It is of course an essential part of the responsibility of the United

Nations to help resolve regional conflicts.

However, I cannot overemphasize the

fact that, to do so effectively, the Organization must be given clear mandates,
adequa te resources and solid and cons is tent co-opera tion by all sides.

BHS/sm

A/S-l8/PV.l
31

(The Secretary-General)
The independence of Namibia and its admission to the Uni ted Na tions has taken
place at a moment of great and creative change in world affairs.

Old

confrontations are crumbling and the search for a new harmony is visible in several
of the areas that have been most plagued by conflict in recent decades.
Opportunities abound.

For its part, the United Nations - inspired by Namibia's

admission to our ranks - looks to these emerging global opportunities with renewed
hope and confidence.
In conclusion, may I ask Prime Minister Geingob to extend to President Nujoma
-and to the Government and the people of Namibia our renewed congratulations.

I

wish to assure them of the continued support and understanding of this Organization.
The PRESIDENT:
on this occasion.

Several representatives have expressed a desire to speak

Before calling on the first speaker, I should like to appeal to

representatives for thei r co-operation in limi tinq their sta tements to five
minutes.

We do have a lengthy agenda before us.

I now have the honour and pleasure to call on the first speaker,
His Excellency Mr. Amre Moussa of Eqypt, who will speak on behalf of the
Organization of African Unity.
Mr. MOUSSA (EgYPt)

(interpretation from Arabic):

It gives me great

pleasure at this time of momentous events to express, on behalf of the Organization
of African Unity and its Chairman, our congratulations to the people and the
Government of Namibia on Namibia's admission to membership of the United Nations.
On behalf of the Organization of African Unity I should like to express our
qratitude to the international community for its support for that historic strugqle
and for its celebration of this important occasion.

The independence of Namibia

has been a cherished cause for which we s truqgled over a lorq period of time.

BHS/sm

A/S-18/PV.I
32
(Mr. Moussa, Eqypt)

TodaY the culmination of that struggle marks a qlorious chapter of all our efforts
at the national, regional and internatio nal levels.

Every effort was exerted in

order to achieve this cherished goal, which is enshrined in the Uni ted Nations
Charter, namely, to ensure the right of every people to self-determination, and to
ensure that all peoples have equal rights.
In celebrating this occasion, we recall with appreciation and admiration the
struggle of the people of Namib ia, carried out and led with na tional dedica tion,
determination and efficiency by the South West Africa People's Orqanization
(SWAPO).

We also recall the support qiven by Africa as a whole, in particular the

front-line States, and by the international cOllUnunity at larqe on behalf of that
struggle.
It is my duty on this occasion to express our qratitude to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and to the competent team that assisted him
in implementing the United Nations plan up to the achievement of independence by
Namibia.

We also express our appreciation to the United Nations Council for

Namibia for its vital role in that process.

There is no doubt that the outstandinq

performance carried out under the flaq of the Uni ted Na tions will contribu te to
strengthening belief in the role of the United Nations and its crucial importance
in resolving outstanding regional and international problems.
While we are celebratinq the fall of the last bastion of colonialism and
foreign occupa tion in Africa, we look forward to the day when we shall see Africa
totally free, the day when the people of South Africa will also achieve their
undeniable and inalienable riqhts.
I should like now to read out a messaqe from President Mohamed Hosni Mubarak,
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity.

A/S-18/PV.l
33

BHS/sm

(Mr. Moussa, Eqypt)
nIt gives ~ great pleasure to extend, on behalf of all Africa, our most
sincere congratulations on the admission of sister Namibia to membership in
the Uni ted Na tions.

The independence of Namib ia, which is a tr iumph for the

principles of the United Nations and the values for which it stands,
culminates the great sacrifices made by the people of Namibia, under the
leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization and
Presi dent Sam Nujoma.

That competent and wise leadership is a source of pri de

for all Africa.
"The African family takes pride in the admission of Namibia to membership
in the Uni ted Nations and bel ieves that the independence of Namibia is a
supplementary step on the road towards the total independence of Africa and
the freedom of Namibia is a consolidation of Africa's freedom.

The crucial

role played by the United Nations in the independence of Namibia and the
strong unwavering support by the international community to the cause of
freedom in Namibia is an outstanding healthy sign that now marks the
international life today.

It also underscores the importance of the Uni ted

Nations as an instrument of qrea t human value which embodies the spiri t of
in teqra tion and co-opera tion to advance the cause of peace, development and
progress.
"Africa appeals to the world community to extend every possible
assistance to the people of Namibia in order to consolidate Namibian
independence and to provide international aid to the projects and programmes
aimed at the rebuilding and strengthening of the economy of the newly born
State.
"Long live independent Namibia.
hopeful, valiant and vigorous future. 11

Long live Africa' s march towards a

BHS/sm

A/S-1B/PV.I
34-35

The PRESIDENT:

I call on His Excellency Mr.Noumou Diakite, representative of

Mali, who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. DIAKITE (Mali) (interpretation from French):

Mr. President, the

Group of African States at the United Nations, which I have the honour to chair
this month, wishes to convey to you its warmest congratulations and great joy at
seeing you presiding over the work of this eighteenth special session of the
General Assembly, devoted to international economic co-operation, in particular the
revitalization of economic growth and development of the developing countries.
The admission of Namibia as the one hundred and sixtieth Member of our
Organization under your presidency has a symbolic value.

You represent a country,

Nigeria, which has made the total liberation of the African continent one of the
cardinal principles of its foreign policy.

An avowed militant for the riqhts of

people to self-determination, you have, yourself, first as Foreiqn Minister of your
country and la ter as Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid,
vigorously fought against the policy of apartheid of the South African Government
and its illegal occupation of Namibia.
The Group of African States at the United Nations bids welcome to the Republic
of Namibia and assures it of its total solidarity.

This admission to membership,

which takes place one month after that country acceded to independence, is the
crowning achievement of the lonq struggle of the Namibian people against foreign
domination.

It is also the direct resul t of 30 years of struggle for national

liberation waged by the courageous Namibian people, under the leadership of the
South west Africa People's Organization (SWAPO).

This is therefore the appropriate

occasion to pay tribu te to the men and women who fell on the field of honour; their
sacrifice enables us today to feel these deep emotions.

A/S-l8/PV.1
36

RH/2

(Mr. Diakite, Mali)
In accordance with the goals set forth by the Charter of the Organization of
African Unity, Africa in general and the front-line States in particular have
unreservedly supported the just struggle of the Namibian people.

Africa is pleased

with the assistance that the international community has given the Namibian people
in its national liberation struggle.
The pressures brought to bear on South Africa by many States Members of our
Organiza tion, by the General Assembly, the Security Council,

the Interna tiona1

Court of Justice, the Special Committee against Apartheid, and the United Nations
Commi t tee on Decoloniza tion,

toge ther with the struggle of the Namibian people,

compelled the leaders of Pretoria to discover the virtues of negotiation, thus
making possible the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978).
The Secretary-General, who knew how to utilize every situation, deserves our
full recognition and gratitude.

We wish personally to pay a well-deserved tribute

to him, as well as to his team of assistants in Namibia and here in New York.
We find enormously comforting the admission of Namib ia to the Organiza tion by
unanimous vote, since it is true that the young State will need international
solidarity to revitalize its economy and to consolidate its independence.

We call

also for implementation of Security Council resolution 432 (1978) of 27 July 1978,
which reaffirms that Walvis Bay and the offshore islands belong to the Namibian
whole.

Given the historic responsibility borne by the international community

concerninq Namib ia, it is henceforth the du ty of us all to work to bring about the
territorial integrity and unity of the new State.
In conclusion, I wish to pay a well-deserved tribute to Mr. Sam Nujoma, the
first President of the Republic of Namibia.

A statesman who has embodied the

aspirations of his people, who has been courageous and realistic throughout his
long years of struggle, he deserves our admiration.

RH/2

A/S-18/PV.l
37
Mr. RANA (Nepal):

On behalf of the Group of Asian States, I have the

honour to welcome Namibia as a new member in this family of nations.

While

extending our fraternal felicitations to the people of Namibia, the Asian States
share their pride and joy on this historic occasion.
Namibia's road to nationhood and independence has been long and arduous.

The

Group of Asian States pay the highest tribute to the Namibian people for their
great courage, fortitude and sacrifice.
lives

to

Many freedom fighters laid down their

achieve the dream that is a reality today.

The determination with which

the people of Namibia waged their heroic struggle and the the dignity with which
they conducted themselves during the transi tion period have earned them the
admiration of the entire international community.

Equally praiseworthy was the

adoption of a constitution with a full guarantee for a pluralistic deoocratic
society.

This will remain a glowinq testimony to the wisdom of the Namibian

people, as well as to the vision, couraqe and statesmanship of leaders like
President Sam Nujoma.
The United Nations had, since its inception, borne a special responsibility
for Namibia.

Together wi th the people of Namibia, we have shared moments of hope

and despair.

It is no accident that the final victory was aChieved through free

and fair elections under the supervision and control of the United Nations.

The

independence of Namibia is an example of what this Organization is capable of
achieving given the co-operation of its members.
On this happy occasion I wish, on behalf of the Asian regional group, to pay
special tribute to our Secretary-General for the perseverance and skill with which
he implemented the mandate entrusted to him by the international community.
not an easy task, and at times obstacles seemed insurmountable.

It was

We wish also to

record our deep appreciation to his Special Representative, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari,
who carried out a difficult task with such distinction.

Our appreciation also qoes

to all those who served in the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG)

A/S-18/PV.l
38-40

RH/2

(Mr. Rana, Nepal)
and discharged the ir du ties wi th dedica tion.

We applaud the Uni ted Na tions Counc i l

for Namibia, which so ably represented the people of Namibia during the
transitional period and assisted in the preparation of nationhood.

The Asian

countries have consistently supported and been closely involved in this procesS.
The independence of Namibia and its admission to the United Nations is therefore a
matter of special satisfaction to the continent of Asia, as well as to my own
country, Nepal, which had the honour to co-ordinate the adoption of the resolution
that initiated the implementation of the United Nations plan for the independence
of Namib ia in the Securi ty Council last year.
The emergence of Namibia as an independent and sovereign State is bound to
have a profound impact, particularly on the ongoing struggle against the system of
apartheid in South Africa.

The members of the Asian Group warmly welcome this new

nation in our midst and look forward to working in close co-operation with it.
Mr. OUDOVENKO (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic)
Russian):

(interpretation from

As Chairman of the Group of Eastern European States for this month, I

wish to welcome you warmly, Sir, as President of this special session of the
General Assembly and to wish you every success as you guide our work here.

It is

noteworthy that you, an outstanding representative of Africa, should be presiding
over this session, which has just admi tted to membership of our Organiza tion the
Republic of Namibia, whose people have won their lonq-awaited independence after
more than 100 years of struggle against colonial oppression.
There is little need for me today to recall that the item on Namibia has been
on the agenda of the Uni ted Na tions for more than four decades.

During the en tire

period of its existence, our Organization has consistently advocated immediate
independence for the people of Namibia.

It is indeed qra tifying to see that these

protracted efforts made by the international communi ty have been crowned with
success wi th the implementa tion of the plan for gran ting independence to Namib ia
through free and fair elections under United Nations supervision and control.

RH/ID

A/S-18/PV.l
41
(Mr. Oudovenko, Ukrainian SSR)
Namibia·s independence was not only the result of the heroic national

liberation struqgle; it was also the culmination of the peace-makinq activities of
the United Nations and its insistent and persistent efforts to ensure the
legitimate rights of the Namibian people.
Settlement of the problem of Namibia is an impressive example of what the
United Nations can do by way of resolving regional conflicts.

The United Nations

has demonstrated in practice that its mechanism for settling situations of conflict
and maintaining the peace is an effec tive one and the most acceptable one today to
ensure peace and security in the various parts of the planet Earth.

It seems to us

that greater use can and must be made of this potential of the United Nations to
settle the most longstandinq conflict, the Middle East conflict, alonq with the
crux of that conflict, the question of Palestine, and to eliminate apartheid in
South Africa.
Here we would pay tribute to the Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, for
his efforts to promote a solution to the problem of Namibia.

We would also note

the important positive role played by the United Nations Council for Namibia, which
for 23 years has been dealing with the many different problems of the Namibian
people on a day-to-day basis.
A positive contribution was also made by the Organization of African States,
by the front-line States and by all who participa ted in the 1988 New York
aq reements, which paved the way to unblocking the situation of conflict in
South West Africa.

In particular we should like to stress the role played by the

South West Africa People·s Organization (SWAPO), headed by Sarn Nujoma, which for
more than 20 years led the struggle for the country·s freedom.

The people of

Namibia demonstrated their appreciation of SWAPO·s work when they expressed their
confidence in it durill;l the elections to the Constituent Assembly.

We also extend

A/S -18/PV.l

RH/IQ

42

(Mr. Oudovenko, Ukrainian SSR)
our thanks to Mr. Martti Ahtisaari and his team and to General Prem Chand for
carrying out their important work in leadinq Namibia to independence.

We would

also pay a tribute to the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) and
the countries of Eastern Europe who participated in its work.
As

we celebrate the birth of this new State, this new Member of the

United Nations, we once again turn our eyes to the historic Declaration on the
Granting of

Inde~endence to

Colonial Countries and Peoples.

It would be difficult

to imagine an event more significant than the elimination of this last colony in
Africa as we approach the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of that Declaration.
Namibian independence is indeed a historic triumph of justice, and further
proof of the effectiveness of the new poli tical think ing of today.

We express our

deep conviction that the Republic of Namibia will make a constructive contribution
to the strenghtening of international co-operation, peace and security.

The Eas t European States have always supported the legi timate and just
s trugg le of the Namib ian people for in dependence.

Today we would ass ure the younq

independent State of our close co-operation with them.

We wish the people of the

Republic of Namibia every success as they build up their Sta te and develop and
consolidate their independence.
The PRESIDENT:

I call on the representative of Venezuela, who will speak

on behalf of the Group of La ti nAme ric an and Caribbean Sta te s.
Mr. AGJILAR (Venezuela)

(interpretation from Spanish):

A long period of

waiting preceded this happy occasion as we witness the admission of Namibia to
membership of the United Nations.

Many efforts had to be made to overcome the

intolerance and selfishness of a few.

The regional group I represent is proud to

have been able to contribute to the defence and promotion of that noble cause since
its inception, even before the norms leadinq to the riqht to self-de termina tion and

RH/lO

A/S-l8/PV.l

43
(Mr. Agui1ar, Venezuela)
independence of peoples had become firmly established in the minds and practice of
some of the colonial Powers of the time.

But the wave of independence that added

so much to the wor Id of the Uni ted Na tions in the decades of the 1960s and 1970s
did not incl~de a Territory that perhaps more than any other had the best
credentials to obtain early independence.

It was only after a bitter protracted

liberation struggle under the responsible leadership of the South West Africa
People IS Org aniza tion (SWAPO), with the support and solidari ty of the interna tiona1
community, that Namibia got itself back on the road to freedom.
A little over a year ago we saw with cautious hope the beginning of
implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978).

The coming together of a

series of interna tional factors seemed finally to be leadinq to a solu tion that
would possibly bring about the redress of injustice, which had for so long been
awai ted by the Namibian people.

Today the process of independence has ended and a

new nation has joined the concert of sovereiqn nations.
The United Nations Council for Namibia has ended its work and is fast
approachinq its dissolution.

Throughout its 23 years of work it has tirelessly

contributed to the realization of the happy rroment that has brouqht us toqether
here today.

Starting as a body with limited political scope, challenged and even

underes tima ted, it went on to become a signi ficant tool that denounced the
si tuation and spread information on everything pertaining to the cause of Namibia.
The nature of its responsibilities frequently brought it up against influential
elements of the international equation, but it made no concessions with regard to
its position of principle and nor did it abdicate the mandate the General Assembly
had entrusted to it in resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967.
Together with meetio;J its political responsibilities, the Council carried out
important work in the field of traininq human resources and providing material

A/S-18/PV.l

RH/10

44-45

(Mr. Aquilar, Venezuela)
resources to the Namibian na tion.

Venezuela is certainly proud that over the las t

decade it has chaired the Committee of the United Nations Fund for Namibia, whose
contribution in this area is of singular importance, given the developmental needs
the new nation will face.

The past leaves marks, and lessons are learned.

future offers challenges and hopes.

The

Still unresolved are aspects havinq to do wi th

Namibia's territorial integrity, in particular the question of Walvis Bay.
Security Council resolution 432 (1978) recognizes the titles of sovereignty held by
Namibia, and it is the international community's responsibility to ensure that that
strategic enclave is returned to it as soon as possible without prejudice of any
kind.

It is important to point out that settlement of the Namibian question will

be incomplete until that thorny matter has been resolved.

In that regard, the

inte rnational communi ty' s commitment still stands.
Though much has been done to crea te human resources to meet the impera tives of
the social and economic reconstruction of Namibia, the facts show they are not
sufficient.

Namibia no longer exists only on paper as the subject of academic

study by specialized agencies; Namibia now exists, which formulas for co-operation,
bilateral or multilateral, must take into account.

The Group of Latin American and

Caribbean Countries has already taken steps in that direction.
Our Group is pleased warmly to welcome Namibia to the Organiza tion.

We are

convinced its contribution to our work will demonstrate all the creativity,
generosity and solidarity we expect of it.

JP/td

A/S-18/PV.l
46

The PRESIDENT:

I now call on His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson of Sweden,

who will speak on behalf of the Group of Wester n European and Other States.
Mr. ELIASSON (Sweden):

To welcome a new Member State to the United

Nations is an occasion of joy, indeed an occasion of great pride for the world
community.
Today, however, our rejoicing goes beyond the gratification of having seen the
birth of a new nation.

Another siqnificant step has been taken towards the

universality of our Orqanization.

And we have seen the United Nations play a

crucial and unprecedented role in the successful conclusion of the process of
independence.

All this constitutes a truly historic event.

Admitting Namibia as a Member State of the United Nations also marks the
culmination of a long and sustained effort in the pursuit of freedom.
The people of Namibia have ,finally come to the end of their courageous and
determined quest for freedom.

There have been many sacrifices On the lonq and

arduous road to independence.

'Ibday Namibia can proudly take its rightful place

alTK)ng the Member States of the United Nations.
The members of the Group of Western European and Other States congratulate the
Namibian people on their qreat achievement and pay tribute to them for it.

We also

wish to express our deep appreciation to the Secretary-General, his SPecial
Representative and all the men and women of the United Nations Transition
Ass istance Group (UNTAG) and the secretariat who have worked so hard and skilfully
for the success of one of the most complex and difficult operations ever undertaken

bY the Organization.
The independence of Namibia is a victory for Namibia and for Africa as a
whole.

But it is also a victory for the entire United Nations system.

The

Namibian experience has strengthened our Organization and the very principles of
the Charter.

In a powerful and convincing way, it proves that even the most

A/S-l8/PV.l
47

JP/td

(Mr.

Eliasson~

Sweden)

intricate and deep-rooted problems can be resolved by poli tical means.

It proves

what can be achieved when the efforts of the parties concerned and the efforts of
the world community are bound together ~ a common objective.
Namibia is, indeed, a symbol of the strength that lies in the will of the
people and a symbol of the potential of peaceful change.

What better start as a

nation could the one hundred and sixtieth Member - or for that matter any Member
of our Organization have?
Namibia will no doubt make a great contribution to the work of the United
Nations.

~any

experience.

of our Namibian friends know our Organization from first-hand

The members of the'Group of Western European and Other States warmly

welcome the deleqa tion of Namib ia.

We look forward to working with its members

both as old friends and as new colleagues facing the common task of. promoting the
noble aims and ideals embodied in the Charter of the Uni ted Na tions.
The PRESIDENT:

The next speaker is His Excellency

Mr. Mohammad Hussain Al-Shaali of the Uni ted Arab Emira tes, who will speak
on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
Mr. AL-SHAALI (Uni ted Arab Emirates)

(interpretation from Arabic):

On

behalf of the Group of Arab States, Mr. President, I wish to express our great
pleasure in congratulating you on your election to preside over the General
Assembly at its eighteenth special session.

Your election on this day in

particular is a reaffirmatio n of the trus t placed in you by the international
communi ty and of your remar !cable sUCcess in conducting the General Assembly's
deliberations.
This is a historic day in the life and annals of the United Nations.

This

day, on which Namibia is admitted to membership of the international Organization,
has particular significance, unlike that of the admission of any other State,

JP/td

A/S-18/PV.1
48

(Mr. A1-Shaali, United Arab
Emirates)
because it marks the independence of the last colony on the continent of Africa and
represents the culmination of a hard struggle waged by the people of Namibia, under
the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO), against the
racist colonialism of South Africa.
by

It is also the culmination of the efforts made

the interna tional community, represented by the Uni ted Nations and !:IV all the

forces of justice and peace which contributed directly or indirectly to the
realization of the country's independence.

Here mention should be made of the role

of the Secretary-General, the African States, the Non-Aligned Movement and other
organizations and individuals.

What has happened today also reflects the

importance of international detente in the settlement of regional conflicts.
we in the Arab Group feel particularly happy today because of our special
historical ties with Africa throughout all the stages of the common struqqle
against colonialism.

We congratulate this newly established State on its admission

as a full Member of the United Nations and emphasize our support for its
achievement of freedom and prosperi ty and the ability to play its role wi thin the
international community in the establishment of international peace and security.
At the same time, we look forward to the day when the people of Palestine
achieve its independence and assumes its proper place amongst us in the United
Nations, like all other peoples.
The PRESIDENT:

The next speaker is His Excellency Mr. Tesfaye Tadesse of

Ethiopia, Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples.
Mr. TADESSE (Ethiopia), Chairman of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granti~ of

I'

JP/td

A/S-18/PV.l
49-50

(Mr. Tadesse, Chairman,
Special Committee af 24)
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (Special Committee of 24):

It is a

particular pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding over the Assembly on this auspicious
occasion.
I feel a deep sense of joy in extending a most cordial welcome to the new
independent State of the Republic of Namibia.

The leaders of the South West Africa

People's Organization (SWAPO), the combatants of the liberation movement and the
people of the new independent Sta te of Africa can look with pride at this mee tinq
of the General Assembly and the justly deserved investiture of the victory won
through the toil and struggle they have endured over the past several decades.
Namibia1s independence is a source of immense satisfaction and deliqht to the
entire world community and in particular to the IIV:!mbers of the Special Commi ttee on
decolanization, who over the years have followed closely often frustrating and at
times even discouragi~ developments taking place in that region.

JSM/edd

A/S-18/PV.l

51
(Mr. Tadesse, Chairman, Special
Commi t tee of 24)
Namibia IS independence clearly demons tra tes to the world that a colonial
people fighting for its freedom cannot be silenced and that, against all odds, a
just cause pursued with courage and de termina tion will indeed triumph.

The final

victory of Namibia is a tribute to the indomitable will of its people, as well as
the resilience, foresight and statesmanship of the leaders of SWAPO,

the national

liberation movement, at the negotiating table as much as on the battlefield.
When I had the honour of representing the Special Committee at the official
independence celebration ceremonies at Windhoek, I had the opportunity of conveying
to the Government and,

throuqh it to the people, of Namibia the Special Committeels

warmest congratulations and best wishes for peace, happiness and prosperity in the
years to come.

Bu t Namibia needs more than the good wishes of all na tions.

A

tremendous effort of national reconstruction will engage all the enerqies of the
entire population, and I need not stress the responsibility of the international
community, of the United Nations and its family of orqanizations, to extend their
help most generously and give this new nation all the assistance it needs to
rehabilitate its refugees, rebuild its economy and heal the wounds sustained from
decades of colonialism and racism.

Surely this important task of na tion-bu ilding

requires that Namibia should be ensured continued stability in full unity and
territorial integrity, as provided by the Charter of the United Nations and the
resolutions of the Security Council.
Over the years, as more and more colonial Territories on its aqenda have
become independent, the Special Committee has taken great pride in contributi~ to
the enlargement of the membership of the United Nations.

As we observe the

thirtie th anniversary of the Declara tion and beq in the decade devoted to the
eradication of colonialism, Namibials assumption of its rightful place in our

A/S-l8/PV.l
52

JSM/edd

(Mr. Tadesse, Chairman, Special
Committee of 24)
Organization no doubt provides added impetus to the decolonization process.
Rejoicing in this historic event, the Special Committee considers it fitting to
call for continued efforts to assist the remaining Non-Self-Governinq Territories
so that the United Nations can hasten the achievement of one of its fundamental
objectives:

universality.

In conclusion, I should like to pay a deserved tribute to the
Secretary-General for his perseverance against immense difficulties and express our
appreciation to the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG), and to all
others involved in the process, for their valuable contribution to Namibia's
i nde pe nde nCe •
I once again congratulate Prime Minister Hage Geingob, and through him the
Namibian Government and people, and wish them success as they set out to build
their new nation.
Mr. ZUZE (Zambia), President of the United Nations Council for Namibia:
This day marks a special occasion in the history of the United Nations.

Today,

Namibia, a Terri tory for which the Uni ted Nations assumed di rect responsibility
more than two decades aqo, is being admitted into the community of nations.

This

brings us a step further towards the realization of the cardinal principle of
universali ty in the membership of the Uni ted Na tions.
I wish in this regard, Sir, and on behalf of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, to say how happy we are to see you, a distinquished son of Africa,
presiding over the eiqhteenth special session of the General Assembly.

Your

country, Nigeria, together with the front-line States, has for a long time played a
significant role in the struggle for the independence of Namibia.

JSM/edd

A/S-lB/PV.l
53
(Mr. Zuze, President, United
Na tions Council for Namibia.

May I take the liberty to welcome in our midst the Republic of Namibia.

I do

so cognizant of the fact that the will of the international community to see
Namibia liberated has been fUlfilled.

The Council for Namibia cannot but salute

all those who made the independence of Namibia possible.

We are happy that at long

last Namibia has taken its rightfuL place in this body.

Its participation in the

work of the United Nations will indeed enrich our deliberations.
It

is with the greatest sense of pride and satisfaction that I extend a warm

and sincere welcome to the Prime Minister of the Republic of Namibia,
Mr. Hage Geingob, and the Foreign Minister, my brother Theo Ben-Gurirab.

Their

presence at this historic session of the General Assembly is clear testimony of the
importance Namibia attaches to the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
Uni ted Nations.
Namibia's independence attests to the SUCcess of the United Nations.
it is, to all in tents and purposes, the success of mul tila tera1ism.

Indeed,

And in these

days of rapprochement, we cannot but express the hope that mu1 tila tera1 efforts
will be crowned with success in other conflict situations.
To the Council for Namibia, this day represents a very historic and joyous
moment.

Namibia, a child of the international community, has gained adulthood.

many who participated in the work of the Council, it is a dream come true.

It is

beyond the power of words to express adequa tely the jUbila tion that the Sta tes
members of the Council for Namibia feel on this momentous occasion.
since the establishment of the Council in May 1967, we have waited for the
moment when Namibia would assume its rightful place among the family of nations.
For 23 years the Council has engaged in programmes to mobilize interna tional
support for, and solidarity with, the struggling people of Namibia, and to assist

To

A/S-18/PV.1
54- 55

,JSM/edd

(Mr. Zuze, President, United
Nations Council for Namibia)
the growinq number of Namibians who were forced to flee from persecution in their
country and seek sanctuary elsewhere.
In the fulfilment of its mandate, the Council consulted broadly with
Governments and other parties concerned, throughout the world, to seek greater
support for the cause of Namibia and to review all the measures that had to be
taken to promote the implementation of United Nations resolutions regarding the
Territory.

The Council also kept under continuous review the political, economic,

social and military developments in the Territory which affected the struggle of
the Namibian people for freedom and independence.
Alarmed by the revela tions of the rape and plunder of Namibia's na tura1
resources, the Council took specific steps to protect the natural wealth of Namibia
lY{

enacting in September 1974 the now famous Decree No. 1 "for the Protection of

the Natural Resources of Namibia".

To qive effect to that Decree, the Council

decided in 1985, after years of careful study and prepara tion, to take legal action
in the domestic courts of States aqainst those corporations and individuals
involved in the exploi ta tion, transport, processin:j or purchase of Namibia's
natural resources.

Since the Council's mandate effectively ended at the time of

the independence of Namibia, it remains for the Government of the Republic of
Namibia to take whatever further action it deems necessary in the furtherance of
this ma t ter.

RH/2

A/S-l8/PV.l
56

(Mr. Zuze, President, United
Nations Council for Namibia)
The road to Namibia's independence has been long and arduous.

For more than a

century Namibians have struggled, by diplomatic, political and all other means at
their disposal, including armed struggle, for freedom and self-determination under
the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO).
them for their courage, determination and heroism.

It was

We salute

their heroic resistance,

bolstered by the support of the international community, that led to their
independence under the United Nations Settlement Plan embodied in Security Council
resolution 435 (1978).

The successful implementation of resolution 435 (1978) has

thus brought an end to the colonial si tua tion in Namibia and an end to colonialism
on the continent of Africa.
The Territory's independence and its admission to the United Nations are
clearly a cause for celebration.
Namibia are far from over.

Yet we must not forqet that the problems of

After decades of struggle against the ravages of

apa.rtheid and colonialism the crucial tasks of "rehabili ta tion and na tional
development are just beginning.

We therefore appeal to the international community

to extend its co-operation and assistance to Namib ia, either through mul tila teral
forums or through bilateral channels.

Namibia will need SUbstantial external help

in restructurin;l its economy and providing the population as a whole with new
economic and social possibilities.

A comprehensive international aid proqramme

will thus be essential for the country to consolidate its newly independent status,
stabilize its finances and generate sustainable growth.
The Republic of Namibia has now joined the Uni ted Na dons and the Southern
African Development Co-ordination Conference (SAD CC) and will soon formalize its
membership in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Organization of African
Unity (OAD) and a number of other international and intergovernmental
organizations.

The mandate entrusted to the Council for Namibia by the world

community has been fulfilled, and we have recommended to the General Assembly our

_~

..............._~,d

A/S-18/PV.l

RH/2

57

(Mr. Zuze, President, United
Nations Council for Namibia)
own dissolution.

However, we cannot fail to note that Namibia's sovereignty over

Walvis Bay and the offshore islands is still being disputed by South Africa.

We

therefore urge the Security Council and the General Assembly to reiterate their
positions on these important matters and to compel South Africa to abide by the
will of the international community and thus ensure the territorial integrity of
Namibia.
Namibia's independence has shifted the struggle against apartheid to within
South Africa's own boundaries.

The Pretoria regime has in recent weeks professed a

desire for positive change in its racist policies and has taken some small steps
towards that end.

But much more needs to be done.

The val iant struggle of the

people of Namibia conclusively proved the irresistible trend of history that the
just struggle of oppressed peoples eventually triumphs.

The forces of colonialism,

exploitation and racism which relentlessly try to obstruct that historical trend
are doomed to failure, and we firmly believe that Namibia's independence has spelt
doom for aeartheid and has brought closer the day of liberation for South Africa's
oppressed people.
As we rejoice today, we must also remember those who gave their very best
along the road to independence.

The silent soldiers who perished in the struggle

paid dearly for the liberation of their motherland.

We must also recall those who

died while still in our midst, and memory bows for a moment at the names of
Sean MacBride and Bernt Carlsson, two of our Commissioners, and of Rago Monteiro,
one of our outstandiN:J Secretaries.

Let us remember the men and women whom the

Council was able to reach and to persuade - the scholars and statesmen, the writers
and readers, the trade unionists and the churchmen, and our many shared moments of
companionship and camaraderie, of friendship forged in the furnace of a mission
sustained I:1f our many individual selves.

Let us recall the love and laughter that

infused our work, the many personal friendships that the sharing of this cause and

RH/2

A/S-18/PV.l
58

(Mr. Zuze, President, United
Na tions Council for Namibia)
the harmony of our work together afforded.

Let us remember how the fire of our

determination forged the steel of solidarity amongst all of us, distant though our
nations may have been, unhappy as relations between us may have been on occasion.
Namibia made us one.
At this solemn moment I wish to extend once again our warm qreetings and
welcome to Namibia, the one hundred and sixtieth Member of the Uni ted Na tions.
Namibia's unhappy past is a nightmare and is now forever behind it.
dream and a future of glorious opportunities.

Ahead is a

We wish the Government and people of

Namibia great success in the arduous tasks of social and economic development and
na tion-building, as well as in their efforts to consolida te peace, security and
justice in southern Africa.
It is now ~ distinct privilege and honour to express our deep appreciation to
His Excellency the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Javier Perez de
Cuellar, for his untiring efforts to bring about Namibia's freedom and national
independence.

His was a difficult assignment, and we commend him most sincerely_

We also recognize the important role played by the United Nations Transition
Assistance Group (UNTAG), comprising thousands of international military, police
and civilian personnel who worked ceaselessly to realize Namibia's national
independence.
As the old adage goes:

"All's well that ends well."

Mr. PIO<ERING (United States of America):

On behalf of the host country,

it is a great pleasure to welcome the representatives of the Government of the
newly independent Republic of Namib ia.
sponsoring Namibia's accession

to

We are especially proud to join in

membership in the United Nations.

The Secretary-General and his Special Representa tive, as well as all of the
personnel of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) and the United
Nations Secretariat, have worked tirelessly to help the Namibian people join the

A/S-18/PV.l
59-60

RH/2

(Mr. Pickering, Uni ted States)
Uni ted Na tions as an independent and sovereign na tion.

We congra tula te those

involved in helping to reach this proud moment.
The road to Namibia's independence was long and sometimes rocky.

Howe~er,

neither the people of Namibia, not the world community nor my own Go~ernment e~er
gave up hope that Namibia would achieve nationhood with a dem:>cratically elected
Go~ernment.

The Administrations of three successi~e American Presidents worked

diligently in the negotia tirg process and elsewhere to achieve this qoal.

My

Government will support and encourage this new democracy as it establishes a
democratic, peaceful and prosperous na tion for all of its ci tizens.
The United States has been engaged in the cause of Namibian independence since
the early part of this century.

President Wilson's sugqestions led to the

establishing of the mandate system under the Leaque of Nations, which guaranteed
separate territorial identity of the former German colony of South West Africa.
Following the Second World War we advocated Namibian independence and opposed all
annexation efforts with vigour and determination.

The United States played an

important role in helping to fashion United Nations Security Council resolution
435 (1978),

the blueprint for Namibia's independence.

We are proud of the

mediating role which we played in the negotiations that led to the New York

'I

Accords, which enabled the implementa tion of that resolution, and I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for mentioning several of our American colleagues by name for
their contribu tion to this great effort.
The Namibian people are to be commended for their fairness, patience and
perseverance during the transition process.

The United Nations-monitored,

democratic elections, with 97 per cent of the voting population turning out at the
polls, offer a model for the rest of the world.

acr/JK

A/S-18/PV.l
61
(Mr. Pickering, United States)

Great strides toward democracy are bein:] made these days around the globe, as
former closed societies open their doors to popular participation.

As these

nations set the stage for democracy, they can look to the new Republic of Namibia
with esteem, with respect and with admiration as a pace-setter in the conduct of
free and fair elections.

The last colony in Africa is now a republic, a sovereign

State in its own right, with a multiparty democracy.
Namibia's admission to the United Nations affirms its successful quest for
freedom and for self-determination.

Congratulations to you, Prime Minister

Geingob, and to all the Namibian people on this historic day.

There is no better

way to bring in this new decade of the 1990s than with the birth of a proud new
nation and its inclusion in the United Nations as the newest full Member of the
Organ i zatio n.
The PRESIDENT:

The Assembly will now hear a statement by the Prime

Minister of the Republic of Namibia, His Excellency Mr. Hage Geingob.
Mr. Hage Geingob, Prime Minister of the Republic of Namibia, was escorted to
the ros trum.
The PRESIDENT:

I have great pleasure in welcoming the Prime Minister of

the Republic of Namibia, and I invite him to address the General Assembly.
Mr. GEINma (Namibia):

The poverty of language makes it impossible for

me to express clearly in words how honoured and privileged I am to have been
accorded this rare opportunity - indeed one incapable of repetition - of leadinq
the delegation of Namibia to the United Nations for admission.
I stand before you in all humility, Mr. President, you a son of that great
country Nigeria, which because of its close association with the strugqle in
southern Africa came to be known as a front-line State.

What a palatable

conspiracy of circumstances it is, therefore, to see you presiding over this

A/S-18/PV.1
62

BGr/JK

(Mr. Geinqob, Namibia)
special session of the General Assembly where Namibia is admitted as the
One hundred and sixtieth Member of the United Nations.

We are immensely indebted

to you for your well-known consummate diplomatic skills, which undoubtedly made
Namibia's adn issio n today possible.
Mr. Secretary-General, allow me to express the Namibian people's appreciation
to you personally for your unwave!inq support for their cause.

When elected, you

promised to make the Namibian question one of the priorities during your term of
office.

It is a pleasure, therefore,

to note that under your stewardship the

biggest Uni ted Nations operation ever mounted proved a success and resul ted in
Namibia's taking its rightful place in the community of nations.

I am reminded of

one colonial mayor of Windhoek in the 1970s who arqued in a television interview
that the United Nations had never anywhere in the world carried out any project
successfully.

For you it must have been a harvest of happiness, therefore, to see

the United Nations preside over Namibia's peaceful transition to independence.

The

United Nations without a doubt faced a lot of resentment from those opposed to
change in Namibia, but with the help of the majority of the people of Namibia it
pulled off the biq One.
It would be a derileetion of duty on my part if I did not place on record our
apprecia tion to the Securi ty Counc i l for favourably recommendinq to the General
Assembly to admit Namibia.

It was resolution 435 (1978), the Council's brainchild,

that led to Namibia's peaceful transition to statehood.

It must have felt a great

deal of frustration during the 10 years of non-implementation after resolution 435
was adopted, in 1978.

But now, with Namibia's independence, the long hours it

spent and the patient diplomacy it engaged in on the Namibian question have not
been in vain.

Many thanks go also to the General Assembly, which has remained

seized of the Namibian question since its inception, and particularly since South

Bcr/JK

A/S-18/PV.I
63
(Mr. Geingob, Namibia)

Africa's Mandate over Namibia was terminated, in 1966.

It is my sincere hope and

belief that with its adm ission today Namibia will cease to be a perennial question
on the agenda of the General Assembly.
Let me also seize this opportuni ty to express our whole-hearted appreciation
to the front-l ine States and the Sta tes members of the Organiza tion of African

Unity (OAU)

and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries for having played a vital

role in the decolonization of Namibia.

We pay a similar deserved tribu te to all

other countries that stood firm with us in our struggle for freedom and justice.
In addi tion, our tribute goes to the en tire Uni ted Na tionssys tem, particularly the
Uni ted Nations Council for Namibia.
The new State of Namibia applied for membership of the Uni ted Nations under
Ar ticle 4 of the Charter as, in its view, it fulfils all the requisi te condi tions
for membership.

Namibia has a small but vibrant popUlation - of about 1.5 million;

i t has a clearly defined territory, which consists of the whole of the territory

recognized by the international community through the organs of the United Nations
as Namibia, including the enclave, harbour and port of Walvis Bay as well as the
off-shore islands of Namibia; and its southern boundary extends to the middle of
the Orange River.

It has a democratically elected executive President and a

Government which derive legitimacy from the will of the people.

Namibia has the

capacity to enter into relations with other States; as a matter of fact, over 80
sovereign States either have expressed interest in or have already entered into
bilateral agreements wi th the Republic of Namibia - a fact which demonstrates the
international community's confidence in our young RepUblic.
desire peace.

The people of Namibia

Therefore, the new State of Namibia pledges to live at peace with

its neighbours; it accepts as sacrosanct and will fufi! all obligations attendant
upon its becoming a Member of the world body.

A/S-lB/PV.l
64-65
(Mr. Geingob, Namibia)
The Constitution of Namibia, woven and crafted with meticulous care, is the
pride of most Namibians, as it is homegrown and reflects the compromises aChieved
by Namibia's Constitution-makers in a spirit of give and take.

We take justifiable

pride in the fact that, second only perhaps to the United States of America, we had
the rare opportunity without outside interference, but under the watchful eye of
the international community, to sit down and draft our own Constitution.

JB/5

A/S-l8/PV.I
66
(Mr. Geingob, Namibia)
The foundation stone of that Constitution is the recognition and jealous

protection of fundamental human rights.
outlaw the death penalty.

Our Constitution is audacious enough to

It recoqnizes the rights of children and guarantees

political opposition under a mutli-party democracy.

It gives me immense pride,

therefore, to announce to the General Assembly that on this historic occasion I am
heading a governmental, all-party parliamentary and trade union delegation, now
also joined by the business community.
political diversity of our society.

That is a clear recognition of the

We are committed to building a democracy in

which violent confrontation and the politics of hatred will be things of the past,
a democracy in which the concept of reconcfliation is already slowly but decidedly
permeating the social fabric and the political lexicon of our society.
Lest I be misunderstood, I wish to place on record that to us, .the Government
of the day, reconciliation does not mean the continuation of the status quo.
have inherited a skewed economy riddled with imbalances and lopsidedness.

We

The

country is racially stratified, with the whites enjoying relative prosperity while
the majority of the blacks live in grotesque poverty.

The challenge facing us,

therefore, is to achieve a healthy balance between political and economic
reconciliation.

The two qo hand in qlove, and we are committed to achievinq both,

not one at the expense of the other.
Globally, not least in southern Africa, the scale of human suffering has
escalated by leaps and bounds, at times because of conflict that can be overcome
throuqh dialogue and discourse.

With regard to South Africa specifically, it is

our fervent hope that Namibia's experience will serve as an encouragement to the
people of that sister country to end apartheid and bring about a non-racial
de lOOcra tic society.

A/S-18/PV.l
67

JB/S

(Mr. Geingob, Namibia)
We are a small nation of limited means but we stand ready to take our place
among the nations of the world to contribute positively towards the realization of
those most attractive ideals of the human race - world peace and harmony - throuqh
the United Nations, the greatest international experiment in peace, co-operation
and hope.
The PRESIDENT:

On behalf of the General Assembly, I wish to thank the

Prime Minis ter of the Republic of Namib ia for the important s ta tement he has just
made.
Mr. Rage Geingob, Prime Minister of the Republic of Namibia, was escorted from
the ros trum.
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to announce that the flag of Namibia will

be raised at a ceremony that will take place immedia tely after the adjournment of
the meeting, in front of the delegates' entrance.
That concludes our consideration of agenda item 10, on the admission of
Namibia to membership of the United Nations.

Before we begin the general debate,

the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, wishes to address the Assembly,
and I now call on him.
STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from Spanish):

This special

session of the General Assembly has been convened at a particularly appropriate
time.

For the first time since the Second World War, there is an extraordinary

convergence of views on the most cri tical issues faced by the interna tional
community.

That augurs well for the deliberations of the General Assembly, which,

under your able guidance, Mr. President, will address questions of crucial
importance for the economic well-being and situation of the international
communi ty.

I need hardly say that the success achieved by the present session will

have positive and long-ranging effects On international relations as a whole.

1
,cl

·······'·.1.. ·
H

;/

\

'
:

A/S-18/PV.l

JB/5

68

(The Secretary-General)
Despi te the many di fficul ties we face today, the last decade of this century
is full of promise and hope.

Thanks to outstanding events that have taken place in

the political international arena, especially the renewed process of
democratization, the reduction of rivalry between the super-Powers, the improvement
in relations between East and West, and the sincere quest for solutions to regional
conflicts, the possibility now exists to change forever the basis of international
relations which had come to be considered permanent in the post-war period.
clearly point to the possibility of achieving stable global peace.

They

The opportunity

of the kind that has now been provided by the dynamics of human affairs had not
occurred in our age.

It needs to be fully grasped if international security is to

be broadened, made truly collective, and given a lasting fOllndation.
The past decade witnessed political, economic, social, environmental and
technolog ical currents that cut across na tiona1 boundaries.

The increased

international flow of people, goods, finance and ideas has given real meaning to
the term "globalization".

It has reduced the mental distance between societies and

shown much political discord in the world to be a product of out-worn concepts and
attitudes.

It has also led to a narrowing of differences stemming from economic

philosophies.
It is ironic, however, that along with that creative historical process there
has also been a movement in the opposite direction.

I refer to the wideninq of the

gaps in economic and social well-being around the world.

The developed market

economies are enjoying an unprecedented period of expansion, while only a few
developing countries have been able to achieve and maintain high levels of growth.
Dut for most developing countries the 1980s brought no genuine economic
betterment.

Indeed, the economies of many of those coun tries stagnated or

A/S-18/PV.1

JB/5

69-70

(The Secretary-General)
declined.

Some of them were already among the world's poorest.

without a reversal

in their downward spiral, those countries, and indeed whole regions, will be even
more economically margina1ized.

M.illions will be added to the more than 1 billion

people already living in abject poverty.

Is it acceptable that, in today's

prosperous world, millions of children should die every year from starvation or
malnutrition, or that most people in the developing world should not even have safe
drinking wa ter?
The developed countries cannot isolate themselves from those realities.

The

consequences of the economic and social retrogression in developing countries are
already touching lives elsewhere.

The drug epidemic now threatening the world has

been aggravated by the deteriorating situation in the developing countries.

The

increase in the flow of migrants within as well as among countries has been another
manifestation of this phenomenon.

BHS/sm

A/S-18/PV.l
71

(The Secretary-General)
The political maturity that is reflected in the recent developments that I

.

mentioned earlier will, of course, help to bring about a lasting peace, but it
alone cannot guarantee peace.

,

Peace needs to be securely anchored in a strong

bedrock of economic and social justice world-wide.

The United Nations Charter

takes full account of this requirement when, in Article 55, it refers to
"condi tions of stab Hi ty and wel1-beinq which are necessary for peaceful and
friendly relations among nations".

It is, therefore, a matter of the greatest

concern that, despite the global effects of the deteriorating economic situation in
most nations since the early 19805, no serious effort has been made to initiate a
broad-based dialogue on international economic co-operation.

This special session

provides Member States with the opportunity to correct this anomaly, which indeed
amounts to a lamentable failure.
In recent months, Member States have laboured hard to lay a solid foundation
for the success of this se ss ion.

I should 1 ike to take this opportuni ty to thank

Ambassador Constantine Zepos of Greece, Chairman of the Preparatory Committee, who
has done much to prepare the final document of the special session.

All others who

have contributed to the preparatory process also deserve our appreciation.
The prepara tions for th is special sess ion prompted, qui te na turally, a further
discussion of the reasons for the economic slowdown that has beset so many
countries in the world.

Those who have been unaffected tend to think that economic

decline is due essentially to poor domestic management.

Those who have suffered

economic retrogress ion are inclined to argue that their misfortunes are the resu1 t
of international factors that are generally beyond their control.

Experience has

surely demons tra ted that both po ints of view have some elements of tru th.
Developing countries, lacking the economic resilience of more advanced societies,
cannot prosper in an adverse international environment.

At the same time, all

countries must pursue sound domestic policies if they are to utilize the

__-..J;,

A/S-18/PV.l

BHS/sm

72

(The Secretary-General)
opportuni ties available.

Both condi tions are necessary; nei ther condi tion alone is

sufficient.
Over the past several years, I have noticed an tncreas inq determination,
.,'
particularly on the part of the developing countries, to strengthen their na tional
economic policies.

In many countries, the qrowth and development process could be

helped by a better ordering of priorities, by the introduction of improvements in
economic management and by the existence of a standard of administrative efficiency
and effectiveness, especially in countries with a shortaqe of resources.

However,

it is useless to put stress on such measures without also addressing the
fundamental causes of underdevelopment and overcoming the international factors
that impede development.
We must recognize that domestic economic measures taken by larqe countries, or
by

a number of countries acting collectively, can impinqe directly on the

well-being of other countries, particularly the smallest ones.

For example, the

benefi ts that developing countries can obtain from adjus ting their own aq ricul tural
prices will be compromised when agriculture in most industrialized countries is
heavily subsidized.

Similarly, the efforts of developing countries to open their

markets and become more outward-looking will be frustrated if international trade
continues to be hampered bV a wide variety of restrictive arrangements.

One of the

objectives of this special session should be to chart a course for qreater fairness
and coherence in qlobal economic policy-making.
In seeking to improve the international economic environment, there are a
number of critical issues that must be faced squarely.
open and equitable international tradinq reqime.

Governments must create an

A firm political commitment by

major trading countries is needed to ensure that the Uruquay Round neqotia tions
will enhance the trade and development possibilities of developinq countries.

BHS/sm

A/S-18/PV.I
73
(The Secretary-General)

In the matter of comoodi ties, the need for strengthened interna tional
co-operation is paraoount, particularly in addressing the problems faced by
developirq countries.

There must also be improvements in the flow of technology,

so that all countries can make the best use of their physical and human resources,
and we must ensure that developirq countries have the financial resources necessary
to avail themselves of these opportunities.
It is in this last context that we must address the question of the net
transfer of financial resources from developing countries.

Currently, developinq

countries are transferring about $30 billion annually to the developed countries.
One of the natural results has been a decline in investment, which directly damages
those countries' prospects for future development.

This clearly runs counter to

the principles of international co-operation for development.
Since 1982, international organizations, Governments of both debtor and
creditor countries, private-sector banks and economic analysts have been addressing
the problem of external indebtedness which confronts more than half the countries
represented here.

On previous occasions I have expressed my appreciation of the

various ini tia tives, such as the Brady plan, which have been taken to de fuse the
international debt crisis.

However, the fact remains that the total debt of the

developirq countries rose from some $750 billion at the end of 1982 to almost
$1,200 billion las t December.

This increase was not, as some might suppose, a

reflection of the willingness of bankS to lend to credit-worthy customers.

On the

contrary, most of it was lending and borrowing entered into reluctantly by both
parties in recoqni tion of the fact that nei ther had much choice.
It has become obvious that we must remove the exorbitant burden of earlier
loans.

Present efforts for debt reduction and debt-service reduction must be

pursued vigorously, underpinned with larqer resources and extended to a larger

A/S-18/PV.l

BHS/sm

U-~

(The Secretary-General)
number of countries.

This will require a major effort, and it is for this reason

that I have requested the distinguished Italian statesman, Mr. Bettino Craxi, to
act as my personal representative on debt.

Mr. Craxi is consulting with all

interested parties, and I am certain that his efforts will contribute to an
effective resolution of this problem.
One of the lessons of the 1980s, and surely one of the causes of the changes
that took place at the end of the decade, was the need to recognize the decisive
role of the human factor in the development process.

Economic growth has little

value unless it can provide adequate food, health and shelter for the world's
population.

At the same time, in the more complex and interdependent world of

today, the development of human resources must be a central feature of efforts for
economic development in the 1990s.

JVM./l7

A/S-18/PV.l
76

(The Secretary-General)
Our planet is suffering from the burden we are imposing on its physical
superstructure.

An ever-expanding population that produces and consumes in ever

growing amounts is threatening the very existence of future generations.
Underdevelopment and poverty have damaged the environment, as have profligate
production and consumption by the rich.

Living genera tions have no licence to

endanger the life prospects of future generations.

We must achieve a better

balance between population growth, resource utilization and the protection of the
environment.

Tackling this problem is an enormously complex task unprecedented in

human history; but we cannot shirk it.

The Conference on environment and

development to be held in Brazil in 1992 will provide a major opportunity to
address this challenge in a comprehensive and unequivocal manner.
To recognize·the multiplicity of humanity's current problems is an important
first step towards their solution.
another challenge.

Mobilizing the resources to meet them is itself

However, the special session is taking place at a time when

Govern ments around the world are reconsi der ing the uses to which they put their
resources.

The reduction in the number of armed conflicts and the relaxation of

poli tical tensions, in particular if reinforced by concrete arms reduction
agreements, will provide Governments with an opportunity to reallocate resources
from military purposes to pressinq economic, social and environmental needs that
they all recognize.
For the past two generations the developed countries have spent vastly more on
nuclear armaments than on protecting the physical environment.
environmental threat looms as large as the nuclear danger.

But today the

Among the developing

countries there are many whose military outlays far exceed what they spend on
health and education.

Despite the lesseninq of regional conflicts, world military

expendi tures in 1989 is es tima ted to have been close to a

trill ion dollar s -

approximately the same as the total external debt of the developing countries.

A/S-18/PV.l
77

JVM/17

(The Secretary-General)
Continued poli tical efforts, including the expanded use of this Organiza tion' s
international security and peace-keeping roles, can contain the threat of war.
Nevertheless, unless specific measures are ini tiated substantially to cut world
production and trade in arms the benefi ts from the reduction in tens ion may prove
to be chimerical.

Commi tmen ts are needed to convert armaments indus tries to

non-defence production and to give higher priority to the economic and social
proqrammes in na tional budgets.
The restructuring of the political systems and economies that is beinq carried
out by the countries of Eastern Europe should lead in the not-too-distant future to
the growth of their markets, thus facilitatinq exports from developinq countries
and the qreater participation of these countries in tho effort of the international
community to provide assistance to the developing countries, in particular the
least developed among them, in their undertaking to make up lost time.

There is

reason to be optimistic with reqard to active participation by the countries of
Eastern Europe in the decision-making process affecting our small and shrinking
planet.
At the time of the establishment of the United Nations Governments had a clear
perception of the world's future need for international economic co-operation, and
hence created the Bretton Woods insti tutions.

Those institutions will continue to

serve as solid founda tions for co-operation in the ir spheres of compe tence.
But much has changed in 45 years~
have been added.

New problems have emerqed and new tasks

The time has come for international financial institutions and

Governments to reflect on the experiences of the past in order to develOp, based on
a new vision of the future, more favourable conditions for mUltilateral development
co-ope ratio n.
Responding to these challenges and seizing these opportunities will require an
extensive international effort.

This special session may not be able to deal with

RH/2

A/S-18/PV.l
78
(The Secretary-General)

all the technical aspects of these myriad issues, but we can and should agree on
the fundamental principles and measures of international economic co-operation.
This would also help us qui de the del ibera tions rela tinq to the elabora tion of the
International Development Strategy for the Fourth Development Decade, the Second
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries and the Eighth United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
We shall to some extent be venturiN;! into the unknown.
time has come to be bold.

I firmly believe the

Success requires that we be more forward and outward

100kiN;l than our cautious human and political nature normally allows.

Addressing

the complex issues and bringing toqether the varying views on how to confront the
challenges ahead is a daun til'¥J task.

However, the current mood of ra tionali ty

suggests that we have progressed beyond sterile ideological debate.

we are in a

posi tion to agree on ways and means of achieving sustained and eqlli table economic
growth.

At the same time we have to address such urgent and fundamental issues as

explosive population growth, the environmental degradation of our planet and
respect for human rights.
For over 40 years this Organization has been a catalyst for change and
transforrna tion in global affairs.

It is now beinq given new and ex.traordinary

responsibilities in world affairs, as envisaged by its fOllnders.

We should set

ourselves a programme of work for the 19905, an agreed-upon global agenda.

The

United Nations in all its parts must remain relevant, efficient and effective.
have a unique opportunity.
The PRESIDENT:

We should not shy away.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I thank the

Secreta ry-General for his ve r:v important sta tement.

We

A/S-lB/PV.l

RH/2

~

79-80

AGEIDA ITEMS 8 AND 9

I:I'

(ENERAL DEBATE

JI
~j

The PRESIDENT:

We shall now begin the general debate.

In accordance

1

:1,1
!1),.

with the decision just taken by the General Assembly, the Assembly will also

,',1

,~;

l:

consider agenda item 9.

:~

"
li l

!i'

Before calling on the first speaker, I should like to propose that the list of

i l,:

li
'\

"

-~

speakers in the debate be closed this afternoon at 6 p.m.
If I hear no objection, it will be so decided.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT:

I therefore request those representatives wishing to

participate in the debate to inscribe their names as soon as possible.
I now call on the first speaker in the general debate, the representative of
Bolivia, who will speak on behalf of the Group of 77.

RH/1S

A/S-18/PV.l
81

Mr. GARCIA (Bolivia)

(interpretation from Spanish):

Bolivia is honoured

to begin the debate at this special session at a time when the topic of the
relationship between international co-operation and economic growth and development
is comi rY;J to the fore.
On behalf of the Group of 77, and on behalf of the Government and people of
Bolivia, I wish to extend a welcome to the latest Member of the United Nations,
new State of Namibia.

the

Its creation in the wake of a long strugqle against

oppression and discrimination clearly stands as a tribu te to justice and freedom.
The Group of 77 also stands ready with open arms to welcome into its midst the
Sta te of Namibia, which we are confi dent will contribute to strengtheniN:) the Group
and provide all of us wi th an occasion for rejoicinq.
The Group of 77, over which Bolivia has the honour to preside, was the main
initiator in the bringing about of this special session because we consider it
essential that,

in the decade we are now entering, yesterday's negative trends with

reqard to stabili ty, growth and equity be reversed and that we embark upon the
twenty-first century following a course that will revitalize the development
process, thus in turn achieving a more just balance between nations.
The 1980s has been a trauma tic decade for the rna jori ty of developinq
countries.

Deterioration in the terms of trade, inflation, the debt crisis, the

sudden decline in net flows of external capital and protectionism in the
industrialized countries have combined to oblige the majority of developing
countries to adopt prolonged and painful proqramrnes of adjustment.
Those adjustment processes have sometimes been the outcome of qovernmenta1
policy decisions and sometimes the automatic result of overriding economic
realities.

The effect, however, has been the same in virtually every case:

a

SUbstantial reduction in consumption, savings, investment, employment and per
capita income accompanied by a decline in the standard of 1ivinq of the people.

RH/1S

A/S-18/PV.l
82
(Mr. Garcia, Bolivia)
Thus the situation of the 1980s has contributed to widening the gap between

the developing and the industrialized countries.

The decade of the 1980s, which we

in La ti n America refer to as the wasted decade, must be put behind us.

It has,

however, left us with important lessons for the future, and it presents us with the
challenge of finding innova tive s trateg ies to consolida te stabil i ty and advance
towards economic growth, but qualitatively better economic growth.
allocation of resources,

The efficient

technological improvement and its concomitant

international competitiveness must combine with the creation of productive
employment and enhancement of the human person as the goal and purpose of
development.

This all implies a better distribution of wealth, satisfaction of the

basic needs of the people,

the elimina tion of critical poverty and makio:) use of

the productive potential of human capital.
This strategy of renewal must also include environmental protection through
endeavours of the industrialized and developing countries based on shared
responsibility.

The decade of the 1990s, the decade of hope, must also be a time

for consolidating democracy,
step~

freedom and ideological pluralism as indispensable

towards better systems for living.

These challenges will first and foremost require that the developing countries
rely upon appropriate policies.

The indus trial i zed countries, for their part, mus t

also have policies conducive to an international environment that encourages
development.
If any progress was made in this regard during the wasted decade, it is that,
by contrast with years past,

there is now clear recognition and virtual consensus

that appropriate macro-economic management is fundamental.

But it is essential

that there be symmetry between the actions of developed and industrialized
countries if all of this is to be meaningful.

There have been large budget

RH/IS

A/S-18/PV.l
83
(Mr. Garcia, Bolivia)

deficits in some industrialized countries, reliance on monetary instruments to
control inflation and the application of protectionist policies and unstable
foreign-exchange markets, and all of these have contributed to aggravating the
crisis of the 1980s.
Appropriate macro-economic management will no doubt have to be accompanied by
appropriate development strategies and far-reaching structural chanqe that will
enable countries to adjust not only their policies and institutional frameworks but
also the attitudes of their peoples.
Respecting the specificity and characteristics of each country, structural
changes should seek freer interplay between supply and demand in determininq
prices, growing openness of the economy, the reduction and gradual elimination of
subsidies and protectionist practices, and a new role for the Sta tee

The new Sta te

must be qualitatively better, seeking to remedy the shortcominqs of the market and
to quide the development process according to criteria of efficiency and equity.
But all of this is not enough to reactivate development in developing
countries.

A.llow me to list, with no attempt to be exhaustive, only four of the

obstacles requiring immediate attention:

first, solving the debt problem,

secondly, reversing protection ist practices; thirdly, applying policies and
instruments that will make the terms of trade more stable; and, fourthly,
increasing net flows of capital and makinq international co-operation more
effect i ve.
As to the question of debt, notwithstandinq the advances achieved - the Brady
Plan, greater flexibility in the Paris Club rules, including
and innovative agreements between developing countries -

the Toronto treatment,

th,e debt burden continues

to s train the investment capaci ty of developing coun tries.
Without investment there can be no qrowth, and without qrowththere can be no
development.

That is why this topic remains the centre-piece in restorinq

RH/18

A/S-18/PV.l
84-85
(Mr. Garcia, Bolivia)

macro-economic equilibrium and movirY;l towards development.

The second topic,

relating to protect ionism, and the second, relating to the terms of trade, are
undoubtedly crucial to achievirg change in in terna tional economic rela tions and
ushering in stability and economic growth.

In this regard the speedy successful

conclusion of the Uruguay Round is fundamental.

We hope that, toqether with the

foregoing, studies will be undertaken and agreements reached to qive greater
stabili ty to the prices of the raw ma terials of developing countries.
topic relates to increasing net capital flows.

The fourth

The drastic curtailment of those

flows has turned many developirg countries into what may more accura tely be
described as net exporters of capital.

This is an intolerable situation that must

be changed immedia tely.

In this regard, official development assistance should attain at least
0.7 per cent of the gross na tional product of the donor coun tries, a tarqet set for
the 1970s but never fulfilled except for some commendable exceptions.

We must also

insist that at least 20 per cent of that amount be for the benefit of the least
developed countries.
Likewise it is important that multilateral organs such as the International
Monetary Fund, the World Bank and regional organizations play a growing role at
this stage in the transition from stability to development.

More resources are

needed on concessional terms to that end.
With regard to flows of external private capital, we are aware that the
,1

~I

pre-condition for restorin::i those flows to an appropriate level is solution of the
debt problem.

However, with regard to public credits of a commercial nature, and

priva te credits enjoyirq public guarantees, mechanisms must be found for their
immediate enhancement.

One instrument that may foster tpis process is the

promotion of co-f inancial mechanisms wi th the World Bank and the reg ional and
sUbregional finanCing organs.

JP/td

A/S-18/PV.1
86
(Mr. Garcia, Bolivia)
Another crucial factor in enhancing capi tal flows is direct foreign

investment.
framework,

Attracting such investment depends upon an appropriate macroeconomic
transparent rules of the qame in host countries, and policies and

mechanisms in the industrialized countries that encourage investors.
I would not wish to conclude th is s ta tement wi thout allud inq to the experience
of my country, which makes crystal-clear the traumatic effects of the wasted
decade, the effort that the adjustment process has meant, and the difficulty
inherent in making the transition from stability to economic growth.
At the beginninq of the 1980s Bolivia had to contend with a dictatorial
setting in which human rights were constantly violated and drug-trafficking had
begun to take over the nation.

No SOoner had the country, at qreat sacrifice,

embarked upon democratic life than it suffered the severe blow of deteriorating
terms of trade and the rising cost of debt-service.

Through the dis10ca tions

produced by this situation, Bolivia fell victim to unprecedented hyperinflation,
with a steady decline in per capita income and in the population's standards of
living.
However, the country shouldered its burden with maturity and determination.,
As a result, Bolivia today can point with pride to a consolidated dellOcratic
process, for three successive Governments have been elected by the will of the
people during the last 10 years and, moreover, have assumed power as a result of
agreement among the leading political forces.
Similarly, structural adjustment measures in Bolivia, after inf1a tion had
reached levels of more than 24,000 per cent annually, have made it possible for
inflation in the last three years to be reduced to less than 20 per cent a year.
Similarly, since 1987 we have reversed the conditions of negative growth in the
economy, which for six consecu tive years had brought about a reduction in
per capita income of more than 26 per cent.

-

-------------,...,.
..

-

JP/td

A/S-l8/PV. I
87
(Mr. Garcia, Bolivia)
The Government of President Jaime Paz Zamora has decided to consolidate

stability and press forward with structural change.

To that end, in conSonance

with the ideas of price deregulation and an open economy, an effort is under way to
rationalize and trim the State and give greater impetus to private enterprise.

At

the same time, our Government takes a view of development which pursues growth
together with social improvement.
With regard to lightening the debt burden, we have taken pioneering strides,
as shown by our solution to the commercial debt and the imaq ina tive aqreements
reached with Argentina and Brazil.

Moreover, the recent Paris Club negotiations,

under which Bolivia was granted "Toronto treatment", have made possible a
substantial reduction in debt-servicing costs and siqnificant balance-of-payments
relief.

We extend our appreciation to the member countries of the Paris Club for

their construct i ve decision.

At the same time, I wish to express the deep

gratitude of President Paz Zamora and the people of Bolivia to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, for his invaluable personal
endeavours on behalf of my country in obtaininq the Toronto treatment.
I cannot fail to mention Bolivia's commitment to a comprehensive solution to
the problem of drug-traffickinq, a solution based on the principle of the shared
responsibility of consumer and producer countries and on a search for solutions
that will make it possible to develop substitute crops enjoying access to markets,
while eradicating excessive planting and pursuing druq-trafficking interdiction
activi ties.
As will be appreciated, in spite of all those efforts by country, it has had
an uphill struggle in reversinq the neqa tive trends in economic growth.

As a

re suI t, Bolivia can project no more than a modest growth of about 4 per cent in
gross domestic product over the next three years, which is consistent with

JP/td

A/S-18/PV.l

88
(Mr. Garcia, Bolivia)
macroeconomic constraints.

It is obvious that, in those circumstances, Bolivia

will not see its per capita income restored to the level it enjoyed during the
1970s before the s tart of the next decade.
What I have said clear ly illus trates clear ly the urgent need to change the
interna tional rules of the game.
The experience of Bolivia and of the developing countries in general shows how
deep is the people's yearning for improvement and social change.

Let us not forqet

that a weariness has set in among the developing countries as a result of the
con tinuous sacrifice demanded of their peoples through unremi t til"tJ processes of
adjus tment.
In this context, I must emphasize the importance of global integration,
international co-operation and the role of the United Nations in seekinq a
comprehensive solution to all those problems.
The Group of 77 approaches this session with high hopes, because, as I said at
the beginning of my statement, it could be a historic crossroads, defining the
future lines of international co-operation to stabilize the world economv,
revitalize the development process and narrow the gaps that separate the poor
countries from the rich, all of which are essential in order to consolidate
ideological pluralism and democracy and in order to set the world on a course to a
more prosperous and just twenty-first century.
The PRESIDENT:

The next speaker is Mr. Budimir Loncar, Federal Secretary

for Foreign Affairs of Yugoslavia, who will speak on behalf of the Non-Aliqned
Movement.
Mr. LONCAR (Yugoslavia):

It is a pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding

over this important special session.
My very first words and thoughts are addressed to the subject of Namibia.
independence of Namibia and its admission to membership of our Orqaniza tion is a

The

JP/td

A/S-18/PV.l
89-90

(Mr. Loncar, Yugoslavia)
great event for the people of this youngest African State, for southern Africa, for
the world at large and for the United Nations in particular.

With it, the

Non-Aliqned Movement and the policy of non-alignment have realized one of their
basic goals.

It is also fitting on this occasion to pay tribute to the

Secretary-General.
The coming together of two events - having Namibia as a new Member of the
United Nations and holding the debate on international economic co-operation and
development - has a deep symbolic meaning.
No one denies the historical fact that colonial times have left behind serious
disparities in the world's economic and social development.

What concerns us most

is that they are widening at an accelerated rate in some areas and regions.

The

solemn event to which I have referred, which marks the end of a long era, itself
dramatically warns us of the importance of this issue.
World developments have reached a crucial stage.

We have entered a new

historical scene, with a completely different POlitical and spiritual map in its
backqround.

JSM/ad

A/S-18/PV.l

91
(Mr. Loncar, Yugoslavia)
In the midst of these great changes and positive and - it is to be hoped irreversible processes, we should figure out the place and role of the developing
countries.

Indeed, what are the prospects for the vast majority of mankind, who

possess tremendous potential and yet, for the most part, are impoverished?
question lex>ms large.

This

The response must be both wise and prompt, practical and

comprehensive.

This is not impossible.

Have we not already opened avenues of

understanding?

Do they not offer responses to confronta tion and antaqonism,

divisions based on the ideology and military doctrines of yesterday?
development are but two facets of a single whole:

to

Security and

world stability.

We posed the same question in this forum 15 years ago.

We riqhtly argued then

that the problems of development would become the key issue of interna tional peace
and security, and that no partial solutions could be found to development
problems.

On the other hand, we were obviously not realistic in our belief that

declarations could alter the pattern of economic relations in the world.
Global in terdependence has become even more pronounced and complex today.
consequences of economic imbalances cut ever more deep, day after day.

The

The focus

on the relationships between East and West has been shifting to those between North
and South, which have assumed the shape of qrowinq economic dependence.
Economic integration is the dominant feature of our time.
qrowth and interdependence.
coming epoch.

Its basic loqic is

Growth should, indeed, be the motto of this and the

However, interdependence is not duly perceived on the world scale

and in historical perspective.

What would, for instance, isolated or restricted

growth or development, at the expense of others, the weaker ones, amount to?

It is

evident that in the long run it would have a disintegrative effect and its main
purpose, integra tion, would become the oppesi te, dis inteqra tion.
We have entered a stage when we can be more optimistic than ever before.
There are new notions about the world economy and its reintegration.

New options

JSM/ad

A/S-l8/PV.l
92

(Mr. Loncar, Yuqoslavia)
are emerqing on the social and economic scene, and reqional co-operation, which is
essentially centripetal, should be conducive to wider fields of co-operation and
integration.

Inteqration of the most developed countries need not pose a threat to

the less developed ones if it' is based on the bbvious loqic 'of the interdependence
of the world economy as a whole.

Therefore I note with sa tisfaction tha t the Bonn

Conference on economic co-operation in Europe recoqnized that increased economic
co-opera tion wi th in the process of the Conference on Securi ty and Co-opera tion in
Europe (CSCE) should not, detract from development co-operation and:'should irtclude
assistance to the developinq countries.

The fact that the developed countries,

especially the European Community and Canada, have made significant contributions
along that line inspires the hope that th is special session will be marked by the
efforts and desire of all to find a cdmrnon denominator of interests and agree on
further action.
Antaqonisms, contradict io ns and the waste of enormous resources on competi tion
and intimidation have qiven way to other preoccupations.

Instead of the balance of

power and fears, alternative new values are in the makinq:

a new system of

international security, and more reliable foundations of stability.

I am sure that

this session devoted to international economic co-operation and development can
qreatly contribute towards identifyinq where these foundations are to be souqht,
namely, in the new balance of interests, at the core of which lie the economic and
social spheres.
The non-aligned countries have constantly qiven the same priorities to
disarmament and development - to disarmament as the proper way of achievinq
economic prosperity.

We have taken

th~

path of disarmament.

Is it not natural

then to invest these capacities and potential, and above all, the resources,
development?

The point is quite obvious.

Development breeds development.

in

JSM/ad

A/S-l8/PV.l
93-95
(Mr. Loncar, Yuqoslavia)

Prog ress breeds proq ress.
full circle.

Whichever way we take, this two-way process comple tes a

All of this calls for a qlobal strateqy, not only for economic

development but also for the protec;:tion of the environment; for ensuring

cl~an

and

fo~

renewable sources of energYI for dealinq with population and social problempl

eradica tinq poverty I for comba tin;) drug abuse, terrorism and new mass diseases.
The existing multilateral mechanisms must be transformed into an instrument
adequate to the present and future challenges.

It qoes.. without sayinq that the

United Nations should be the cornerstone of this new structure of, international
rela tions.

."

.

It is clear that development can result only from a harmonious blend of
national efforts and adjustment, on the one hand, and a supportive international
environment on the other.
direction?

In other word$, we, should all chanqe.

But in which

In the direction of development for all.

The non-aligned and other developinq countries accept the responsibility for
their own developments, and they unequivocally confirmed this at their Ninth Summit
Conference.

They arema~inq tremendous efforts to mobilize human and material

resources at a high sqci,:ll cost.

They are ready to do even more.

the processes of economic and social reform are already under way.

In many of them
Many have

opened the doors to the cri teria and standards imposed by the world market.
it enouqh?

The answer is no, unless, as I said earlier, more favourable

international conditions are created.
followinq:

But is

first,

These imply, first and foremost,

the

resolution of the foreiqn-debt problem and a reversal of the

neqa tive net transfer of financial resources from developinq countries; secondlv,
free access to markets throuqh the reduction of protectionism,

in particular the

elimination of tariff barriers, or more favourable treatment for developinq
countries in areas such as services, trade-related investment measures, and
in tellectual property rights wi thin the framework of the Uruquay Round;

A/S-18/PV.l
96

FlM/21

(Mr. Loncar, Yugoslavia)
thirdly, revitaliza tion of the North-South dialogue on the reactiva tion of
development, as well as on other issues such as combatinq poverty, improved livinq
condi tion,~( development of human' resou rces, the environment, communica tions,
scientific and technological co-operation; and, fourthly, a special approach to the
solution of problems faciM the least-developed countries.
The approach to the issue of North-South dialoque should take into account the
interests of all.

SOlutions should be sought primarily on the basis of mutual

benefit, as well as of equality and respect for national independence.

New

relations require changes to be made in the spirit of interna tional solidarity and
social and human justice.
It is only in this kind of world that the developing countries can catch up
wi th the world economic trends that will mark not only the last decade of this
century but definitelY the early years of the twenty-first century as well.

That

is why the new international strategy for the fourth United Nations development
decade, which is currently beinq formulated, should ensure a coherent framework for
all international activities in the economic field.

The existinq economic and

development institutions and organizations should play an important role in the
elaboration and implementation of that strategy.
We are aware that one session cannot meet all expectations.

However, if it

gets to the core of the problem and provides an answer to at least one question namely, how to open a development cycle in the interest of all key to all other doors,

it may secure the

those leadin:) to world stabili ty and true de rro cra tiza tion

of international relations, which,

in themselves, are inseparable from the economic

and social spheres.
After all, have not human freedoms become the supreme value of this decade?
Is not the individual, with his creative POtential and dignity, the common

RM/21

A/S-18/PV.1
97

(Mr. Loncar, Yuqos1avia)
denominator, over and above politics, ideology, religion and race?

And yet that

same individual is not able to rise above his economic' and social environmen t.
That environment can be his chance, but also his ill fate.

If humanfreedbms are

our ultimate goal and the individual the main link the human chain, then a chain
reaction should be set off in the direction of development, the development of
nations, countries, regions, the whole world without exception.
The PRESIDENT:

The plenary meeting will start at exactly 3 o'clock this

afternoon, and in view of the lonq list of speakers, I appeal to members once aqain
to be punctuaL

I will take down the names of deleqa tions that '-are here at 3.10.

The meeting rose at 12. 55 p~m.
