A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/202
13 March 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 100 (c)

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/610/Add.3)]

49/202. Situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran

The General Assembly,
Guided by the principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights 1/ and the International Covenants on Human Rights, 2/
Reaffirming that all Member States have an obligation to promote and protect human rights and
fundamental freedoms and to fulfil the obligations they have undertaken under the various international
instruments in this field,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including the most recent, resolution 48/145 of 20 December 1993, as
well as those of the Commission on Human Rights, including the most recent, resolution 1994/73 of 9 March
1994, 3/ and those of the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,
including the most recent, resolution 1994/16 of 25 August 1994, 4/

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3/ See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1994, Supplement No. 4 and corrigendum
(E/1994/24 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
4/
95-77209

See E/CN.4/1995/2-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1994/56, chap. II, sect. A.
/...

A/RES/49/202
Page 2

Noting that the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran has responded to the request of the Special
Representative of the Commission on Human Rights for information concerning allegations of human rights
violations in that country, but that it did not allow him to pay a fourth visit to the country so that he might
obtain direct and first-hand information on the current human rights situation there,
Reaffirming that Governments are accountable for assassinations and attacks by their agents against
persons on the territory of another State, as well as for the incitement, approval or wilful condoning of such acts,
Noting the observation of the Special Representative that continued international scrutiny of human
rights and fundamental freedoms in the Islamic Republic of Iran is warranted and that the subject should remain
on the agenda of the General Assembly,
Noting also that the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, in its
resolution 1994/16, condemned the continuing flagrant violations of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Noting further the concluding observations of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination, the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on
the human rights situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the interim report of the Special Representative of the
Commission on Human Rights 5/ and the considerations and observations contained therein;
2.
Expresses its concern at continuing reports of violations of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran;
3.
Expresses its concern more specifically at the main criticisms of the Special Representative in
his recent reports with regard to the human rights situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran, namely, the continued
high number of executions, cases of torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, a failure
to meet international standards with regard to the administration of justice, the absence of guarantees of due
process of law, the discriminatory treatment of minorities by reason of their religious beliefs, notably the Baha’is,
whose existence as a viable religious community is threatened, lack of adequate protection for the Christian
minorities, some of whom have recently been the target of intimidations and assassinations, restrictions on the
freedom of expression, thought, opinion and the press, and, as noted by the Special Representative, continued
widespread discrimination against women;
4.
Expresses its grave concern at the continued widespread use of the death penalty, especially
where its use is in violation of the relevant provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
2/
5.
Also expresses its grave concern that there are continuing threats to the life of Mr. Salman
Rushdie, as well as to individuals associated with his work, which appear to have the support of the Government
of the Islamic Republic of Iran;
6.
Urges the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to refrain from activities such as those
mentioned in the report of the Special Representative against members of the Iranian opposition living abroad

5/

A/49/514, annex; see also A/49/514/Add.1 and 2.
/...

A/RES/49/202
Page 3

and to cooperate wholeheartedly with the authorities of other countries in investigating and punishing offences
reported by them;
7.
Regrets that the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran has still not permitted the Special
Representative to visit the country and thus has not enabled him fully to discharge his mandate by according him
full cooperation;
8.
Urges the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to implement existing agreements with
international humanitarian organizations;
9.
Calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to intensify its efforts to investigate
and rectify the human rights issues raised by the Special Representative in sections IV and V of his report, in
particular as regards the administration of justice and due process of law;
10.
Urges the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to carry out thorough, careful and
impartial investigations into the assassination cases of the three Christian ministers mentioned in the report of the
Special Representative;
11.
Also urges the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to comply with international
instruments on human rights, in particular the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which the
Islamic Republic of Iran is a party, and to ensure that all individuals within its territory and subject to its
jurisdiction, including religious groups and other persons belonging to minorities, enjoy the rights recognized in
those instruments;
12.
Endorses the view of the Special Representative that the international monitoring of the human
rights situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran should be continued;
13.
Calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to cooperate fully with the Special
Representative;
14.

Requests the Secretary-General to give all necessary assistance to the Special Representative;

15.
Decides to continue the examination of the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran, including the situation of minority groups, such as the Baha’is, during its fiftieth session under the item
entitled "Human rights questions" in the light of additional elements provided by the Commission on Human
Rights and the Economic and Social Council.

94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
