S/2014/893

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 December 2014
English
Original: French

Letter dated 9 December 2014 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I refer to my letter dated 3 January 2014 (S/2014/6) informing the President of
the Security Council of the progress made by the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed
Commission, and to his reply dated 8 January 2014 (S/2014/7), in which he took
note of my intention to continue the activities of the United Nations support team to
the Mixed Commission, with funding from the regular budget. In the same spirit, by
the present letter, I would like to inform you of the latest achievements and
activities undertaken by the Mixed Commission.
As you know, the United Nations established the Mixed Commission to
facilitate the implementation of the judgment of the International Court of Justice of
10 October 2002 on the Cameroon-Nigeria boundary and territorial dispute.
Through my good offices, and with the support of the United Natio ns Secretariat, I
have continued to facilitate the implementation of the judgment of the Court.
The mandate of the Mixed Commission includes supporting the demarcation
of the land boundary and delineation of the maritime boundary, facilitating the
withdrawal and transfer of authority, addressing the situation of affected
populations, and making recommendations on confidence -building measures.
Achievements to date in the implementation of the judgment of the Court include
the withdrawal of Nigeria and transfer of authority to Cameroon in the Lake Chad
area (December 2003), along the land boundary (July 2004) and in the Bakassi
Peninsula (a process which began in June 2006 and was completed in August 2008);
the delineation of the maritime boundary (May 2007); and the end of the special
transitional regime of five years, established under the Greentree Agreement in June
2006, and the exercise by Cameroon of its rights of sovereignty over the Bakassi
zone (August 2013).
The Mixed Commission also approved all of the recommendations of the
Working Group on the Maritime Boundary, including the provisions for cross border cooperation on hydrocarbon deposits straddling the maritime boundary
(March 2011).
In the course of 2014, the Mixed Commission continued to facilitate the
process, including by helping to maintain dialogue and communication between the
two countries. However, the deteriorating security situation in north -eastern Nigeria
impeded the conduct of the envisaged field visits, especially since the declar ation of
a state of emergency in the three border States of Adamawa, Borno and Yobe, owing
to the terrorist activities of Boko Haram. To date, the parties have agreed on the
14-67150 (E)

161214

*1467150*

161214

S/2014/893

delineation of 1,947 kilometres of an estimated total of 2,100 kilometres of land
boundary.
At a meeting held on 11 October 2014 in Yaoundé, the heads of delegation of
Cameroon and Nigeria expressed confidence that the remaining tasks of
demarcation could be completed without the dispatching of new field missions to
the boundary, because the technical teams had acquired consistent and reliable
knowledge of geographical and demographic data deemed sufficient to finalize their
work. Consequently, the Mixed Commission has adopted new measures aimed at
completing the implementation of the judgment of the Court, including in-office
cartographic methodologies to assess the remaining disputed areas of the land
boundary.
Meanwhile, the emplacement of pillars along the boundary has continued, with
289 pillars built between January and June 2014, bringing the total number of pillars
to 667; another 767 pillars remain to be emplaced. During the meeting of heads of
delegation held in Yaoundé, in October 2014, the parties officially expressed their
willingness to contribute to the pillar emplacement project through the trust fund,
and also agreed to call upon international donors to increase their assistance. Other
fundraising initiatives, through my Special Representative for West Africa and
Chairman of the Mixed Commission, may be required.
Throughout 2014, the Mixed Commission also undertook confidence -building
initiatives for the affected populations. However, additional resources are required
to implement joint cross-border programmes between the United Nations country
teams in Cameroon and Nigeria, particularly those in support of the populations
affected by the demarcation process. These additional resources would be used,
inter alia, to fund quick-impact projects for confidence-building among the
communities, in particular among women and youth in boundary areas. In
Cameroon, four projects in the areas of food security and micro -credit, water, green
energy, and capacity-building for women and youth, with an estimated value of
$6,352,625, have been finalized and submitted for approval to United Nations
agencies in Cameroon. In Nigeria, the programme has been approved by the
Government and the cost estimates for the selected projects are being finalized. The
Chairman of the Mixed Commission will seek extrabudgetary resources to
implement confidence-building projects consistent with the revised United Nations
Development Assistance Frameworks of both countries.
The committee which was established in February 2014 to prepare the land
and maritime boundary statement held two meetings, with the activ e support of the
Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat. The United Nations Cartographic Section
is also working to produce maps of the boundary statement, which will pave the
way for the production of large-scale maps.
Overall, it is expected that the field assessment of the areas of the boundary
not yet assessed would be completed by the end of 2015 or early 2016, depending
on the availability of the parties. Regarding the outstanding issues, most, if not all,
could be settled during the same period if the parties demonstrate flexibility and
adhere to compromise solutions. This, in turn, would allow for the finalization of
the demarcation activities, the final maps and the pillar emplacement work by the
end of 2016. However, completion of the bulk of the demarcation work will depend
on the ability of the two parties to reach an agreement on all the remaining areas of
disagreement in a timely manner.

2/3

14-67150

S/2014/893

After 31 December 2014, the following activities are required, in view of the
conclusion of the work of the Mixed Commission, as indicated above:
(a) Finalization, using remote-sensing methodology,
activities, final maps and the boundary statement;

of

demarcation

(b) Facilitation of boundary pillar emplacement financed by the trust fund
for the demarcation activities;
(c) Promotion of cross-border cooperation, including maritime cooperation,
and coordinated security monitoring along the land boundary;
(d) Finalization of confidence-building initiatives for local communities
affected by the demarcation;
(e) Implementation of the exit strategy by handing over the activities of the
Mixed Commission to the Joint Bilateral Commission and other subregional
structures.
I would like to recall that, until 2003, the Mixed Commission was funded
entirely from extrabudgetary funds. During the period from 2004 to 2014, the
activities of the Mixed Commission were funded through the United Nations regular
budget. The Governments of Austria, Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, Italy, Norway,
Pakistan, Sweden and Uruguay have provided in-kind contributions for the
substantive and technical work of the Commission (military and legal experts), in
addition to the logistical support provided by the Governments of Cameroon and
Nigeria, and the voluntary contributions of both countries, as well as those of
Canada, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
European Union, to the trust fund for the demarcation activities.
As has been the case in recent years, and given the cost-effectiveness of the
operation and the important tasks remaining at this juncture to help advance the
peaceful implementation of the judgment of the International Court of Justice, it is
my intention to ask for resources from the regular budget for the Mixed
Commission for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2015.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

14-67150

3/3
