S/2011/609

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 October 2011
Original: English

Letter dated 30 September 2011 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit to you the attached letter dated 26 September
2011 that I have received from Judge Khalida Rachid Khan, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (see annex).
In the letter, the President requests permission for Judge Bakhtiyar
Tuzmukhamedov to work part-time at the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
and to engage simultaneously in another judicial occupation from 28 September 2011
to 31 December 2011. During this period, Judge Tuzmukhamedov will be completing
his duties at the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation. He intends to resume
full-time work at the Tribunal thereafter, in order to complete the Nzabonimana
case, in which judgement is expected to be delivered around March 2012.
I note that, pursuant to Security Council resolution 1932 (2010), the term of
office of Judge Tuzmukhamedov will expire on 31 December 2011. However, it is
my understanding that the President of the Tribunal will seek permission for Judge
Tuzmukhamedov to continue serving at the Tribunal beyond that date, until the
completion of the Nzabonimana case, and may request the redeployment of Judge
Tuzmukhamedov to the Appeals Chamber of the Tribunal.
It falls to the Security Council to consider and decide on this request.
Accordingly, I would be grateful if you would bring the letter from President Khan
to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

11-52787 (E) 061011

*1152787*

S/2011/609

Annex
Letter dated 26 September 2011 from the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to the
Secretary-General
[26 September 2011]
I would be grateful if you could bring this urgent matter to the attention of the
Security Council.
Leave is requested for Judge Bakhtiyar Tuzmukhamedov to work on a parttime basis from 28 September 2011 until 31 December 2011, while engaged in
another judicial occupation.
Judge Tuzmukhamedov is requesting to work on a part-time basis to enable
him to complete his duties at the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation and
thereafter resume his work at the Tribunal on a full-time basis. Judge
Tuzmukhamedov has informed me that he will be paying for his own travel home
and back to the Tribunal as well as any expenses incurred.
Judge Tuzmukhamedov is involved in the Ndahimana and Nzabonimana cases,
which are the judgement drafting phase. the Ndahimana judgement will be delivered
as scheduled in November of this year. However, I have been informed by Judge
Bossa, the Presiding Judge in the Nzabonimana case, that despite all efforts to
maintain the original judgement delivery date, this case will be delayed until March
2012. I understand from my conversation with Judge Bossa that the delay is caused
primarily by the complexity of the case, that four members of the legal team are
new, the judgement coordinator has also been handling the Ndahimana case and that
the judges have been working simultaneously on other cases.
Judge Tuzmukhamedov has assured me of his commitment to the work of the
Tribunal and the complete and honourable discharge of his obligations. He has also
assured me that this arrangement will not give rise to any conflict of interest and
will not delay the judgement delivery in the Ndahimana and Nzabonimana cases.
In these exceptional circumstances and considering the importance of the
timely completion of the Nzabonimana case, I request that the Security Council
authorize Judge Tuzmukhamedov to work part-time from 28 September 2011 until
31 December 2011 and to engage in another judicial occupation in his home country
during that period.
(Signed) Khalida Rachid Khan
President

2

11-52787
