S/PV.9127

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9127th meeting

Thursday, 8 September 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mrs. Hackman
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-58498 (E)
*2258498*

S/PV.9127

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Expression of sympathy on the passing away of Her
Majesty Queen Elizabeth II
The President (spoke in French): At the beginning
of this meeting, on behalf of the Security Council, I
would like to express the deepest condolences to the
people and the Government of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland on the occasion of
the death of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. I would
also like to express our condolences to her family
and friends.
As Head of State, she was the longest-reigning
monarch of the United Kingdom. Her Majesty Queen
Elizabeth II reigned reassuringly during a period of
historic changes for both her country and the world. Her
entire life was devoted to the service of her country.
On behalf of Council members, I invite everyone in
the Chamber to stand and observe a moment of silence
in memory of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Ambassador of the United Kingdom.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank colleagues for this minute of silence.
Many will have memories of Her Majesty the
Queen during her long and distinguished reign. She
will be remembered, I think, for her dedicated service
at home, across the Commonwealth and around the
globe. Her extraordinary service fostered peace and
friendship worldwide.
The President (spoke in French): I would
like to once again express the condolences of the
Security Council.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
2/19

08/09/2022

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs; and Ms. Dragana Trif ković, Director, Center
for Geostrategic Studies.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I have been requested to brief on
the issue of “the supply of lethal weapons to Ukraine”.
It is a matter of public record that, since the Russian
invasion of Ukraine, which started on 24 February,
Ukraine has received for its defence force transfers of
weapons systems and ammunition from a number of
States. Information about transfers of such material has
been widely publicized by the Governments involved.
Those transfers have included heavy conventional
weapons, including battle tanks, armoured combat
vehicles, large-calibre artillery systems and uncrewed
combat aerial vehicles, as well as small arms and
light weapons. There have also been widespread and
independently verified reports of the transfer of major
conventional weapon systems to local armed groups in
Ukraine, including artillery rocket systems.
As a matter of general statement, any large-scale
influx of weapons to conflict-affected zones raises
many concerns, including the potential for diversion.
Those concerns should be taken with due regard, and
the international community has some instruments,
such as the United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms, to enhance transparency in arms transfers. I
encourage States to make use of those mechanisms.
Beyond the matter of the supply of weapons, we
must focus on how those weapons are used, in particular
considering the devastating impact on civilians and
civilian infrastructure caused by the use of heavy
weapons in Ukraine.
The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has recorded 13,917
verified civilian casualties since 24 February. The
actual numbers are believed to be significantly higher.
Most of the civilian casualties recorded were caused by
the use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects,
including attacks by heavy artillery, multiple-launch
rocket systems, missiles and aircraft.
22-58498

08/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

The war also continues to drive large-scale
displacement, with more than 6.9 million people
internally displaced and more than 7 million refugees
recorded across Europe. The Secretary-General has
consistently highlighted the severe humanitarian
impact of the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas and has repeatedly called on parties to conflict
to avoid their use in populated areas. I would like to
strongly reiterate that call here today.
Under international humanitarian law, combatants
must not direct attacks against civilians or civilian
infrastructure and must take all feasible precautions in
the conduct of military operations to avoid, or at least
to minimize, incidental loss of civilian life, injury to
civilians and damage to civilian objects.
On 24 August, the Secretary-General addressed
the Council (see S/PV.9115), marking the sad and tragic
milestone of six months since the invasion of Ukraine.
Throughout that period, we witnessed tremendous
devastation, with thousands of civilians killed and
injured, most as a result of the use of heavy conventional
weapons. The time to end that suffering is now. Let
us resolve to keep working for peace, in line with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Trif ković.
Ms. Trifković: At the outset, I want to express
my special respect for this high organ of the world
Organization and to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to speak. I consider every word spoken to
be a great responsibility.
When we talk about the war in Ukraine, it is
very important to look at it consistently and to take
into account the arguments of both warring parties.
Of great concern is the fact that often one hears only
accusations that are not supported by arguments, much
less evidence.
The view of the war of someone who is from Serbia
and who has survived and learned about the special
methods of warfare may differ from that of many
others who do not have that experience. That is why,
from the beginning, I considered the war in Ukraine
to be a hybrid war and compared it to the one waged
on the territory of the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s,
in terms of the external influence on war preparations
to the direct and indirect participation in the war of

S/PV.9127

various parties through the training, arming, bringing
volunteers to, and commanding of, an army. I will
mention a few of the most important examples.
The first is the case of a Croatian general, Špegelj,
a member of the Yugoslav People’s Army, who
smuggled weapons into Croatia through Hungary,
Austria and Italy, armed paramilitary formations and
prepared them for attacks on members of the regular
army even before the start of the war in Yugoslavia. In
October 1990, the counter-intelligence service recorded
a Špegelj conversation, from which it became clear
that he received help from the United States for those
operations. The leadership of Croatia, in agreement
with Slovenia, illegally imported large quantities of
weapons from former Warsaw Pact countries, such
as Hungary and Romania, and thus armed 100,000
members of paramilitary formations.
Another example is the arming of Muslims in
Bosnia and Herzegovina from 1992 to 1995 by Saudi
Arabia, Afghanistan, Turkey, Iran and others, which
was carried out through Croatia, but with the knowledge
and approval of the American Administration — headed
then by George Bush and later by Bill Clinton. Bosnian
Muslims were also armed during the embargo. The
biggest concession to Muslims is the permission given
by the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR)
to arm Croatian and Muslim units under the conditions
of an embargo on the import of weapons. Their basic
task was control of all kinds. There is evidence that
even weapons from the American Ramstein Air Base,
in Germany, were delivered to Muslim forces in Bosnia.
In 1994, Admiral Leighton Smith of the United States
and General Bertrand de Lapresle of France agreed that
arming Serbia’s neighbours was an important obligation.
A third example was the arming of Albanians in
1997 to incite a rebellion, in which weapons were taken
from military warehouses in Albania, transferred to the
territory of Kosovo and Metohija and handed over to
members of the terrorist Kosovo Liberation Army. It
should be noted that Albanian separatists from Kosovo
formed an official Kosovo army in 2018, in contravention
of resolution 1244 (1999), and that regardless of that
violation of international law, a number of countries,
including the United States, Great Britain, Turkey and
others have trained and armed that illegal army.
Today in Ukraine we can also see examples both
of direct interference in the conflict, with Western
countries sending weapons to the Ukrainians, and of
the use of third countries to supply weapons to Ukraine.

22-584983/19

S/PV.9127

Threats to international peace and security

A Ukrainian plane that took off from Niš loaded with
weapons recently crashed in Greece. Weapons are
also reaching Ukraine via various Asian and African
countries, and those weapons are killing the civilian
population in Ukraine, regardless of whether they speak
Ukrainian or Russian. The Center for Geostrategic
Studies, which I lead, recently sent a letter to the United
Nations Human Rights Committee, the Council of
Europe, the Red Cross and other institutions that states
the following facts.
It is evident that the Ukrainian army often uses
prohibited cluster weapons to target the civilian
population in eastern Ukraine. An inspection of the
situation on the ground revealed that between April
and July of this year, the Ukrainian army repeatedly
targeted Izyum with cluster bombs, which led to the
death of a large number of civilians. On 20 July, in
the Donetsk region, the Ukrainian army carried out
several missile attacks by United States high mobility
artillery rocket systems on the settlements of Olenivka
and Oleksandrivka, including on civilian objects
and infrastructure.
Then, on the night of 29 July, there was another
attack by the Ukrainian army on a detention centre
in Olenivka where prisoners of war from the Azov
Battalion were also held. As a result, 51 people died
and 75 were injured. On 30 July, the Ukrainian army
targeted the centre of the densely populated city of
Donetsk, which had previously been demined and
completely cleared. On that occasion, the Ukrainian
forces used Uragan missiles produced by NATO that in
addition to their standard destructive effect are equipped
with cluster munitions. Each of the rockets contained a
large quantity of banned PMF-1 “petal” anti-personnel
mines. They completely paralysed the city and its food
and water supplies to its inhabitants for several days.
From all of this, it can be concluded that the Ukrainian
side perceives civilians, as well as prisoners of war, as
legitimate targets and that its aim is to achieve as many
victims as possible, which goes against all rules of war
and international humanitarian law.
In addition, in many cases — between 20 and 30 per
cent — weapons that Western countries deliver to
Ukraine pass through corrupt members of the Security
Service of Ukraine and end up in third countries, often
in the hands of terrorists. That increases the danger
that many regions could be further destabilized. There
are well-founded suspicions that some weapons from
Ukraine have already been transferred to Bosnia and
4/19

08/09/2022

Herzegovina and Kosovo and Metohija — areas that
are still endangered by potential outbreaks of renewed
conflicts years after the end of the war in Yugoslavia.
There are indicators of renewed preparations for
unrest in Kosovo and Metohija through instructions on
increasing the presence of NATO forces.
The situation today is more than dangerous, and the
hybrid war threatens to turn into a large-scale direct
conflict. Given the state of modern weapons, that calls
into question the survival and future of our civilization.
The Security Council has a great responsibility to
prevent conflicts and facilitate the establishment of
peace and security. The first step in that direction
requires that Western countries stop supplying weapons
to Ukraine and that the black market in arms be closed.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Trif ković for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russia): At the outset, allow me to express to my
heartfelt condolences to the Government and people
of the United Kingdom following the passing away of
their monarch, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.
We thank Mrs. Nakamitsu and Ms. Trif ković for
their briefings. Unfortunately, we could not hear part of
Ms. Trif ković’s statement due to technical difficulties.
We hope that she will be able to circulate the text of her
briefing later for the benefit of Council members.
Since the special military operation in Ukraine
began we have discussed various aspects of the
situation there. We and the Council’s Western members
have different views on the origins of the Ukrainian
crisis, as well as on the transformations that have taken
place in the country since the anti-constitutional coup
of February 2014. It is clear that our former Western
partners are trying at all costs to evade responsibility
for Ukraine’s steady deterioration from a state of
independence to that of an anti-Russia, for ignoring the
eight long and continuing years of the Kyiv regime’s
shelling of the people of Donbas and for glossing
over the unwillingness of the Ukrainian authorities to
implement the Minsk agreements.
Meanwhile, a majority of Member States are
becoming increasingly convinced of the multifaceted
nature of the Ukrainian crisis. They understand that
the reasons for it cannot be found in simplistic Western
22-58498

08/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

notions of Russian guilt. That explains their desire,
first and foremost, to reach a cessation of hostilities
and seek solutions at the negotiating table. We are
regularly hearing appeals for peace from our colleagues
in developing countries. Today we propose to jointly
analyse the factors that are obstacles to seeing their
wishes fulfilled.
We launched our special operation to protect the
people of Donbas, in accordance with Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations, after the Kyiv regime,
with the approval of its Western sponsors, publicly
killed the Minsk process. It was a difficult but necessary
decision after it became clear that Ukraine’s military
action against the Donetsk and Luhansk people’s
republics was inevitable. That has been confirmed by
Ukrainian General Staff documents that have been
found during the special military operation. One of
the special military operation’s goals also became the
de-Nazification and demilitarization of Ukraine with
a view to ensuring that there would no longer be any
threats to the Donbas or to Russia from its territory.
As we all know, only a month after the operation
began, the Russian-Ukrainian talks had already
virtually agreed on the outlines of a future peace
agreement. Peace seemed so close that as a goodwill
gesture we withdrew our troops from the occupied
regions of Kyiv, Chernihiv and Sumy oblasts. It was up
to the Kyiv authorities, who were ready to say the word,
but at that point our Western partners got involved, since
this scenario did not suit their purposes. I am referring
primarily to London and Washington, which give NATO
its orders. The fact is that Ukraine has been of interest
to them solely as a pawn in the geopolitical struggle to
weaken Russia since the illegal Maidan coup, so that a
peaceful solution would not work for either Britain or
the United States. Envoys arrived in Kyiv to impress
upon Mr. Zelenskyy and his team that the West was
prepared to do anything to ensure Ukraine’s victory
except through direct military intervention. Along
with that came the slogans claiming that the destiny of
democracy would be decided in the clash between good
and evil in Ukraine. At the same time, Josep Borrell
Fontelles, the chief diplomat of the European Union
(EU), breaking every rule of diplomacy, declared that
“this war will be won on the battlefield”.
Poland, the Czech Republic and the Baltic States
were in their usual Russophobic hysterics, while the
now former British Prime Minister Boris Johnson was
far more engaged in inciting Ukraine than addressing

S/PV.9127

his own country’s problems. President Biden cheered
on Kyiv too. As we know, President Zelenskyy
consequently disavowed all the agreements and together
with the British secret services orchestrated a blatant
provocation in Bucha, after which the chance for peace
was lost. That was how the President of Ukraine made
a fatal mistake for his country. But what we want to
talk about today is not that but the role of our Western
colleagues in using Ukrainians to launch the largestscale proxy war in history against Russia, until the last
Ukrainian falls.
Let us analyse what is happening today. For all
practical purposes, NATO is at the helm directing
Kyiv’s actions in the theatre of war. Ukrainian military
intelligence officials have publicly admitted that
Washington is directly involved in coordinating every
target of the multiple-launch rockets of the American
high mobility artillery rocket systems. Ukraine is
awash in Western military trainers, special operations
personnel and mercenaries. A number of NATO
countries are conducting training courses for Ukrainian
armed units. We said in one of our previous meetings
(see S/PV.9114) that saboteurs were being trained at
the military base in the Czech city of Český Krumlov
to carry out a terrorist attack in the Donetsk people’s
republic. There is information that the Pentagon is
planning to launch a mission to provide military and
technical assistance to the Kyiv regime, and we have
heard of similar plans by the European Union.
According to the most conservative expert estimates,
the United States and its allies have spent $20 billion
on military support for Ukraine in the past months of
this year alone. According to American media reports,
the Biden Administration intends to request another
$20 billion in emergency funding for the first quarter
of 2023 alone. The Ukrainians have been consistently
given to believe that with Western weapons — modernday Wunderwaffe — they will be able to turn the tide
of the military campaign and defeat Russia. We will
not comment on those beautiful but empty fairy tales
except to say that this mass deception of the population
perpetrated through President Zelenskyy and his
entourage will have tragic consequences for Ukraine,
and at the moment we are still far from the end of this
self-destructive process. I hasten to say, however, that
Western weapons are not playing a decisive role on the
battlefield, regardless of the claims to the contrary by
our former partners and their Ukrainian vassals.

22-584985/19

S/PV.9127

Threats to international peace and security

With minimum risk to our soldiers and civilians, the
Russian army is gradually and methodically destroying
not only the obsolete Soviet weapons that the Eastern
European countries have been happy to unload but
also NATO’s modern weapons. The only difference
is that after receiving long-range NATO artillery and
rocket launchers, together with Western intelligence,
the Kyiv regime has begun to target civilian and other
infrastructure objects that it had previously been unable
to reach. The results have been a massacre in Olenivka
and the continued shelling of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant and the civilian areas of the Donbas.
By loading up Ukraine with weapons that are in
active use by the Armed Forces of Ukraine against
civilian targets, the countries of the EU have violated
their own internal rules — the so-called Common
Position — which prohibit issuing export licences for
weapons if that creates an obvious risk of violating
international humanitarian law and also require
taking the risk of their unauthorized re-export and
illegal trade into account. EU States have similarly
disregarded the provisions of another brainchild of
theirs, the international Arms Trade Treaty, which
requires every exporting State to assess in an objective
and non-discriminatory manner whether the arms
transferred would harm peace and security and whether
their use might violate international humanitarian law.
The Treaty explicitly prohibits States from authorizing a
transfer of conventional weapons if the State concerned
knows with certainty that they will be used to commit
acts of genocide, crimes against humanity or attacks on
civilian objects or civilians.
In order to scrounge up new weapons, especially on
the eve of the meeting of NATO Defence Ministers in
Ramstein today, the Zelenskyy regime has attempted to
create at least an appearance that Ukraine can launch an
offensive. Contrary to elementary principles of military
strategy, Ukrainian propagandists at the highest levels
of Government publicly shared with the world plans for
an offensive to regain lost territories that were eagerly
relayed by the Ukrainian and Western media. As far as
we could tell, even the leadership of the Armed Forces
of Ukraine was against this, but Ukraine’s Head of
State was adamant following his conversations with his
American and British colleagues. The result is that the
fields near Mykolayiv and Zaporizhzhya and the forests
near Kharkiv are strewn with the corpses of thousands
of Ukrainian soldiers who were sent to certain death
and who the rearguard did not allow to retreat. A few
minor villages were taken and needless to say there was
6/19

08/09/2022

nothing approaching a breakthrough, as the military
experts well know. But the Western media have already
trumpeted that Ukraine has launched a counteroffensive that must be supported with a new supply of
Western weapons. That created the necessary media
backdrop for the meeting in Ramstein, which was
exactly what Mr. Zelenskyy and his Western masters
were aiming for. That means there is every chance that
more gas will continue to be poured onto the fire of the
Ukrainian conflict in the form of further deliveries of
Western weapons.
Will that change the situation on the battlefield?
Not in any significant way, and most leading military
experts openly agree on that. The new weapons will
not be able to change the balance of power, but they can
prolong the agony of the Zelenskyy regime and delay its
inglorious demise. They will also prolong the suffering
being visited by the West on the Ukrainian people,
who are the sacrifice in its geopolitical struggle with
Russia. And, of course, it will only delay any prospects
of peace in Ukraine, which with the exception of the
Western bloc is what an absolute majority of United
Nations members want.
Let us look at who benefits from that scenario. It
is a strange coincidence that the main beneficiaries
are precisely those beating the drums of war the
loudest — the United States and Great Britain. Their
defence contractors are making fabulous profits and
their share prices are climbing at a stunning rate. Clearly,
the American and British weapons lobbies are not ready
to give up such profits, and their pressure on politicians
will only grow. Besides that, Ukraine is not only a huge
platform for recycling ageing NATO weapons but also
a testing ground for new ones and for advertising them
for export. It would not be in the West’s interest to lose
such an opportunity and it would therefore be naive to
suppose that Washington and London will change their
inflammatory rhetoric in the near future.
What are the consequences and risks of this
situation for the world and above all for Europe? In
the short term, they mean the proliferation of weapons
resold by corrupt Ukrainian officials and their falling
into the hands of terrorist and criminal groups, as
Ms. Trif ković mentioned earlier. As early as June,
Jürgen Stock, the Secretary General of INTERPOL,
warned about the great interest that organized crime
has shown in the spillover of weapons from Ukraine
onto the black market. That threat is so great that the
Security Service of Ukraine has already begun to put
22-58498

08/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

out fake news that Russia may be moving Western
weapons into Europe, and that means that the situation
has already spiralled out of control. The Western
military leaders are already openly admitting that they
are not in a position to trace the end users of its weapons.
But they cannot be unaware that corrupt Ukrainian
officials have established channels for putting Westernmade weapons on the black market, and a significant
percentage of them go directly from warehouses into
the hands of smugglers. There are all kinds of offers
for their sale on the Darknet. We have seen similar
situations in the Balkans and the Middle East in the
recent past, in which Western military arsenals were
subsequently clandestinely re-exported to Europe and
used by criminal groups on European territory or fell
into the hands of terrorists. However, the leadership of
Western countries has unfortunately learned no lessons
from that and is now turning Ukraine into a global hub
for illegal weapons supplies that may very soon be used
by terrorists in Europe, Asia, the Middle East or Africa.
The proliferation of man-portable air defence
systems (MANPADS) and man-portable anti-tank
systems (MANPATS)is a particular threat. These
types of weapons pose enormous risks to international
civil aviation and rail transport, which is why their
circulation is strictly regulated at the international
level. The NATO countries are well aware of that. In
the 2000s NATO spent huge amounts on destroying
surplus MANPADS components in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Hungary, Montenegro and a number of
other countries within the framework of the Partnership
for Peace programme. The United States, realizing
the danger of the MANPADS they had supplied to
Afghanistan in the 1980s, also went to great lengths
to buy them back. But now the Western countries have
forgotten all about that, and in seeking to arm Kyiv
at any cost, they are violating all their international
obligations regarding the circulation of MANPADS
and MANPATS, including those agreed in the General
Assembly and in the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export
Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods
and Technologies.
Indirect confrontation between NATO and
Russia objectively increases the risk of a direct clash
between Russia and NATO, regardless of the claims
that everything possible is being done to prevent such
a scenario. We have been groundlessly accused of
nuclear blackmail, while Britain’s new Prime Minister,
Liz Truss, has openly affirmed her readiness to use
nuclear weapons and push the nuclear button. Before

S/PV.9127

her, no one had made such irresponsible statements.
Has NATO crossed the red lines? In 2020, United
States presidential candidate Joe Biden tried to accuse
Russia of that merely on the basis of speculation in The
New York Times that Russia had allegedly secretly paid
the Taliban to kill American troops in Afghanistan.
British Members of Parliament then argued that a
permanent member of the Security Council should
not supply arms and training to the very fighters who
had prevented a peaceful resolution of the conflict in
Afghanistan. According to those criteria, the Western
countries crossed those red lines a long time ago, and
more than once.
Let me now address my colleagues from developing
countries. We requested today’s meeting because we
want those countries to be aware of the cynicism and
mendacity of the calls for peace from the States of the
collective West, as well as their appeals to us to stop
our so-called war of choice. By creating a neo-Nazi
hornet’s nest at our borders and supporting the Kyiv
regime’s war against the people of Donbas since 2014,
they left us no choice. As President Putin has said, we
did not start this war — we are ending it. In other words,
we are ending the war that the Ukrainian regime, with
the support of Western sponsors, began in 2014 against
its own people. Our former Western partners do have
a choice. They can continue supplying weapons to the
conflict zone, contrary to all international norms and
their own declared principles, encouraging Ukrainians
in their unrealistic calls for defeating Russia on the
battlefield, or they can make the Zelenskyy regime
sit down at the negotiating table and try to address
the reasons that led us to launch the special military
operation — all of which can be ascribed either to
actions of Ukraine or actions by the West.
Unfortunately we have no faith in the good sense
of the Western countries. They have repeatedly
demonstrated their willingness to commit any
crime and engage in any venture to ensure the wellbeing of the so-called golden billion for the sake of
maintaining world dominance and pursuing their
neocolonial policies. And their realization that the
world has irrevocably changed since 24 February has
only strengthened their determination to fight to the
last Ukrainian. We do, however, have faith in the good
sense of the developing world — the countries of Asia,
Africa and Latin America — and we hope that they will
demonstrate it, not only for their countries’ sake but for
all of humankind.

22-584987/19

S/PV.9127

Threats to international peace and security

Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and
Ms. Dragana Trif ković, civil-society representative, for
their briefings.
The Security Council held meetings on the situation
in Ukraine on Tuesday (see S/PV.9124) and Wednesday
(see S/PV.9126), and now we are meeting again
today. We need to focus every one of our meetings on
finding solutions to end the war. This war has already
caused far too many deaths, destroyed far too much
civilian infrastructure and had grave economic effects
internationally. We are very concerned about the signals
that we are proceeding towards a war of attrition,
which humankind certainly does not need. My country
reiterates its rejection of war. It is time to silence the
guns in Ukraine. More weapons mean more death, war,
destruction and distress, and more civilian victims.
There is a clear and obvious correlation between arms
proliferation and precarity. We urge the parties to cease
all verbal and military escalations, as well as any action
likely to stoke confrontation.
The purpose of the Security Council is security.
It needs to live up to that purpose in every one of
our meetings. The Council is our primary platform
for shaping peace. Every time we meet, we need to
collectively mobilize our efforts to find a solution to this
conflict. My country will continue to work tirelessly in
the quest for peace, and we support those who propose
alternatives outside of the realm of weapons. This war
must be stopped — and quickly. The peoples of the
world are expecting us to make concrete proposals to
end it.
Finally, I would like to express my country’s
condolences to the people of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and extend our deep
sympathy to them on the occasion of the death of Her
Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Russia’s unprovoked and illegal war is a violation of
Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty and of
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. It
is the most significant threat to international peace and
security that the world is currently facing.
Ukraine has every right to defend itself under the
Charter, legally and morally. It is doing so with great
bravery. Ukraine is fighting not just for its existence;
it is fighting in defence of the principles of the Charter
8/19

08/09/2022

itself and in defence of the United Nations system.
And it is succeeding. Thanks to the sacrifices of the
Ukrainian people, we know that Putin’s troops are
tiring, his losses are significant, his supply lines are
vulnerable and his territorial gains are ephemeral. We
have seen that Russia is struggling to maintain stocks
of equipment, exacerbated by component shortages
resulting from the international sanctions that are
aimed at ending the war. Russia is now turning to Iran
to supply unmanned aerial vehicles, and, in a clear
violation of United Nations sanctions, to North Korea
to supply ammunition. There remains one simple way
to end the war — Russia must withdraw its troops
from Ukraine and Ukraine’s territorial integrity and
sovereignty must be restored. Any negotiation must be
premised on that fundamental principle.
The United Kingdom is proud to support the
Ukrainian people. We will continue to do so in the
face of Russia’s assault on their sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We will continue to stand against
that aggression and for freedom, democracy and the
sovereignty of nations around the world.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her briefing
today, especially with less than a day’s notice from the
Russian Federation.
I would like to begin by joining others in expressing
our deepest condolences to the royal family and to the
people of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the Commonwealth of Nations
on the passing away of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth
II. The Queen lived an extraordinary life dedicated
to service. Her legacy will loom large in the pages of
British history and in the story of our world.
Before I go further, I think it is important to
make sure that we are clear what today’s meeting
is about. It is a transparent attempt to distract from
yesterday’s meeting on the forced displacement of
Ukrainian citizens (see S/PV.9126), during which the
representative of the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights clearly stated that the Office had
received reports of torture, in conjunction with Russia’s
abhorrent use of filtration camps.
Moving on to address what we just heard from
the Russian delegation, I would ask representatives
to assess what we just heard in the light of the
following fact. Earlier this year, we warned of Russia’s
premeditated intention to invade Ukraine, including
22-58498

08/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

with an unprecedented build-up of military forces along
Russia and Belarus’s borders with Ukraine. We can all
recall the Russian delegation’s fervent insistence in this
Chamber, and in a series of tweets and social media
posts, that its massive mobilization was only a routine
military exercise and that it had no plans to invade
Ukraine. I think that that says enough. However, Russia
now has the gall to blame other countries for refusing to
step aside as it seeks to destroy another State Member
of the United Nations, in violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law.
Like the United Kingdom, the United States
is proud to stand with Ukraine and our allies and
partners from more than 50 countries in providing vital
security assistance in support of Ukraine’s defence of
its sovereignty and territorial integrity in the face of
Russian aggression. The United States is committed to
supporting the people of Ukraine as they defend their
lives, their liberty and their democracy. We are not
hiding that support. Ukraine and all States Members
of the United Nations have every right to defend
themselves. We will not stop our support to Ukraine
just because Russia is frustrated that its attempt at
regime change has not gone according to plan.
Later this month, leaders from around the world will
gather here to reaffirm their commitment to the Charter
and its foundational principles. It bears repeating that
all countries have an inherent right to self-defence,
consistent with Article 51 of the Charter. That is a
simple, straightforward principle. Every member of
the United Nations has a right to its sovereignty and
territorial integrity. I encourage all the members of
the Council to consider this question. If they were in
Ukraine’s shoes, how would they respond if a bigger
neighbour invaded their territory? If their neighbour
sent its armies into their cities and lands, what would
they do? What would they ask of the international
community? None of us here would simply let our
country’s history and identity be attacked, our cities
shelled to rubble, our people killed, our territory taken.
We would appeal for international support in the face of
such naked aggression.
Russia’s claims that the United States and the West
are escalating and prolonging the conflict are false.
They are cynical attempts to deflect attention from
Moscow’s role as the sole aggressor in an unnecessary
and brutal war for which the world is paying a collective
price. Let me be clear that the United States is not
using force against Russia. President Biden has been

S/PV.9127

clear. The United States is not seeking a war between
the United States and Russia. But we will not fail to
condemn President Putin’s choice to launch and pursue
the invasion of Ukraine.
Speaking of scrounging for weapons, as my
Russian colleague did, even now Moscow is in the
process of purchasing millions of rockets and artillery
shells from the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea for use on the battlefield in Ukraine, which,
as Ambassador Woodward said, would be a clear and
unequivocal violation of Security Council resolutions.
Before Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine started,
the United States, Ukraine and our partners and allies
engaged in intense diplomacy, seeking every avenue
to defuse conflict and find ways to address mutual
concerns about security in Europe and beyond. Russia
did not take that path. Now Ukraine is responding to
that invasion as any of us would — by defending itself.
We salute the Armed Forces of Ukraine and all
Ukrainian citizens who continue to inspire the world
with tremendous skill and profound courage. We have
provided security assistance to enable Ukraine to
defend itself and restore its control over its sovereign
territory. But we are not just helping Ukraine defend
itself, we are helping it to deal with the consequences
of this awful war. The United States has also provided
nearly $1.9 billion in humanitarian assistance in
Ukraine and the region since Russia first invaded
Ukraine eight years ago. We have channelled a total
of $8.5 billion in budget support to Ukraine through
World Bank mechanisms. We are also making sure
that any assistance to Ukraine’s defence is responsible
and limits unintended consequences. We take very
seriously our responsibility to prevent the diversion
or illicit proliferation of weapons. We are working
with Ukraine to ensure accountability for assistance,
even amid the challenging circumstances of war. The
Ukrainian Government has shown that it too takes that
responsibility seriously. We welcome the Ukrainian
Government’s recent announcement of its formation
of a new commission to strengthen the monitoring of
donated military equipment.
In conclusion, let me say it again. War is not the
answer. The conflict, Russia’s atrocities, its filtration
and forced displacement, the streams of refugees and
displaced persons must end. But that will happen only
when Russia decides to respect and comply with the
United Nations Charter.

22-584989/19

S/PV.9127

Threats to international peace and security

Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): The Government of Ghana
has learned with great sorrow of the passing away of
Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II in the early hours of
today. We are deeply saddened by the loss of the United
Kingdom’s longest-serving monarch and head of the
Commonwealth of Nations. This is a moment of great
sadness for the many across the world who cherished
and held the Queen in high esteem as a person and a
sovereign. On behalf of the Government and the people
of Ghana, we offer our profound condolences to the
royal family, the Government and the people of the
United Kingdom and the Permanent Mission of the
United Kingdom to the United Nations.
At the outset, I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, for her briefing. We have
also taken note of the contribution of the civilsociety representative.
The Security Council is meeting for the third time
in three days to discuss the war in Ukraine once again.
While we note the continuing interest in the aggression
against Ukraine, we are also seriously concerned about
the fact that the meetings of the Security Council have
not constructively supported the diplomatic action
required in the immediate term for ending the hostilities
and helping the parties find a mutually acceptable,
comprehensive and lasting solution to their conflict.
As we have said previously, and as is consistent with
international law, the Charter of the United Nations,
the decision of the International Court of Justice
and resolutions ES-11/1 and ES-11/2 of the eleventh
emergency session of the General Assembly, the invasion
of Ukraine, a sovereign Member of the Organization, is
unjustified. With the war showing little signs of abating,
and considering its unique circumstances, we believe it
is important that the international community devote
every possible effort to finding a pacific solution to the
conflict, but in a manner that also ensures that there are
no benefits accorded to parties whose ab initio actions
are unacceptable under international law.
We must continue to work to eliminate the real risk of
the war engulfing the entire European continent, which
could lead to a generalized and widespread conflict
with devastating consequences for all of humankind.
We therefore call for a de-escalation of tensions and
urge all the relevant actors to conduct themselves in a
manner that encourages confidence-building and fosters
trust and reconciliation. We note with deep concern the
resumption of shelling near the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
10/19

08/09/2022

power plant despite the clear and looming risk that it
presents to Ukraine and the world at large. We call for
greater cooperation by the parties to realign the status
quo at the power plant with the seven pillars of nuclear
safety and security outlined by the International Atomic
Energy Agency and reiterate the call for the urgent
delineation of a safe zone around the plant.
Ghana encourages the sustained commitment of
all the parties to the Black Sea Grain Initiative and of
the other actors involved to helping to bring critical
food aid to people in other parts of the world where
famine-like conditions exist and populations, including
children, are on the brink of starvation. Rising fuel
prices are rapidly being translated into elevated and
unprecedented cost-of-living standards, especially in
developing countries. Increasingly, life is becoming
unbearable, and tensions appear to be festering among
populations as they scramble to survive. We must
therefore work together to find sustainable solutions and
prevent the worsening energy crisis from degenerating
into a global security crisis.
As the Secretary-General noted in his statement
on Tuesday (see S/PV.9124), we need peace in
Ukraine — peace that is founded on nothing less than
the norms and principles of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations. Ghana stands firm in the
belief that only diplomacy and dialogue can bring about
the peaceful solution that military engagements have so
far failed to deliver.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Ghana’s continuing
and unwavering support for the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to begin by expressing to the
delegation of the United Kingdom Mexico’s solidarity
with regard to the death of Her Majesty Queen
Elizabeth II, who embodied a sense of duty and service
to her people.
I am grateful for the briefing by High Representative
Nakamitsu, and we have also taken note of the
information that Ms. Trif ković provided to us.
Before I begin, I would like to point out that my
delegation has several times brought up the importance
of focusing on the possible implications of arms
transfers related to the conflict in Ukraine, which
is unquestionably an extremely relevant topic. Yet
considering the time we have had during the crisis to
include this vital issue in our discussions, my delegation
22-58498

08/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

is surprised at the haste with which this meeting was
scheduled and convened. Matters of this importance,
especially when they can be foreseen, should be
scheduled sufficiently in advance, not at the last minute.
Furthermore, we reiterate that the Security Council’s
deliberations on this issue should lead to concrete
action aimed at fulfilling its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. We
have met at least 27 times since the beginning of the
war, and so far the Council has limited itself to issuing
a single presidential statement (S/PRST/2022/3),
sponsored by Norway and Mexico, expressing deep
concern about the situation in Ukraine and of course
supporting the efforts of the Secretary-General in the
quest for a peaceful solution. Given the gravity of the
situation, that is utterly inadequate. We regret that in
addressing the crisis, the Council has confined itself
to continuing its deliberations, while ignoring the
executive powers conferred on it by Article 24 of the
Charter for ensuring prompt and effective action by the
United Nations in order to deal with a breach of the
peace or an act of aggression.
Mexico’s concern about arms transfers is not
limited to the current situation but also relates to the
transfers that have been going on since the beginning of
the conflict in eastern Ukraine in 2013. As long as the
Security Council does not shoulder its responsibility
for addressing a situation involving an invasion such
as the one that Ukraine is confronting, we acknowledge
the natural right to legitimate self-defence and acquire
arms to that end. However, that must always go hand
in hand with the protections and safeguards needed to
minimize risks and prevent diversions of weapons or
their use to commit grave and systematic violations of
human rights or international humanitarian law.
We have taken note of the statements concerning
the precautions taken by the exporters selling and
shipping the weapons. However, the high volume of
transfers necessarily implies a certain degree of loss
of control over their life cycle, which increases the
inherent risks of trafficking and diversion. Criminal
organizations will certainly be eager to exploit such
gaps. We must also be mindful of the implications of
the proliferation of civilian-owned weapons. If there is
one thing we should have learned from recent history, it
is that such situations result in the spillover of weapons
being trafficked to other conflict zones — as we have
clearly seen in the Sahel — and putting the hopes for
peace in post-conflict situations in jeopardy.

S/PV.9127

We must also acknowledge the impact of the use
of all types of weapons. The highest price has been
paid by civilians, with the destruction of residential
areas, deliberate attacks on infrastructure and civilian
objects and the shelling of railway stations, schools
and hospitals. Explosive weapons with indiscriminate
humanitarian effects have become commonplace. That
is absolutely unacceptable.
Worrisome arms transfers go back approximately
10 years; it is almost unimaginable what a decade of
arms flows means and the effects that it may have
in future. Conflict Armament Research published a
report in 2021 detailing only transfers between 2018
and 2020 to the Donetsk and Luhansk regions. The
research points to the provision of a wide range of
weapons and ammunition, mostly from neighbouring
countries. It also highlights the practice of deliberately
obliterating markings to avoid any efforts to trace them
to the source, all in contravention of multiple standards,
political agreements and legally binding instruments
on arms transfers.
In addition to more traditional weapons, various
reports, including from authorities in the Netherlands,
point to the transfer of a Buk surface-to-air missile
system that resulted in the downing of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 in eastern Ukraine in 2014. That is just
one concrete example of the very serious consequences
of an irresponsible transfer that caused the deaths of
hundreds of passengers on a commercial airliner that
had no connection to the conflict in Ukraine.
With the regrettable prospect of the continuation of
the conflict in Ukraine, the international community
should be unequivocal in demanding accountability in
arms transfers. We therefore call on all countries that
are party to the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) to adhere
fully to its provisions, especially those relating to the
denial of transfers that would be in violation of the
Treaty and the application of strict risk analysis. But we
equally call on those who are not yet party to the ATT
to responsibly comply with the highest precautionary
standards in their transfers, with truly objective criteria
that transcend private or geostrategic interests.
Mitigation measures, including non-re-export
and clear end-use clauses, must be an indivisible part
of such assessments and arms transfer agreements.
And there must clearly be a commitment to actively
monitor the human rights situation and ensure respect
for international humanitarian law in any future
arms transfers.

22-5849811/19

S/PV.9127

Threats to international peace and security

But beyond the current decisions to approve new
sales and transfers, it is also time to establish concrete
measures for arms control in the post-conflict period.
I conclude by emphasizing that military means will
never be the solution. The international community
must therefore focus on promoting diplomatic
understandings that will lead to the end of this war,
and not on supplying arms to a conflict whose end,
unfortunately, is still very uncertain.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me join others in
expressing our most sincere condolences to our British
colleagues and, through them, to the British royal
family and all British and Commonwealth citizens
for the passing away of Queen Elizabeth II. We pay
tribute to her unique contribution to building peace
and reconciliation, and our thoughts are with all those
grieving today.
(spoke in French)
I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
(spoke in English)
The right title of the meeting today should have
been “Worldwide solidarity and support for a country
that has been brutally attacked by its neighbour
whose intentions are to wipe it from the map”. That is
because, in our view, that is all we can discuss here
today — not weapons and calibres, including those that
reportedly Iran and North Korea, two countries under
sanctions, are unlawfully providing to Russia. There
are mechanisms and instruments for that. They work
very well, and we agree on the need to strengthen them
further. Therefore, for this delegation, the meeting is
about solidarity, help and support to a country in need.
During these six long months, beyond the
brutality of a war of choice, the world has witnessed
two remarkable experiences — first, the heroic and
unwavering resistance of the Ukrainian people, army
and Government and, secondly, the international
community’s incredible solidarity with, and support
for, Ukraine. As we know, solidarity, help and support
come in different ways and forms. They came on
2 March, when 141 Member States stood on the right
side, with Ukraine, and only four sided with Russia.
They continue every day with vivid expressions
of sympathy on the streets of almost every capital in
the world, which have proudly displayed Ukraine’s
colours. They come with all forms of assistance for
the millions brutally uprooted from their homes, who
12/19

08/09/2022

are welcomed and cared for in neighbouring countries.
They come through humanitarian help for those many
millions more who need food on the table, milk for
their babies, medicine for the sick and shelter for those
whose homes have been turned to rubble by Russian
bombs. They come also — and rightfully so — in the
form of direct defensive military aid to a Government
and a people who are under premeditated, unprovoked,
unjustified, indefensible and unacceptable attack by a
neighbour who wishes them well by dropping bombs
and destroying their homes.
And no, there are no warring parties in Ukraine.
There is an aggressor and a country rightfully
defending itself.
We also could not entirely hear Ms. Trif ković, but
please do not bother to distribute the statement, since we
can easily complete the missing part of the propaganda.
Since the very beginning of this madness, it
has been clear that Russia’s aggression is not only
against Ukraine and its people. It is also an attack on
international law and the Charter of the United Nations
and a danger for European security architecture.
Standing for and helping Ukraine today is therefore
both a moral duty not to let down 44 million souls that
Kremlin wants to subjugate, as well as a key security
imperative. Albania is proud to be part of those who are
doing what they can to help Ukraine and Ukrainians
defend themselves.
Around this table, no one here knows better than us
what sovereignty, independence and the right to selfdefence are and mean. Article 51 of the Charter is clear.
It provides an unquestionable legal basis for individual
States to offer any assistance to a country exercising
its inherent rights to self-defence and the defence of its
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Therefore, taking a collective stand against
an illegal war of conquest is the right course and a
contribution to future security in Europe and beyond.
In the face of the deliberate and barbaric targeting of
civilians and civilian infrastructure, with widespread
evidence of war crimes and crimes against humanity,
standing for Ukraine is standing for life.
We understand the clear intention is to slice the
Ukraine tragedy into discussion pieces, isolating
specific aspects and interests and pushing a certain
narrative. It will not succeed, and we do not buy it. We
will always agree to thoroughly discuss every aspect
on an issue, but let us not lose sight of the big picture.
22-58498

08/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

In this case it is — why we have this war and who is
responsible for it and all its consequences. Russia
started the war, Russia is responsible for the war and
Russia can end the war at any time. Ukraine’s war
and solidarity with Ukrainians are therefore all about
protecting freedom, peace and security, development,
prosperity, friendly relations, fair trade with mutual
benefits, principles and values, laws and commitments
and the Charter of the United Nations. Our solidarity
stands against the Kremlin’s reckless actions and
therefore against aggression, invasion, war crimes,
crimes against humanity, widespread destruction,
the killing of civilians, including children, forced
deportation, food insecurity leading to starvation,
world economic and trade disruption and disrespect for
international law.
All of those are in total opposition to everything
we commonly aspire to in our efforts to make the world
a better place for all, not just for the Kremlin and its
expansionist dreams. Russia did not go to Ukraine with
flowers, but with guns. There is no surprise that it was
not welcomed with flowers but with guns. And as we
have seen, it has been outgunned. Let us not forget that
if Russia wins the war, there may be no Ukraine. Who
would be so naive as to believe that Russia would stop
there, if we allowed it to continue?
Mrs. Kamboj (India): At the outset, our deepest
condolences go to the United Kingdom. Our Prime
Minister has tweeted that Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth
II will be remembered as a stalwart of our times. She
provided inspiring leadership to her nation and people
and personified dignity and decency in public life. I
am pained by her demise and my thoughts are with her
family and the people of the United Kingdom at this
sad hour.
Turning to the topic at hand, our thanks go to High
Representative Nakamitsu for her detailed briefing. We
also thank the civil-society briefer for her remarks.
We believe that internationally agreed principles
and regimes should be respected and upheld by all
countries. The Council is aware that since the conflict
in Ukraine began, India has consistently called for
an immediate cessation of hostilities and an end to
the violence. We have emphasized that dialogue and
diplomacy are the only way forward. In our view, it
is therefore regrettable that the situation in Ukraine
has shown no significant improvement despite regular
Council discussions, with today’s meeting being the
third in as many days in this week alone.

S/PV.9127

In the meantime, we very much hope that the
international community will continue to respond
positively to the calls for humanitarian assistance.
India has recently dispatched its twelfth consignment
of humanitarian aid to Ukraine. Our assistance is
in keeping with the human-centric approach of the
Government of India and is a central tenet of our
national beliefs and values, whereby we perceive the
whole world as one family.
Going forward, India’s approach will be to promote
dialogue and diplomacy with an overarching aim of
ending the conflict and working with other partners
to mitigate the economic challenges emerging from
the Russia-Ukraine conflict. It is in our collective
interest to work constructively, both within and outside
the United Nations, to seek a speedy resolution to the
conflict. We continue to reiterate that the global order
is anchored in international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and respect for the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of States.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): On behalf of the Kenyan
delegation, I would like to take this opportunity to
convey with a profound sense of sadness our deepest
condolences to the royal family, the Government and the
people of the United Kingdom, as well as our colleagues
at the Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom
following the demise of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth
II. She will be remembered for her exemplary sense of
duty and leadership of her people and Commonwealth
throughout her seven decades on the throne.
I thank High Representative Nakamitsu and
Ms. Trif ković for their briefings.
The Council is meeting today for the third
time in three days on the situation in Ukraine, this
time to discuss the supply of weapons. However,
underlying the discussion and those preceding it is
the challenge of how to collectively build a stable and
peaceful global order. We continue to be extremely
concerned about the ruinous damage the war is doing
to Ukrainian lives, to Ukraine’s legitimate right to its
sovereignty and territorial integrity and to regional and
international security.
However, even as the Security Council debates the
conduct of the war, as we are doing today and urging
for every effort to be made to stop it, we must be more
responsive in our fundamental mandate to protect
international peace and security in a comprehensive
manner. In our view, that means that the Council and

22-5849813/19

S/PV.9127

Threats to international peace and security

the international community need to fully face up to
the strategic thinking that led to this war and the allied
responses to it. We should act to minimize the risk of
escalation while establishing channels of dialogue that
will lead to a stable global order.
Our countries are suffering various forms of harm
due to the war. In Africa, its direct and indirect effects
are damaging our aspirations for development, for united
and comprehensive action against climate change and
for security. The mobilization of militarized alliances;
the utilization of sanctions, blockades, cyberattacks
and of proxies in third countries; and the undermining
of multilateral institutions are robbing us of the ability
to collectively resolve our most serious challenges.
They are distorting the global economy by shifting
patterns of trade and investment. That is undermining
the engine of globalization that most countries have
sought to recruit in their search for growth and
development. It is in the interests of the entire global
community, and of developing countries in particular,
for the ending of the war to usher in a new age of global
peace and cooperation. We urge the warring parties and
their allies and partners to enter into comprehensive
discussions on a set of guidelines that will reanimate
their willingness to modify their strategic posture in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Those discussions should be guided by identifying
areas where cooperation is necessary and achievable,
for instance through undertaking ambitious climate
change mitigation and adaptation and supporting a
trade and investment regime that is open enough to
avoid undermining worldwide economic development.
They should honestly face each other’s most serious
security concerns and conduct regular dialogue to
clarify positions, minimize misunderstandings and
reverse risks of escalation.
The spirit and letter of the Charter of the United
Nations offer a fundamental template. Its application
should be guided by the honest recognition that it has so
far not proved to be a sufficient constraint on the illegal
actions of the most powerful States as they assert or
protect their interests. Rather than seeing that reality
rupture multilateralism further, all countries — and
especially opposed military Powers — should understand
that the Charter can still be of great service to them all
if it is applied through cooperation, compromise and
de-escalation. In addition, every region should also
reflect that approach in order to identify and clarify
regional areas and sectors for cooperation, as well as
to undertake dialogue guided by the security concerns
14/19

08/09/2022

of neighbouring countries. We once again call for a
cessation of hostilities and for a political settlement
that respects the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Ukraine.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to join
previous speakers in conveying our deepest condolences
to the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, our friends and colleagues at the Permanent
Mission of the United Kingdom to the United Nations
and the people of the United Kingdom on the passing
away of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. As the world
mourns her departure, we in Brazil will remember
with fondness her trip to our country, where she was
received with great warmth. Her decades-long sense of
duty and devotion to her people will not be forgotten.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General and
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs Izumi
Nakamitsu for her tireless work in what has been an
extremely intense, and yet frustrating, few weeks
concerning the disarmament file. I would also like to
welcome the participation of Ms. Dragana Trif ković, of
the Center for Geostrategic Studies.
We cannot but be disheartened by yet another
meeting in this Chamber — the third this week — on the
topic of Ukraine. The conflict has dragged on for more
than six months and, despite the constant discussions
in the Security Council, we have not been successful in
fostering the suspension of hostilities.
Brazil has made its position clear since the
outbreak of hostilities, in both the Council and the
General Assembly. We hold the firm conviction
that threats and force will not lead this crisis to a
lasting settlement. Military action inflicts damage,
undermines faith in international law and jeopardizes
millions of people’s lives. We remain deeply concerned
about the humanitarian impact of the conflict and are
convinced that there is no alternative to the negotiation
of a ceasefire as a first step on the way to resolving the
present crisis.
As a party to the Arms Trade Treaty, Brazil
abides by the set of principles outlined in that legal
instrument and believes that they offer a valuable
guideline for the transfer of arms. First, the Treaty
highlights the importance of respecting, and ensuring
respect for, international humanitarian law and for
international human rights law, regardless of military
objectives or security concerns. Secondly, it urges
States to effectively regulate their arms trade so as to
22-58498

08/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9127

prevent diversion through systems of effective national
control. Those principles should serve the objectives,
which we also believe are applicable to the present
crisis, of promoting responsible action in the arms
trade, building confidence, reducing human suffering
and contributing to international and regional peace,
security and stability.

This war will not end militarily. Sooner or
later — and we hope that it will be sooner — there will
have to be real dialogue and a political solution based
on respect for sovereignty, international law and the
Charter of the United Nations. Let us make sure that
the strategic objective of peace is not undermined by
the immediate military tactics of war.

Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): Before
I begin, I would also like to join other colleagues in
expressing the heartfelt condolences of the United
Arab Emirates to the Government and the people of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
on the passing away of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth
II. Having celebrated the seventieth Jubilee this past
summer, Her Majesty’s reign spanned an intense period
of our modern world, and there is a lot to be said that
will be remembered about Her Majesty’s long, welllived and remarkable life, but at the moment, I shall
limit myself to this. We stand together with the United
Kingdom at this difficult time, and we want to express
how truly inspired we have been by Queen Elizabeth’s
duty to, and life in service of, her people. As we mourn
Her Majesty’s passing away, we must also celebrate an
extraordinary life and Her Majesty’s achievements and
legacy, which lives on.

The pursuit of the maintenance of international
peace and security is rarely a simplistic equation. As
long as armed conflicts remain a brutal part of our
reality, we must recognize the importance of striving
for the safe and secure transfer of weapons. It is crucial
that the ultimate recipients of arms and ammunition be
accounted for so that, down the line, such weapons do not
inadvertently end up in the hands of terrorists. History
has taught us the danger of focusing on short-term
objectives and ignoring the longer-term implications of
the flow of lethal weapons in the calculus of decisions
about the supply, transfer, stockpiling and safe storage
of arms.

With regard to the subject of today’s meeting, I
would like to thank High Representative Nakamitsu
for her updates, and I also take note of the briefing by
Ms. Trif ković.
We have met, as others have said, countless
times to discuss the war in Ukraine, its causes and
its consequences. We do not forget that what is
happening in Ukraine is a result of the war, but as I
have emphasized before in this Chamber, while the past
cannot be changed, we still can have an impact on the
present and the future trajectory of this conflict. That
is why this topic deserves our attention in the correct
forum and with the technical expertise required to fully
discuss it.
The United Arab Emirates has advocated
repeatedly for a cessation of hostilities and a peaceful
settlement to the conflict. In order to get to a peaceful
end to the conflict, any action taken by the parties or
other stakeholders needs to be measured and deliberate.
The war has been raging for more than six months and,
sadly, it risks settling into a protracted conflict, with
both sides intent on military victory. We should not
resign ourselves to that reality, and the countless lives
at stake depend on that.

In that regard, we note with concern the warnings
expressed by the Secretary General of INTERPOL in
June about the dangers of the availability of weapons and
the real possibilities of criminal groups exploiting their
proliferation. That is especially dangerous in the case
of smaller, easily portable light weapons. We support
INTERPOL’s calls for suppliers to track and trace the
weapons entering Ukraine in order to minimize the risk
of any potential increase in transnational crime and
regional instability during and after the conflict.
The geopolitical tensions rising across the globe
risk undermining the very mechanisms that we have in
place to manage conflict, promote stability and ensure
prosperity and development for all of our nations.
For example, they are having wider ramifications on
global arms control, as demonstrated by the lack of
an agreed outcome at the tenth Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, which is the cornerstone of the
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament regime. The
recent terrorist attacks by Al-Shabaab in Somalia and
displays of heavy weaponry by the Houthi terrorists
in Yemen serve as continuous reminders of the risks
associated with the limited enforcement of the existing
arms control mechanisms. Unless we do something, the
proliferation of small and light weapons will continue
to grow exponentially.
Let me conclude by noting that, as others just said,
this is the third time that the Security Council has met

22-5849815/19

S/PV.9127

Threats to international peace and security

in three days to discuss issues related to the conflict in
Ukraine. It demonstrates the gravity of the situation and
the multifaceted nature of the challenges we face. At
the same time, we must ensure that we are able to make
headway on other important issues on the Council’s
agenda and that dynamics driven by this issue do not
spill over or impact our ability to forge consensus
on other crucial files. To that end, we must redouble
our efforts to achieve tangible results on a range of
unresolved issues that deserve our equal attention,
from the Middle East, to Africa and around the world.
The Council has a responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and we must seek to
discharge that duty to the fullest possible extent.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): At the outset, I should also
like to join other colleagues in conveying our deepest
condolences to Ambassador Woodward, her team and
the British people on the passing away of Her Majesty
Queen Elizabeth II. We in Ireland recall with particular
affection her State visit to Ireland in 2011 — the
first such visit by a serving British monarch since its
independence. That visit not only helped consolidate
and cement the Northern Ireland peace process, but also
affirmed the close bonds of friendship and affection
between our two peoples and islands. It was a moment
of genuine healing and reconciliation, and we thank her
for that. May she rest in peace.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Nakamitsu for her briefing. We also note the presence
of Ms. Trif ković.
Ireland believes in, and is fully committed to,
the core principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, which include the sovereign equality
and territorial integrity of States. Ukraine has the
same fundamental right as every other sovereign and
independent State to choose its own foreign policy and
to ensure the security and defence of its own territory.
As the Secretary-General has said, the principles of the
Charter are not an à la carte menu. Article 2, paragraph
4, applies to all Members of the United Nations — and
so does Article 51. There are no exceptions or waiving
of those principles.
Let us not forget that in the weeks leading up to
Russia’s illegal and unjustifiable further invasion of
Ukraine in February, Ukraine showed remarkable
restraint in the face of Russia’s military build-up at its
border and its use of provocative propaganda. Russia’s
decision to recognize the non-Government controlled
areas of the Donestk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine
16/19

08/09/2022

as independent entities has not changed those borders
one iota. They did not change in 2014, and they have not
changed since.
Ukraine did not commit or threaten to commit an
armed attack against Russia. It was Russia that attacked
Ukraine and sought to justify its invasion by invoking
Article 51 of the Charter. It is Russia that now seeks to
deny a fellow United Nations Member that same right
to self-defence. Contrary to some claims, there is no
credible evidence of diversion and no indication that
exports are taking place, other than in accordance with
national laws and international procedure. That includes
military support provided by the European Union to
help Ukraine exercise its inherent right of self-defence
and defend its territorial integrity and sovereignty.
We would ask that Russia should stop trying
to use the Security Council as a platform for its
disinformation campaign, painting itself as the victim
of its own aggression in the face of the heinous acts
it has committed in Ukraine. We once again call on
Russia to desist.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): Allow me to also
express Norway’s heartfelt condolences to the British
royal family, the people of the United Kingdom and the
Commonwealth and our colleagues on the passing away
of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth.
I thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her
statement. I also take note of Ms. Trif ković’s briefing.
Let me make four short points today.
First, Norway reiterates that Russia’s war on
Ukraine is a serious violation of international law.
Russia must abide by the order of the International
Court of Justice and immediately suspend its military
operation in the territory of Ukraine.
Secondly, we reiterate our unwavering support for
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within
its internationally recognized borders.
Thirdly, we call on Russia to immediately end
its indiscriminate attacks. Norway unequivocally
condemns all violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, including the
reported killing of Ukrainian civilians, and strikes on
civilian infrastructure.
Finally, Ukraine has a right to defend itself against
Russia’s armed attack, as enshrined in Article 51 of
the Charter of the United Nations. Other States are
22-58498

08/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

entitled to respond positively to Ukraine’s call for
assistance in the exercise of its legitimate right to selfdefence. A simple fact remains: Russia’s aggression
against Ukraine is blatantly illegal. Russia must fully
and unconditionally withdraw its forces and military
equipment from Ukraine. Russia started this war, and it
must now choose to stop it.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, on behalf of the Chinese delegation, I would like
to express our deep condolences on the passing away
of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II and to convey our
sincere sympathy to our colleagues in the Permanent
Mission of the United Kingdom and, through them, to
the British Government and people.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Nakamitsu for her briefing. I also listened carefully to
Ms. Trif ković’s statement.
The Ukrainian crisis, which has lasted for more
than six months, has fully demonstrated the tremendous
human suffering caused by weapons and ammunition.
The fierce fighting in various places continues to rage
on, and more weapons and ammunition continue to
flow onto the battlefield, giving rise to the worrisome
prospect of a protracted, escalating conflict.
Since the beginning of the crisis in Ukraine, China
has always emphasized that the delivery of weapons
will not bring about peace. Adding fuel to the fire
will only complicate the problem. The harsh reality
and humanitarian consequences of the past six months
have fully demonstrated that. Equally worrisome is the
scenario of a large number of weapons and ammunition
falling into the wrong hands, which would bring about
endless trouble and create security risks in Ukraine
and beyond. We have noticed that the negative effects
of that are already starting to show. There have been
many lessons learned in that regard. During the hasty
withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan, as much
as $7 billion in weapons and equipment was discarded
at will, fuelling a rampant black-market trade in which
weapons are openly sold in broad daylight and easily
accessible to anyone, even children. Those weapons
will be a long-term obstacle to the rebuilding of lasting
peace in Afghanistan and will pose huge risks to the
security of the countries of the region. The guns that
were left in Somalia by foreign troops in the 1990s have
now become easily available to terrorists, who use them
to kill people and commit violence, threatening the
lives of local civilians, including women and children.
In China, the chemical weapons left behind by those

S/PV.9127

who invaded Chinese soil in the 1930s and 1940s are
still a serious threat to people’s lives and property and
to the environment.
China has always maintained that dialogue and
negotiation are the most realistic and feasible way to
resolve the crisis. Only by seeking joint, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security can we achieve
long-term stability in Europe and the world. The
Ukrainian crisis is proving to us once again, in a
brutal way, that pursuing power politics and absolute
security, maitaining an obession with military force
and creating divisions and confrontation cannot bring
about peace and stability, and neither can it bring about
reconciliation and tranquility. All the parties concerned
should maintain contact and communication, leave
room for diplomatic negotiations in order to the create
conditions for a political settlement and strive for an
early ceasefire and the cessation of hostilities.
I would like to stress again that, on the Ukraine
issue, China has always believed that the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all countries should be
respected, the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations should be respected, the legitimate
security concerns of all countries should be taken
seriously and every effort conducive to resolving the
crisis peacefully should be supported. We will continue
to stand on the side of peace, dialogue and humanity
and play a constructive role in the proper resolution of
the crisis in Ukraine.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
On behalf of my country, I would first like to
once again express my delegation’s condolences to the
delegation of the United Kingdom and to reaffirm the
deep friendship between the people of France and the
people of the United Kingdom.
I would like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
On 24 February, Russia invaded Ukraine in
defiance of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations.
Council members will recall that one week before,
on 17 February, during Russia’s presidency of the
Security Council, the Russian Deputy Foreign Minister
said that that scenario was the result of Western
paranoia (see S/PV.8968). Russia then imposed a war

22-5849817/19

S/PV.9127

Threats to international peace and security

on the entire world, with major consequences on the
humanitarian, food, energy and nuclear fronts. We
must face the facts. Russia alone is responsible for the
current situation. Russia inflames the situation every
day by continuing its armed aggression on the ground.
France has resolved to help Ukraine defend its
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We did so as
Ukraine now fights for the values and principles that we
all share. Those values and principles are also outlined
in the Charter of the United Nations — territorial
integrity, the independence and sovereignty of States,
the prohibition on territorial conquest by force and
condemnation of wars of aggression. It is our duty,
and it is within the purview of the Council, to uphold
those rules, as they alone allow for international peace
and stability.
That is why France, in its national capacity,
furnishes military support, which helps to provide
Ukraine with a way to defend itself. Similarly, at the
level of the European Union, a collective decision was
made to fund weaponry, which is needed to ensure that
Ukraine can withstand the Russian aggression. We
would like to create the conditions that would enable, at
a time of Ukraine’s choosing, either a military victory
or negotiated peace under terms that would be different
from the terms Ukraine would be forced to accept were
we to abandon it to its fate. Such military assistance will
continue for so long as the Russian armed aggression
persists. We will also continue to provide humanitarian,
economic and political assistance to Ukraine.
As we have said, Russia alone is responsible for the
war being waged against Ukraine and the entire world.
France vigorously rejects the arguments put forward by
those who would have us believe that the war is being
fuelled by Ukrainians and Europeans. Let us not shift
blame. France will continue to stand with Ukrainians
as they fight to defend their sovereignty.
If we want to silence the guns, we already know
the solution. The International Court of Justice gave
us the solution on 16 March. Russia must immediately
cease all its military operations in Ukraine. It must
withdraw from the territory of Ukraine and respect
its internationally recognized borders. It must stop its
dangerous advance.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
18/19

08/09/2022

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today our Western colleagues did not address
the topic at hand, as the facts prove that they did not
merely indirectly but also directly participated in this
proxy war. That is why they use their favourite tactic
of shifting the focus from the topic of the meeting
onto an activity with which we are all familiar by
now — levelling accusations at Russia.
We refuse to comment on the speculations made
by our American and British colleagues about filtration
camps and torture and brutality by the Russian army.
We did that on several occasions, including yesterday
(see S/PV.9126). However, we note the statements
made by those in the West that support Kyiv. They said
that they provide Kyiv only with defensive weaponry.
However, it is not the Russian army that is shelled by
Ukrainian armed forces using those so-called defensive
weapons, but the civilian residential areas of Donbas.
I note another point made in the statements by
the representatives of the United Kingdom and the
United States. They said, in no uncertain terms, that
Russia allegedly purchases weaponry from Iran
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. I
would like to ask them now to either provide us with
evidence of that assertion or acknowledge that they are
spreading unreliable information to Security Council
members. Let me also say straight away that neither any
publication of that information in the Western media
nor meaningul comments, conjecture and inconclusive
statements made by American officials can be
considered as evidence.
As has been already stated several times, we are
no longer surprised by anything. Any statement that
appears in the mass media is almost automatically
being used by Western partners to level accusations
against Russia.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I acknowledge the
representative of terrorist Russia in the permanent seat
of the Soviet Union.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing.
In 2008, Russia invaded Georgia. In her 2008
Christmas message, Queen Elizabeth II said what is
today one of her most famous quotes. It is not only
famous, but also very relevant in the light of the tragic
22-58498

08/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

events in Europe as a result of the illegal, unprovoked
and unjustified war of Russia against Ukraine and the
entire civilized world. Queen Elizabeth II said,
“When life seems hard, the courageous do not lie
down and accept defeat; instead, they are all the
more determined to struggle for a better future”.
The world will miss the Queen’s wisdom. May Her
Majesty rest in peace.
By launching its aggression against Ukraine in
2014 and by invading Ukraine in February of this
year, Russia has violated the norms and principles of
practically all fundamental international documents,
including bilateral and multilateral agreements, the
Helsinki Final Act and, first and foremost, the Charter
of the United Nations.
No one on the planet, but those in Damascus
and Pyongyang, would doubt that, and it makes no
sense to waste any more of the Security Council’s
time on substantiating that point. Let me refer to
General Assembly resolution ES-11/1, adopted at the
eleventh emergency special session on 2 March by
an overwhelming majority of 141 member States. It
deplores in the strongest terms the aggression by the
Russian Federation against Ukraine, in violation of
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter.
International law guards the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine. International law
explicitly confers on us the inherent right to selfdefence, enshrined in particular, in Article 51 of the
United Nations Charter. Not a single State present in
the Chamber, besides Russia, is responsible for the
Council’s inability to effectively perform its functions
under the United Nations Charter. It is solely the
presence of Russia in the permanent seat of the Soviet
Union that has immobilized the Security Council in
relation to ensuring the peace and security of Ukraine.
We are defending ourselves, Europe, the world and
the Charter of the United Nations, and we will keep
on fighting until every inch of the sovereign territory
of Ukraine, including Crimea, is liberated. I emphasize
that in strict accordance with the provisions of Article
51 of the Charter, which we all have committed to
uphold. We will fight against the occupiers until
all Russian soldiers who entered Ukraine to kill its
people have been defeated. The only thing that Putin
can do to save the lives of his soldiers is to order their
immediate withdrawal.

S/PV.9127

The level of human suffering and destruction in
Ukraine and the extent of the global implications of
Russia’s war of aggression make it clear that fighting
Putin today can be compared only to our common
fight against Hitler during the Second World War.
Let me remind the Council that the document entitled
“Declaration by the United Nations” — the first time
that the term “United Nations was used — was signed
in 1942 in Washington, D.C. to unite the peoples
throughout the globe in their struggle against the Nazis.
As former Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev
wrote in his memoirs, “if the United States had not
helped us, we would not have won the war.” Even the
dictator Stalin offered the same opinion at the Tehran
Conference in 1943. It was thanks to that global unity,
the Lend-Lease Act and the assistance of the American
people and other allies that we succeeded in defeating
Hitler. The evil of Putin, as that of Hitler before him,
requires a global response. It was the case during the
Second World War, and it is the case right now.
Ukraine and its allies are doing their best to ensure
such a response. The liberation of Ukrainian territories,
which is well under way in the Kharkiv and Kherson
regions, serves as the best proof of the effectiveness of
our efforts.
The Russian Federation has already abused the
Security Council on many occasions, including this
week. We call on Russia to learn to respect this organ.
It is apparent, however, that the Russian delegation is
experiencing many delusions, with false beliefs that
are not based on reality, and having hallucinations,
seeing and hearing things that do not exist, as part of an
endless list of other negative symptoms.
It is indeed a difficult condition, but I would suggest
that those symptoms should not be studied and treated in
this Chamber or by diplomats. They require a different
type of qualification and different offices, perhaps less
than a mile from the United Nations Headquarters on
the same First Avenue. Let them go there and ask for
therapy. Yes — there is only one truly right avenue to
save the lives of thousands of Ukrainian and, in fact,
Russian citizens: that is, to surrender and withdraw. If
that does not happen, however, no therapy will help.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

22-5849819/19
