RESOLUTION ADOPTED WITHOUT REFERENCE TO A COMMITfEE

1474 (ES-IV). Question considered by the Secu•
rity Council at its 906th meeting on
16 September 1960

integrity of the Congo, with the assistance, as appropriate, of Asian and African representatives appointed
by the Advisory Committee on the Congo, in consultation with the Secretary-General, for the purpose of
conciliation ;
4. ..·1ppeals to all Member Governments for urgent
voluntary contributions to a United Nations Fund for
the Congo to be used under United Nations control
and in consultation with the Central Government for
the purpose of rendering the fullest possible assistance
to achieve the objective mentioned in the preamble;

The General Assembly,
Having considered the situation m the Republic of
the Congo,
Taking note of the resolutions of 14 July,4 22 Julyr;
and 9 August 19606 of the Security Council,
Taking into account the unsatisfactory economic and
political conditions that continue in the Republic of
the Congo,
Considering that, with a view to preserving the unity,
territorial integrity and political independence of the
Congo, to protecting and advancing th<' welfare of its
people, and to safeguarding international peace, it is
essential for the United Nations to continue to assist
the Central Government of the Congo,

5.

Requests:
(a)
All States to refrain from any action which
might tcncl to impede the restoration of law and order
and tlw exercise by the Government of the Republic
of the Congo of its authority and also to refrai11 from
auy action which might und~rmine the unity, territorial
integrity and the political inde1iendencr of the Rqmhlic
of the Congo ;
( h I All Member States, in accordance with Articles '.:::5 and 49 oi the Charter of the United Nations.
to accept and carry out the decisions of the Security
Council and to afford mutual assistance in carrying out
measures decided upon by the Security Council;

1. Fully supports the resolutions of 14 and 22 July
and 9 August 1960 of the Security Council;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
take vigorous action in accordance with the terms of
the aforesaid resolutions and to assist the Central
Government of the Congo in the restoration and maintenance of law and order throughout the territory of
the Republic of the Congo and to safeguard its unity,
territorial integrity and political independence in the
interests of international peace and security ;
3. Appeals to all Congolese within the Republic
of the Congo to seek a speedy solution by peaceful
means of all their internal conflicts for the unity and
4 Official

6. Without prejudice to the sovereign rights of the
Republic of the Congo, calls upon all States to refrain
from the direct and indirect provision of arms or other
materials of war and military personnel and other assistance for military purposes in the Congo during the
temporary period of military assistance through the
United Nations, except upon the request of the United
Nations through the Secretary-General for carrying out
the purposes of this resolution and of the resolutions
of 14 and 22 July and 9 August 1960 of the Security
Council.
863rd plenary meeting,
20 September 1960.

Records of the Security Council, Fifteenth Year,

Supplement for July, August and September 1960, document
S/4387.
11 Ibid., document S/4405.
6 Jbid., document S/4426.

1
