36

General AHembly--Seventh Session

any form of political association which would involve
r.nnexation of the Trust Territories in any sense, or
would have the effect of extinguishing their status as
Trust Territories, and affirmed the view that measures
of customs, fiscal or administrative union must not in
any way hamper the free evolution of each Trust Territory toward self-government or independence,
Rccalling its resolution 563 (VI) of 18 January
1952, requesting the Trusteeship Council to submit to
it, at its seventh session, a special report containing a
complete analysis of each of the administrative unions
to which a Trust Territory is a party, and of the status
of the Cameroons and Togoland under French administration arising out of their membership in the French
Union,
Re.calling the studies O on administrative unions undertaken by the Trusteeship Council in 1949 and 1950,
and in particular the important analysis of administrative unions contained in resolution 293 (VII) adopted
by the Council on 17 July 1950,
Recalling the regular annual reports adopted by the
Trusteeship Council in 1951 and 1952 on each of the
Trust Territories participating in an administrative
union,
1. Tllkes note of the special report ' submitted by
the Trusteeship Council in compliance with General
Assembly resolution 563 (VI), and the observations•
made tlM-reon by the General Assembly Committee on
Administrative Unions;
2. Calls to the attention of the Administering Authorities the observations and conclusions contained
in the special report of the Trusteeship Council and
the observations of the General Assembly Committee
on Administrative Unions;
3. Requests the Administering Authorities to continue to transmit promptly to the Trusteeship Council
information as complete as possible concerning the
operation of the administrative unions affecting Trust
Territories under their administration, indicating the
benefits and advantages derived by the inhabitants of
the Trust Territories from administrative unions;
4. Expresses the hope that the Administering Authorities concemed will take into account the freely
expressed wishes of the inhabitants before establishing
or extending the scope of administrative unions;
5. Expresses the hope that the Administering Authorities concemed wilt consult with the Tn~steeship
Council conceming any change in or extension of existing administrative unions. or concerning any proposai to establish new administrative unions;
6. Requests the Trusteeship Council to continue its
regular examination of each administrative union affecting a Trust Territory; and to study these administrative unions, not only with regard to the four safeguards enumerated in Trusteeship Council resolution
293 (VII), but also with regard to the interests of
the inhabitants of the Territory and ,the terms of the
• See O.iirial Rtcords of th, Tnut11ship Cotmt:il, Fi/th
Stssion, tfmws, agenda item 10, li· 255 and Offidal R,cords of
thr Gm,ral Asstmbly, Fi/th St1.ntm, SvpJ>ltmmt No. 4, annex.
'See O/Jiciol R,cords of tht Gtntral Assnnbly, St'Vmth
St1sion, S"vpplnn,nt No. 12.
• See document Afl,'Z17.

Charter and the Trusteeship Agreements, as well as
any other matters which the Council may deem appropriate.
409th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.
650 (VII). Ceseation of the transmission of information under Article 73 e of the Charter
in respect of the Netherlands Antilles and
Surinam

The Gencral Assembly,
Bearing in mind the importance of the question of
cessation of the transmission of information and the
information 9 supplied on that subject by the Netherlands Government, and in view of the short lime remaining for the conclusion of the work of the seventh
session,
Decides that the Committee set up 10 to study the
factors which should be taken into account in deciding
whether a Territory is or is not a Territory whose
people have not yct attained a full measure of selfgovernment, should examine carefully the documents
submitted by the Netherlands Government relating to
the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam in th, light of
the resolution on factors adopted by the General
Assembly, and report to the Assemhly at its next regular session.
409th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.

651 (VII). Question of. South West Africa
The General Assembly
Decides to postpone consideration of the question
of South West Africa until the eighth session of the
General Assembly, and requests the Ad Hoc Committee on South West Africa, established by General
Assembly resolution 570 A (VI) of 19 January 1952,
to continue on the same basis as stated in that resolution and further requests the Committee to report
to the General• Assembly ·at its eighth session.
409th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.

652 (VII). The Ewe and Togoland unification
problem
The General Assemb/y,
Having adopted at the sixth session resolution 555
(VI) on the Ewe and Togoland unification problem,
which recommended, inter alia, that the Trusteeship
Council arrange for the dispatch of either a special
mission or its next periodic visiting mission to the
two Trust Territories concemed to study thoroughly
the Ewe and Togoland unification problem, induding
the functioning of the proposed Joint Council for

• See document A/2177.
10 See resolution 648

(Vil).
