S/PV.9040

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9040th meeting

Monday, 23 May 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Coraiola Yinde Kloss
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Nyarku
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2022/392)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-35752 (E)
*2235752*

S/PV.9040

The situation in Somalia

congratulated and extended support to his successor.
The new President was immediately sworn in, and the
outcome has been fully accepted.

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia (S/2022/392)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. James Swan,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia; and Mr. Francisco Caetano José Madeira,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of
the African Union Mission in Somalia.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/392, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Swan.
Mr. Swan: I thank the members of the Security
Council for the opportunity to brief them on the situation
in Somalia. I am pleased to do so once again alongside
the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia, Ambassador
Francisco Madeira.
The conclusion of Somalia’s electoral process
last week is a major milestone for the country. The
presidential contest followed an unduly protracted
and contentious process to choose members of
the legislature. Once the senators and members of
Parliament were sworn in on 14 April, however, they
moved quickly to elect the Speaker and two Deputy
Speakers in each chamber of Parliament and then
prepare for the presidential vote. On 15 May, Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud was elected Somalia’s tenth President
by a decisive margin, in a joint session of Parliament
that was peaceful, orderly and respectful of the
rules of procedure. Outgoing President Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo graciously conceded and
2/17

23/05/2022

As the Security Council has noted repeatedly,
it is past time for Somali leaders to move beyond
the prolonged political contest to focus on urgent
national priorities. I had the honour, on 18 May, to
hear directly from President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
about his immediate goals. He emphasized national
reconciliation, improving relations between the central
Government and federal member states, addressing
the security threat from Al-Shabaab, finishing the
constitutional review and judicial reforms, completing
election-related laws, ensuring compliance with
international financial institutions’ requirements
for debt relief and giving urgent attention to the dire
drought conditions. We believe that is an appropriate
list of initial priorities and look forward to learning
more details as the new leadership takes charge and as
a new Prime Minister and Cabinet are named in the
coming weeks. The entire United Nations system in
Somalia is ready to work with the new Government in
support of those shared goals.
While we welcome the end of the elections and look
forward to progress on other issues, we must be cleareyed about the shortcomings of the earlier stages of the
process. Contrary to Somalia’s provisional Constitution,
the Somali people did not have the opportunity to vote
for the House of the People in a one person, one vote
election. Women were elected to just 21 per cent of
parliamentary seats — well short of the 30 per cent
goal set by Somalis themselves. Many irregularities
in the selection of members of Parliament were noted
throughout the process, which was repeatedly marred
by tragic incidents of violence, with numerous civilian
casualties recorded. We call on Somalia’s leaders to do
better for their people in the next electoral cycle. The
United Nations stands ready to support such efforts.
Somalia’s security situation remains highly volatile.
Emboldened by domestic political tensions, in recent
months Al-Shabaab maintained its modus operandi and
focused attacks in Mogadishu, South-West state and
Hirshabelle. The spate of deadly incidents in March and
April suggested an effort to disrupt the final phases of
the electoral process.
I commend the courage and tenacity of Somali
security forces and African Union Transition Mission
in Somalia (ATMIS) forces who safeguarded the
electoral process and bore the brunt of Al-Shabaab’s
22-35752

23/05/2022

The situation in Somalia

deadly attacks, then and after. I want to extend special
condolences for the losses suffered as a result of the
3 May complex attack by Al-Shabaab on the ATMIS
forward operating base in Ceel Baraf, Middle Shabelle.
Since the formal transition from the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to ATMIS on 1 April,
as per resolution 2628 (2022), both Somali and African
Union (AU) security officials have been heavily
focused on electoral security. The United Nations
has taken steps at the technical level to engage both
the Federal Government of Somalia and ATMIS on
the way forward on the implementation of the Somali
Transition Plan and the ATMIS mandate. Now that the
election is over, it will be important to reinvigorate
structures previously agreed by the Security and
Justice Committee to support coordination, prioritize
force generation and integration, mobilize resources
and build the capacity of the Somali security forces. I
call on the new Administration to demonstrate its full
political commitment and leadership in delivering the
agreed security transition.
The United Nations Support Office for Somalia
continues to provide support under its mandate to ATMIS
forces and has established and staffed a transition cell
to ensure it is well postured to meet the needs of the
new AU mission. The United Nations Support Office
in Somalia (UNSOS) also continues to support Somali
forces under the terms of its mandate, albeit at reduced
levels owing to the depletion of the United Nations trust
fund in support of the Somali security forces. While
thanking those who have generously offered support,
we call on partners to make further contributions to
the trust fund. We would also welcome more clarity on
plans to fund future ATMIS requirements that are not
currently covered.
The humanitarian situation in Somalia is worsening
following the failure of a fourth consecutive rainy
season. The number of people affected by the drought
has risen to 6.1 million. The country faces a heightened
risk of localized famine in six communities if food
prices continue to rise and humanitarian assistance is
not sustained.
Humanitarians have scaled up their activities,
prioritizing the most vulnerable populations and
focusing on famine prevention. Yet, almost halfway
through the year, the 2022 humanitarian response plan
is just 15 per cent funded against its total appeal for
$1.45 billion. We call for urgent additional contributions.

S/PV.9040

On 26 April, a high-level donor round table in
Geneva focused attention on humanitarian needs across
the Horn of Africa, including Somalia. We are grateful
to donors for their pledges and commitments. However,
without the immediate receipt of funding to expand
humanitarian operations, we face the prospect of
significant loss of life in the period ahead. Even as we
now focus on saving lives and averting famine, there
is also a need to increase resilience, development and
climate responses so that those affected by recurring
crises can adapt and thrive in the future.
In all the United Nations system’s activities in
Somalia, we are guided by the principles of respect
for human rights and the full inclusion of women,
young people and marginalized groups. We continue
to rigorously apply the United Nations Due Diligence
Policy on Human Rights and ensure both advocacy and
technical support for the protection of human rights.
The United Nations and the Government have begun
the implementation of the flagship women, peace and
protection programme, funded by the Peacebuilding
Fund. The programme promotes women’s meaningful
participation in peacebuilding processes and the
protection of women and girls from sexual violence
in conflict. On the youth front, the United Nations
continues to integrate youth dimensions in electoral
participation, mediation and civilian oversight of the
security sector.
In conclusion, let me stress that the conclusion of
the electoral process on 15 May offers a long-awaited
opportunity for Somalia to make progress on other
urgent national priorities. We call on Somali leaders to
work together in a spirit of collaboration and national
purpose. We call on Somalia’s international friends
and partners, including those on the Security Council,
to offer constructive support and encouragement.
Let us work together to capitalize on this moment of
opportunity for Somalia.
The President: I thank Mr. Swan for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Madam President, for
giving me the floor to brief the Security Council on
Somalia. Let me start by congratulating you and your
country, the United States of America, for assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of May.
The most far-reaching development in Somalia
in the period under consideration is the successful

22-357523/17

S/PV.9040

The situation in Somalia

conclusion of the prolonged and painstaking electoral
process, which culminated with the election of the
President of the Federal Republic of Somalia on 15 May
in a peaceful and favourable environment. On behalf
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the African Union Transition Mission in Somalia
(ATMIS), I wish to once again congratulate President
Hassan Sheikh Mohamud on his victory and express our
appreciation to the outgoing President, Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed, for subsequently accepting the
electoral results, congratulating his successor, shaking
hands with him and pledging to support him. This
peaceful transfer of power, which consolidates and
honours a practice that has now become Somalia’s
political tradition, creates conditions conducive to the
advancement of the national political dialogue and the
deepening of reconciliation.
These important tasks will require collaboration
between the Federal Government and the federal
member states. In that regard, I am pleased to note
that the new Administration is already engaging
regional leaders on critical national issues. With a new
Parliament elected and a leadership legitimized by the
people’s representatives, the doors are now open for a
new chapter in the history of Somalia to be written — a
chapter heralding hope, opportunity and determination
of a people who was able to maintain its identity and
idiosyncrasies despite all odds and vicissitudes. This
is a people that has remained steadfast, resilient and
determined to reconcile internally and end the war,
bring about peace, develop the country and restore
Somalia to its former glory and beyond.
In that process, despite the robust campaign in
support of an increased representation of women in the
federal Parliament, the 30 per cent minimum quota for
women was not achieved. That is a source of concern
in our joint commitment — under the African Union’s
Agenda 2063 — to ensure gender equality and priority.
However, we are encouraged to see the election of
Sadia Yasin Haji Samatar as the first female Deputy
Speaker of the House of the People. ATMIS is proud
to have been instrumental in its multiform support to
the electoral process, particularly in the provision of
the much-needed electoral security support alongside
the Somalia security forces in Dhuusamarreeb, Jawhar,
Beledweyne, Baidoa, Baraawe, Kismaayo, Gedo and
Mogadishu, where together we were able to deliver an
orderly, peaceful and secure presidential election in the
midst of repeated threats and attacks by Al-Shabaab,
4/17

23/05/2022

including on the very day of the presidential
election, with the goal of creating an environment of
destabilization and violence, derailing the process
and, eventually, stopping the election. But that did
not happen.
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud campaigned
under the banner of putting Somalis in agreement
with one another and in agreement with the world.
In his electoral manifesto, he placed emphasis on
liberating the country from Al-Shabaab, opening up
the main supply routes, ensuring that the security
forces remained republican and did not interfere in
political processes, restoring justice and implanting a
governance system based on the Constitution and social
reconciliation, as well as prioritizing humanitarian
issues, democratization, economic development and
proactive foreign policy.
Although we still have much to learn about the
details in the transformation of those political objectives
into Government programmes and plans, the spirit
underlying peace policies is very much in line with
what the AU Agenda 2063 stands for and the ATMIS
mandate, as outlined at the 1,068th meeting of the AU
Peace and Security Council, held on 8 March, and what
resolution 2628 (2022), of 31 March, is all about.
Helping to empower and support the Somali security
forces achieve force generation; reconfiguring and
implementing the Somali Transition Plan; supporting
the efforts to degrade and put an end Al-Shabaab and
other illegal armed groups; opening the main supply
routes to facilitate the free and safe movement of
people and goods throughout the country, thereby
eliciting economic growth and social development;
availing AU good offices through ATMIS in facilitating
and finalizing the constitution; promoting justice;
normalizing relations with all the federal member
states; advancing reconciliation, good governance
and democracy; and achieving one person, one vote
universal suffrage by 2026 — all those are actions that
give substance to, and justify the presence of, ATMIS
in Somalia.
We at ATMIS identify with the peace objectives,
and we will be with the Somali Government and its
people as they forge ahead to give substance to those
aspirations and goals. Now is the time for the global
community to proactively and constructively rally in
support of the President of Somalia and his Government
as they confidently start the long walk towards one
22-35752

23/05/2022

The situation in Somalia

person, one vote for the consolidation of democracy
and good governance in the country.
Throughout the electoral process, we saw an
increase in Al-Shabaab’s destabilizing activities
through the employment of asymmetrical means in the
form of attacks using improvised explosive devices,
probing attacks, grenade and mortar attacks, ambushes
and targeted assassinations of senior Government
officials, security forces, civilians and election
delegates and officers. We also witnessed an increase
in activities related to Al-Shabaab’s infiltration of its
Amniyat operatives in major cities, with particular
emphasis on Mogadishu, extortion, ground surveillance
of friendly forces, forward operating bases (FOBs) and
main supply routes and the recruitment and training
of militants.
In Mogadishu on 23 March, a group of armed of
Al-Shabaab fighters disguised in military uniforms
infiltrated the Aden Adde International Airport
area and attacked the SafeLane Global company’s
compound, resulting in five fatalities, including three
international employees and one Somali police officer.
On 19 February, a person-borne improvised explosive
device exploded inside a restaurant in Beledweyne,
resulting in the deaths of at least 18 people, including
Government officials. The attack took place while
a campaign meeting of electoral delegates and other
officials was under way.
On 23 March, an Al-Shabaab suicide bomber
blew himself up near the Hiraan administrative
headquarters, while electoral activities were taking
place. The explosion was followed by an attack using
a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device, killing
at least 50 people, including a member of Parliament,
Amina Mohamed Abdi. Other trends in the activities of
Al-Shabaab have included simultaneous attacks against
AMISOM forward operating bases. In that context, in
February, Al-Shabaab carried out a coordinated attack
against the ATMIS FOB in Elbaraf, using a combination
of available improvised explosive devices.
What has become clear in those daring and
heightened attacks is a resurgent Al-Shabaab that will
continue to pose multiple challenges to both Somalia
and ATMIS, which points to the urgent need for a robust
and adequate response to the group. In that regard,
the establishment of ATMIS on 1 April was followed
by transition activities in close collaboration with
the Federal Government, primarily focused on joint
ATMIS-Somali security forces disruption operations

S/PV.9040

throughout Somalia, securing main population centres
and supply routes, mentoring and training Somali
security forces and joint planning and coordination.
As part of our joint planning, we have continued
to hold regular meetings with the Somali armed forces,
which included the holding of a first-quarter sector
commanders’ conference in March. In order to begin
the full implementation of the transition requirements,
as stipulated in resolution 2628 (2022), ATMIS recently
collapsed its forward operating base in Gololey, in
sector 5, to create a mobile force. In addition, together
with the Somali national armed forces, ATMIS is
expected to undertake a series of planned activities that
will also support its mandated reconfiguration. They
include the convening of the second-quarter sector
commanders’ conference, a logistics conference and
an equipment review that will enable both ATMIS and
the Somali national armed forces to develop a joint
reconfiguration plan.
Force generation and adequate and predictable
funding and equipment attuned to force activity and
mobility are key to degrading Al-Shabaab and ensuring
the success of the transition. In order to achieve that
within the 2024 timeline, it is vital to scale up air
strategic support with transport and attack helicopters,
as well as adequate offensive weapons in all sectors,
for both ATMIS and Somali security forces to be
effectively agile and mobile with the required speed
so that they can surprise and successfully take on and
subdue Al-Shabaab. Had part of those requirements
been implemented in the field, Al-Shabaab’s attack
against the ATMIS forward operating base in Ceel
Baraf would not have been the same.
Transition is only truly transition when its elements
are visible and tangible. Therefore, it is critically
important for the transition’s timely success that
international partners prioritize enhanced support for
the Federal Government to enable it to adequately raise,
pay and equip a Somali security force capable and able
to gradually, but effectively, assume full responsibility
for the country’s security.
It is in that vein, and with immense appreciation,
that the AU welcomed the visit to Somalia by General
Stephen Townsend, Commander of the United States
Africa Command, to discuss cooperation between
United States forces and the Somali National Army.
The President: I thank Mr. Madeira for his briefing.

22-357525/17

S/PV.9040

The situation in Somalia

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Swan
for his briefing.
I will focus my remarks today on three topics:
the presidential elections in Somalia, security and the
humanitarian situation.
The United Kingdom welcomes the completion
of the presidential election on 15 May and warmly
congratulates Hassan Sheikh Mohamud on his election.
Although the representation of women in Parliament
was once again below the 30 per cent target, we welcome
the historic election of Sadia Yasin Haji Samatar as
Somalia’s first female Deputy Speaker.
The conclusion of the electoral process provides
an opportunity to end political uncertainty and refocus
on issues of urgent national importance: addressing the
threat posed by Al-Shabaab, maintaining fiscal stability,
delivering constitutional reform and responding to
the devastating drought. The United Kingdom stands
ready to support President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud’s
Government in its efforts, and encourages all Somalia’s
leaders to work together in the spirit of reconciliation
and collaboration.
Turning to security, we thank the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS) for providing
security support throughout the elections, and we
condemn Al-Shabaab’s persistent attempts to disrupt
the process. We send our condolences to those affected
by the Al-Shabaab terrorist attack on the Burundi
ATMIS contingent on 3 May.
The ongoing threat posed by Al-Shabaab highlights
the need for the new Government to secure broad-based
political agreement on a national security architecture
that is effective and affordable and that facilitates a
sustainable transition to Somali-led security, while
maintaining pressure on Al-Shabaab. The United
Kingdom will continue to work with Somalia’s Federal
Government and federal member states and alongside
other international partners to achieve that.
6/17

23/05/2022

As we heard, the impact of the drought is alarming.
It is increasingly likely that Somalia will face famine
despite our collective commitment that that would
never happen again. More funds and collective action
are needed if we are to prevent famine in Somalia. The
United Kingdom Minister for Africa announced an
additional $31 million in response to the humanitarian
crisis in Somalia, on top of the $25 million already
committed this year.
While we celebrate the recent achievements in
Somalia, we must not lose sight of the work still needed
to ensure that the situation continues to move forward
in a peaceful and stable manner. We look forward to
working with President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
and his Government to advance peace, stability and
prosperity in Somalia for the benefit of all Somalis.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Swan for his
valuable insights, especially at this critical time.
Norway welcomes the conclusion of the electoral
process and congratulates President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud on his election. We thank the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia for assisting the elections
process and for its cooperation on election financing.
We are encouraged that President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud has clearly outlined national reconciliation,
security, economic recovery and inclusive political
stability as critical priorities ahead. We are particularly
pleased that a constructive dialogue between the
President and the International Monetary Fund on debt
relief and economic reforms has started and has already
yielded results.
Political stability is fundamental to economic
recovery and development for the Somali people.
Revitalizing the constitutional reform process deserves
the Government’s full attention and our support. That is
a crucial step towards reaching consensus on federalism,
national reconciliation and preparing for democratic
elections in 2026. Norway looks forward to the swift
formation of a new inclusive Federal Government that
can advance those critical national priorities.
As Somalia aims to take more responsibility for
its own security and development over the coming
years, the international community will continue to
lend its support, but commitment and effective Somali
leadership will be key.
22-35752

23/05/2022

The situation in Somalia

We are disappointed by the overall setback in the
representation of women in Parliament, but congratulate
Sadia Yasin Haji Samatar on being the first woman to
hold the office of First Deputy Speaker. It is important
to provide relevant and sufficient support and security
to all newly elected women Members of Parliament, so
that they can play their full role.
We also remain deeply concerned about the overall
security situation, particularly the persistent attacks
by Al-Shabaab. The effective implementation of the
Somali Transition Plan is key to restoring security and
stability and protecting civilians. And we welcome the
newly adopted mandate of the African Union Transition
Mission in Somalia (ATMIS), which lays the foundation
for a new and more effective military response to
Al-Shabaab by Somali security forces and ATMIS.
However, that should be supplemented by a renewed
and strengthened approach to national reconciliation
and stabilization and a possible dialogue track.
We also must not forget the persistent undercurrent:
Somalia is on the brink of famine. There are more
than 700,000 new internally displaced persons, and
communities have faced multiple shocks — from
climate-induced recurring droughts and flooding to
conflict, locusts, the coronavirus disease pandemic and
rising prices of food and fuel — all resulting in grave
consequences for the civilian population.
For women and children in particular, the situation
is devastating. Children’s access to education is
significantly hampered. The right to education must be
upheld, and protection against conflict-related sexual
violence must remain a key priority for the Council.
While all parties to the conflict must allow and
facilitate full, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access, we also need to find more sustainable solutions
to those recurring emergencies. Humanitarian and
development stakeholders must ensure that their
efforts are complementary, with a focus on scaling up
life-saving assistance.
In conclusion, Norway again welcomes the
conclusion of the electoral process and looks forward
to reinvigorated and constructive cooperation between
Somalia and the Security Council in order to advance
critical Somali priorities, reforms and the protection
of civilians.

S/PV.9040

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke
in French): I thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-Genera1 James Swan and Mr. Francisco
Caetano José Madeira, Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia, for their briefings. I also welcome the
Permanent Representative of Somalia, Ambassador
Osman, to today’s meeting.
France reiterates its congratulations to President
Hassan Sheikh Mohamud on his election. Despite all the
challenges, the electoral process came to an end and led
to a peaceful transition of power. It is a historic moment
and an extremely important step towards stabilization in
Somalia. We wish every success to President Mohamud
and the future Federal Government of Somalia. They
have France’s support.
We encourage the new President to continue
State-building efforts, as well as efforts to revise the
Constitution and re-establish national harmony. That
must therefore include in-depth dialogue between
the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal
member states.
We also encourage the Somali authorities to continue
their efforts to ensure the participation of women in
the leadership of the country, through the 30 per cent
quota of women in Parliament. France welcomes the
election of Ms. Saadia Yasin Haji Samatar, the first
Somali woman to become Deputy Speaker of the House
of the People.
We should also help Somalia address the extremely
serious humanitarian crisis caused by drought and
exacerbated by the unacceptable acts of Al-Shabaab,
which hinder the delivery of humanitarian aid and
include attacks on humanitarian and medical workers.
In addition to providing humanitarian support to
Somalia — approximately €115.7 million over the past
few years — the European Union has also announced
€348 million in aid to strengthen food security in the
Horn of Africa. France is fully involved in providing
that aid.
France firmly condemns the terrorist attacks
committed by Al-Shabaab, in particular those on
23 March and 3 May. We extend our condolences to
Somalia, the African Union Transition Mission in
Somalia (ATMIS), Burundi and to the families of the
victims. Those attacks confirm the urgency of engaging
in a more effective fight against Al-Shabaab.

22-357527/17

S/PV.9040

The situation in Somalia

Resolution 2628 (2022), which endorsed the
reconfiguration of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) into ATMIS, is a step in the right direction,
which should lead to specific changes on the ground.
With ongoing funding to AMISOM over the past 15
years totalling €2.25 billion and the establishment of
its three missions in Somalia, the European Union has
demonstrated that it is a reliable partner and very eager
to see transition in Somalia. Nonetheless, it is clear that
no new funding for ATMIS, regardless of the amount,
would suffice without Somali efforts to generate armed
forces, together with the federal states, or without
strong support from ATMIS to help Somali forces
and conduct offensive operations with them. France
therefore encourages the Government of Somalia and
ATMIS contingents to resolutely commit to the security
transition in order to achieve the objectives outlined
in resolution 2628 (2022). There is no alternative, as
attacks by Al-Shabaab keep reminding us.
Lastly, France deplores the attack that occurred in
Puntland on 6 March. I reiterate the readiness of the
European Union Naval Force Operation Atalanta to
provide maritime security support to Somalia, including
in Somali territorial waters. Operation Atalanta not
only helps to combat piracy, but it also helps to curb
the illicit flows of arms and charcoal, which benefit
Al-Shabaab, and to escort World Food Programme
vessels, on which the Somali people very much depend
in the current circumstances.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Swan and Special Representative Madeira
for their briefings. I also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Somalia to today’s meeting.
Last week, the presidential election was successfully
concluded in Somalia, turning a new page in its national
governance. China welcomes that development and
congratulates Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud on his
election as the new President. We appreciate former
President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed’s respect for
the election results.
The current election result in Somalia is hardwon. It reflects Somalia’s progress in exploring a
development path suited to its own national conditions,
while demonstrating the firm commitment of all parties
in Somalia to maintaining national stability. We look
forward to the smooth formation of the new Somali
Government and sincerely hope that Somalia can use
this opportunity to speed up national reconstruction
8/17

23/05/2022

and achieve long-term stability and security as soon
as possible.
Peace and stability in Somalia still face severe
challenges. China strongly condemns the frequent
terrorist attacks by Al-Shabaab, including the attack
on the African Union Transition Mission in Somalia
(ATMIS), which killed several Burundian peacekeepers,
and the shelling of polling stations for the Somali
presidential election. China highly appreciates the
important contributions and major sacrifices made by
ATMIS to maintain security and stability in Somalia.
The key to handing over security responsibilities
to Somalia is to implement the Somali Transition Plan,
accelerate the formation and integration of its forces and
effectively improve its own security capabilities. China
supports the new Somali Government and ATMIS in
strengthening coordination and communication during
the security transition period. We expect that the
United Nations, the Somali Government, the African
Union and other relevant parties will discuss and define
the sharing of responsibilities and the assessment
benchmarks during the transition period, in accordance
with the requirements of Security Council resolutions.
We call on the major contributors to continue
to provide sustainable and predictable financial
support to the security forces of Somalia and ATMIS
to ensure the effective implementation of relevant
security programmes.
The humanitarian situation in Somalia is
worrisome. Unprecedented drought has devastated
the lives of millions of people, while bringing to the
fore the issue of food security in particular. United
Nations humanitarian response plans are chronically
underfunded, thereby hampering the effective
implementation of emergency humanitarian operations.
China calls on the international community not to
neglect the humanitarian and development problems in
Somalia and relevant inputs in the area, but to continue
to help Somalia respond to the risk of famine and
conduct more development cooperation projects.
China is committed to assisting Somalia in its
economic and social development through practical
cooperation. Recently, it delivered new security and
health assistance to Somalia and plans to provide
Somalia with another set of emergency food aid.
Under the leadership of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Swan, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) has collaborated with
22-35752

23/05/2022

The situation in Somalia

the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development to actively implement its important
mandate, use its political good offices and ensure
capacity-building and coordination among all parties.
China will continue to support the work of UNSOM
and Special Representative Swan.
Against the backdrop of the completion of its
election and the start of the new security transition
in Somalia, China supports the technical rollover of
UNSOM so that the time can be used to conduct a
strategic assessment to optimize the UNSOM mandate,
according to the needs of the Somali Government and
the functions of resident entities of other international
organizations in Somalia in order to focus on key areas
and bring its advantages into full play.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I, too, would like
to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Swan and Ambassador Madeira for their
briefings, and welcome the representative of Somalia
to today’s meeting.
Since our previous briefing in the Security Council
(see S/PV.8965), several developments have occurred
in Somalia. In that regard, I will focus my intervention
on three points.
First, concerning the elections, with the election
of Hassan Sheikh Mohamud as President, Somalia has
ended a complicated and prolonged electoral cycle.
Regarding the election for the House of the People, we
welcome the first female Deputy Speaker of the House.
However, that comes with regrets that the commitment
of Somali authorities to the 30 per cent quota for women
was not met. It is important to ensure women’s inclusion
in the new Administration at all levels of Government,
as their contribution is key.
In congratulating the new President, it is our hope
that the new Government that he forms will move fast
to tackle urgent issues, including the economic reform
programme agreed with the International Monetary
Fund, the institutional reforms and the new focus on the
security situation and the unfolding humanitarian crisis.
Secondly, with regard to the security situation,
on 31 March, we endorsed the decision to reconfigure
the African Union Military Observer Mission in
Somalia into the African Union Transition Mission in
Somalia. Unfortunately, during the reporting period,
we witnessed a certain lethargy towards fighting
Al-Shabaab. The activities of the terrorist group are
widespread, and it seems that its ability to conduct

S/PV.9040

more complex deadly attacks has grown. We condemn
in the strongest terms the most recent attack perpetrated
by Al-Shabaab, which resulted in the death of several
Burundi and Somali forces. Albania is particularly
alarmed by the increase in civilian casualties caused by
various perpetrators. Women and children are among
those most affected by the conflict.
It is also disturbing to see the lack of significant
progress in countering impunity, which further fuels
sexual and gender-based violence. All parties must
respect their obligations under human rights and
international humanitarian law, while justice must
be brought against perpetrators to break the chain of
violence in Somalia.
Thirdly, the humanitarian situation is compounded
by insecurity and the effects of climate change. Despite
efforts by the authorities and their humanitarian
partners to scale up mitigation assistance against the
drought emergency in Somalia, the risk of famine
remains high. The growing number of displaced people
and those in need of assistance, as well as rising food
insecurity, should draw the attention of, and a response
from, the international community. In that vein, we
also urge the authorities to ensure humanitarian access
so that operators can reach those in urgent need.
Finally, we commend the work of Special
Representative Swan and his team in providing
assistance to the Somali Government and stakeholders,
including throughout the electoral process.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
Special Representative Swan and Ambassador Madeira
for their remarks at the beginning of our meeting. I
extend special thanks to Special Representative Swan
and his entire team for their commitment and tireless
efforts over the past year and a half in supporting
Somalia through the election process. We greatly
appreciate that.
I would like to begin by commending the people
of Somalia and their leaders on completing elections.
We know that there were some regrettable delays,
but the peaceful transition of power that we are now
witnessing is welcome and critical to creating the stable
political environment needed to tackle Somalia’s longstanding challenges.
It is also important to pay tribute to the African
Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS) and the
Somali security forces for providing security for the
entire election process. That was not without cost. I

22-357529/17

S/PV.9040

The situation in Somalia

want to express my deepest condolences to the families
of all those who lost their lives in recent months,
including African Union peacekeepers.
I would like to wish the incoming Parliament well
in living up to the expectations of the Somali people for
peace, prosperity and good governance. We congratulate
Sadia Yasin Haji Samatar for being the first woman to
ever hold the role of Deputy Speaker, although it is
certainly regrettable that the goal of electing 30 per cent
women was not met in the elections. I want to encourage
the incoming Administration to build on its electoral
promises and ensure the meaningful participation of
women throughout the new Administration, including
at senior decision-making levels.
I offer our sincere congratulations to the new
President, Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. I was struck by
the positive and conciliatory tone of his acceptance
speech and his urging of the country to look to the
future. That is exactly what Somalia needs now. There
is no doubt that a lot rests on his shoulders, but the
United Nations and Somalia’s partners will continue to
be there to support him in addressing both Somalia’s
long- and short-term priorities.
Among the most urgent of those priorities will be the
dire humanitarian crisis in Somalia. As we have heard,
millions of people are now at risk from climate-induced
shocks, including the devastating drought gripping the
country and looming famine. There is no time to lose.
There will need to be critical political decisions
taken in the coming weeks to ensure that Somalia’s
most marginalized and affected communities are
protected from hunger and death. Of course, we in the
international community must also step up our support.
Equally, the human rights of all Somalis, in particular
those of women and girls, must be prioritized, protected
and respected. As the Secretary-General has told us,
increasingly, many are the victims of abhorrent sexual
violence. I call on the new President to recommit
to complying with Somalia’s obligations to prevent
violations against its own citizens, to end impunity for
perpetrators and to support survivors.
Al-Shabaab systematically targeted the elections.
And it is to Somalia’s credit that, despite that, in the
end the presidential elections went ahead on 15 May as
planned. Now that the elections are over, we must look
forward. The African Union, the Somali Government
and its forces and all partners need to refocus on
implementing the ATMIS mandate and addressing
10/17

23/05/2022

the Somali Transition Plan. A key element will be
strengthening Somalia’s national security architecture
and ensuring genuine security sector reform in order for
Somalia to gradually take full responsibility for its own
security. The European Union will remain steadfast
in our support for Somalia’s security throughout that
next phase.
Last but not least, I urge the new Administration to
steer the country and its politics on a path of dialogue,
inclusivity and consensus that delivers for the Somali
people. Strengthening national reconciliation and
forging an equitable political settlement are fundamental
to progressing State-building measures, including
finalizing Somalia’s Constitution and establishing a
constitutional court.
The time for dispute is over. As the Somali national
reconciliation framework describes it, now is the
moment to turn attention to repairing the broken Haan,
to protecting all citizens equally and to weaving a new
future for Somalia out of all its diverse parts.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to make this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council, namely,
Ghana, Kenya and my country, Gabon (A3).
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/392) and thank Mr. James Swan, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM), and Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia and Head of the African
Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS), for
their respective briefings on the situation in Somalia
and their activities.
The A3 congratulates President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud on his victory in the 15 May presidential
election and on his official inauguration on 23 May
after a peaceful transfer of power following a 15-month
electoral process. We very much look forward to the
swift establishment of a new Government that can focus
on resolving the many complex challenges the country
continues to face after decades of political instability
and insecurity.
The decisive role and commitment of the Somali
security forces and ATMIS in securing the elections
deserves to be commended. We also commend the role
played by UNSOM and other regional and international
partners in providing strategic advice and good
22-35752

23/05/2022

The situation in Somalia

offices. We also recognize the particular commitment
of the electoral team in preserving the integrity of
the process, as well as the Somali people for their
continued commitment to a credible and successful
democratic process.
The A3 also welcomes the commitment of the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to Somalia, including through support for
efforts aimed at democratic governance, the promotion
of national reconciliation and the restoration of peace
and security and stability in the country.
We are convinced that the success of the elections
will mark a real turning point for Somalia and its people.
The momentum generated by the new President and his
incoming Government will result in tangible progress
in stabilizing the security situation, implementing the
necessary economic, judicial and constitutional reforms
and finding adequate solutions to the humanitarian
disaster fuelled by the devastating effects of drought
and famine.
The terrorist activities perpetrated by the Al-Qaidaaffiliated terrorist group Al-Shabaab and its Islamic
State affiliates are of great concern to Somalia, the region
and our continent as a whole. Al-Shabaab continues to
carry out deadly attacks in Somalia. The recent crossborder events in the region reflect its ability to adapt
and its considerable capacity to inflict damage on
security and civilian infrastructure, thus exacerbating
human suffering. The A3 roundly condemns all the
attacks perpetrated by those terrorist groups.
The A3 members echo the appeal made by the
African Union’s Peace and Security Council to invite
Somalia’s international partners to make a further
commitment to ensure sustainable and predictable
financing for ATMIS, so as to enable it to discharge
its mandate effectively over the next 30 months, until
responsibilities are handed over to the Somali security
forces. Such adequate financing is vital in order to
preserve the security gains made so far in Somalia
and to bring about peace and stability in the face of
the threat of the spread of terrorism throughout the
countries of the region.
We pay sincere tribute to the African Union
Mission in Somalia — now ATMIS — whose soldiers
have made the ultimate sacrifice, paying a heavy price
in the fight against Al-Shabaab.
Foreign terrorist fighters integrated into Al-Shabaab
and their affiliates from the Islamic State operating on

S/PV.9040

Somali territory also represent a serious and immediate
threat to the region owing to their ability to carry out
complex attacks. Those foreign fighters, allied with the
various clan militias that exist in Somalia, make for an
explosive security cocktail and an enormous challenge
for the new leaders. We therefore call for capacitybuilding for the Somali forces in terms of equipment and
training so as to enable them to discharge their urgent
duty of securing the territory against those groups.
Furthermore, we express our support for adequate
funding for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme, which is a crucial stage in
the process of moving towards a Somali State free
from any security threats. We call on all international
partners to support Somalia at this critical time in the
country’s history.
We are appalled by the continued suffering of
children, women and elderly persons, who very often
are, sadly, confronted with every possible form of
violence. We condemn in particular the recruitment
of children to become terrorists or carry out acts of
violent extremism. We also condemn the other heinous
practices carried out against those people, including
abuse, murder, mutilation and sexual abuse. That
treatment is intolerable, and we call for respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Schools and hospitals are places of life that should
not be attacked. We call on international partners and
Somalia to take all measures necessary to fight against
the use of mines and explosive devices against children
and refrain from making their future even darker.
It is essential to build a robust legal basis founded
on the rule of law and respect for human dignity in
order to protect and bring justice to all victims of abuse,
in particular children who are the victims of atrocities
committed by terrorist groups.
(spoke in English)
We are deeply concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Somalia. Besides the security challenges,
the dire situation is being constrained by the adverse
effects of climate change, whose harmful consequences
are already being felt by the most vulnerable groups
in society.
We recall that Somalia is facing one of the worst
droughts in decades, and, with the erosion of people’s
survival mechanisms, most continue to flee the arid
areas. Those devastating weather conditions are

22-3575211/17

S/PV.9040

The situation in Somalia

23/05/2022

leading to the displacement of thousands of people. We
note that in the first week of March, more than 17,000
people were internally displaced owing to drought in
the southern Bay region of central Somalia.

with its new authorization. We are also convinced
that its future strategic review will provide additional
assistance to policymaking and peacebuilding
in Somalia.

With the worsening drought, nearly 6 million
people in Somalia, or about 40 per cent of the country’s
population, are facing food insecurity and are effectively
at risk of famine. We urge international and regional
donors and all partners of Somalia to increase their
support for humanitarian assistance and for the Somali
authorities to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid
to those in need.

Thirdly, I would like to underline Brazil’s
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms. The recent
attacks have once again made the people of Somalia
deal with deaths and injuries to their dear sons and
daughters. Earlier this month, Al-Shabaab claimed
the lives of African Blue Helmets, mostly Burundian
peacekeepers. Those African Union Transition Mission
in Somalia soldiers and all who have worked on behalf
of the African Union forces have been taking part in
of one of the most dangerous tasks that a person could
face. Therefore, we deeply appreciate the work that
African peacekeepers have been bravely carrying
out for more than a decade and are grateful to the
contributing countries.

The people of Somalia are counting on us, the
international community, and the Somali Government
to provide lasting solutions to the problems that
affect their daily lives. Our inaction will increase
the vulnerability of those populations, increasing
displacement and intensifying conflict.
In that regard, the A3 commends the outstanding
work of humanitarian organizations, which, at the risk
of their lives, are providing continual support to the
people of Somalia.
In conclusion, Ghana, Kenya and Gabon reiterate
our support for the Federal Government of Somalia and
our full support for UNSOM. We look forward to the
report of the Secretary-General, who, in consultation
with the Federal Government of Somalia, will issue
recommendations on the future of UNSOM later
this year.
Mr. Coraiola Yinde Kloss (Brazil): Let me begin
by thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia, Mr. James Swan, and the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia, Ambassador Madeira,
for their briefings. I also welcome the delegation of
Somalia to this meeting.
My delegation will raise three points today.
First, I would like to reiterate our congratulations
to the Somali people. Brazil commends Somalia on the
peaceful conclusion of its elections. We wish President
Hassan Sheikh Mohamud and the new Government a
successful term.
Secondly, I would like to emphasize our support
for the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM). Brazil shares the sense of priority that
surrounds the upcoming mandate renewal. We are
confident that UNSOM will maintain its core objectives
12/17

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, James Swan, and the Special
Representative of the African Union, Francisco
Madeira, for their detailed briefings. We welcome
the participation in today’s meeting of the Permanent
Representative of Somalia to the United Nations, Abukar
Dahir Osman. We have also studied carefully the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/392).
We congratulate our Somali colleagues on the
successful parliamentary and presidential elections and
the official entry into office today of President Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud. We welcome the contribution of
the African Union Mission in Somalia, the African
Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS) and
Mr. Swan personally in achieving that result. We
hope that the Somali authorities will soon be able to
form a new Federal Government and focus on the task
of State-building and dealing with urgent problems,
including the fight against terrorism and overcoming
the consequences of an unusual drought.
We call on our Somali partners to devote greater
attention to security issues. We are seriously concerned
by the notable activity of Al-Shabaab against the
backdrop of elections not only in the regions but also
in the capital.
There was an incursion into the safe zone of the
international airport in Mogadishu in March, and there
was also an attack on the Burundi contingent in ATMIS
22-35752

23/05/2022

The situation in Somalia

in El Baraf at the beginning of May. This is evidence of
the fact that Al-Shabaab’s strength is growing.
We hope that ATMIS, which in March received
unanimous support from the Security Council (see
S/PV.9009), will meet the objectives on its agenda, so
that ultimately Mogadishu be able to take on complete
responsibility for security in the country. In saying this,
we are convinced that the effectiveness of the Mission’s
work will in many ways depend on the stability of the
financing for African peacekeepers.
As before, we believe that the transfer of
responsibility to the Somali army should take place
gradually, as a function of the real situation on the
ground. In the current conditions, where there is still
a terrorist threat, it would be too early to talk about
ending the Transition Mission. We call on the United
Nations, international and regional partners to continue
assisting Somalia while complying with the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of the
country and without meddling in its domestic affairs.
We believe that there is a way of improving the
effectiveness of international assistance, which would
be through a strategic review of the activities of the
special political mission headed by Mr. Swan, and we
are ready to provide any necessary support for this
work.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Representative Swan and
Special Representative Madeira for their briefings,
and we welcome the delegation of Somalia to today’s
meeting.
Mexico congratulates the people and the
Government of Somalia on the conclusion of peaceful
presidential elections held on 15 May, as well as
Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud on his election as the
tenth president of Somalia.
We recognize the critical role of the members
of parliament, the presidential election organizing
committee and the Somali security forces, as well as the
African Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS),
throughout the election process.
We applaud the election of Mrs. Saadia Yasin Haji
Samatar as the first female Deputy Speaker of the
House of the People in the history of Somalia. However,
we regret that the target of 30 percent of seats held by
women in parliament has not been reached and that the
number of women elected to the House of the People is
less than the number achieved in 2016.

S/PV.9040

The selection of officials for the new
Administration remains ongoing. We hope that women
will be adequately represented in the Government and
that elected women parliamentarians will participate
meaningfully in decision-making.
Mexico urges the new Government of Somalia to
prioritize peace and dialogue and to spare no effort
to ensure the well-being of the Somali people. The
multiple challenges facing Somalia call for learning
from past mistakes and avoiding friction among the
main federal authorities and fostering collaboration
with federal member states. In this regard, Mexico calls
on all political actors to work together in good faith in
order to implement agreements for the benefit of the
population.
My country condemns in the strongest terms the
terrorist attacks perpetrated by Al-Shabaab. Mexico
expresses its great concern that the group continues
to generate sufficient income to sustain its insurgency
through extortion, control of agriculture and illicit
trafficking in arms and explosives. It is urgent to put an
end to this terrorist group’s access to financial services
and to exercise effective controls over arms transfers
and ensure the effectiveness of the embargo.
We also express our deep concern about the
high levels of sexual and gender-based violence and
grave violations against children in Somalia. We call
on the new Somali authorities to accelerate the full
implementation of their commitments to ending these
violations and to take steps to ensure that perpetrators
are held accountable.
Mexico reiterates the need to address the grave
humanitarian situation in Somalia. It is truly worrying
that from January 2022 to date, the number of people
facing food shortages has increased from 2 million to
6 million. Like the rest of the countries in the Horn of
Africa, Somalia is being affected by the worst drought
in 40 years, which is aggravating the humanitarian
situation in the country, increasing the risk of localized
famine and causing large-scale displacement.
Climate change also increases the threat of
insecurity, exacerbating tensions and competition
between communities for resources, which in turn
gives Al-Shabaab scope to exploit these conditions and
consolidate their dominance. In this regard, we find it
important that the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia (UNSOM) continues to consider the adverse
implications of climate change in Somalia. We also

22-3575213/17

S/PV.9040

The situation in Somalia

23/05/2022

recognize UNSOM’s essential role in other areas, such
as strategic advice to Somali authorities, coordination
of support from international partners, electoral support
and its efforts for women’s empowerment. Mexico
looks forward to UNSOM’s strategic review to see how
the Mission can continue to support Somalia.

and the affiliates of Da’esh in Somalia. In this regard,
it is important to ensure that the transfer of security
responsibilities from ATMIS to the Somali security
forces be carried out carefully and effectively to prevent
the creation of any security vacuum that could enable
Al-Shabaab to expand its influence and scope.

Finally, we reaffirm the importance of coordination
between UNSOM, ATMIS and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia in carrying out their
mandates. Their presence on the ground and coordinated
work should contribute to moving the country towards
greater security, social and political stability and
sustainable peace.

It is also important to note that not only does
Al-Shabaab pose a threat to Somalia and its people,
but it also undermines peace and stability elsewhere
in the region, which was quite evident in Al-Shabaab’s
cross-border attacks against neighbouring countries,
including Kenya. The United Arab Emirates condemns
those terrorist acts and reaffirms its solidarity with the
people of Kenya. My country also supports all efforts,
including international partnerships, that seek to put
an end to the growing transnational threats posed by
Al-Shabaab in Africa.

Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates)
(spoke in Arabic): I would like to thank both
the Special Representative James Swan, and the
Special Representative Francisco Madeira for their
comprehensive briefings. We also welcome the
participation of the representative of Somalia in
today’s meeting.
I would like to join my colleagues in congratulating
His Excellency Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud on being
elected President of Somalia and wish him success
during his tenure. The United Arab Emirates welcomes
the successful conclusion of the electoral process in
Somalia, which serves as a definitive step towards
peace and stability in the country. At this critical and
historic juncture for Somalia, it is necessary to increase
focus on addressing the urgent challenges the country
faces, especially terrorism and the impact of drought.
For its part, the United Arab Emirates will continue to
stand by the people of Somalia as they work to build
a peaceful and prosperous country that reflects and
fulfils their collective aspirations.

We remain concerned about reports on the
smuggling of weapons between Somalia and Yemen,
which risk falling in the hands of terrorist groups,
such as Al-Shabaab and the Houthis, and threaten the
stability of the region, international trade and the safety
of navigation. In that regard, we stress the important
role of the Combined Maritime Forces, which remains
critical in combating the smuggling of weapons off the
coast of Somalia, in cooperation with the Government of
Somalia and in accordance with resolution 2607 (2021).

In the light of the current developments, I would
like to focus on three issues. First, we echo the call of
the Secretary-General for continued security assistance
for Somalia, so that it can strengthen its capabilities
to confront the serious threats posed by the Al-Shabab
terrorist group in terms of the security and stability of
the country. Over the last few weeks alone, Al-Shabaab
has continued to launch complex deadly attacks that
have inflicted harm on the Somali people and weakened
the Somali security forces, which could ultimately
derail State-led efforts and State-building priorities.

Secondly, the dire humanitarian situation in
Somalia is also of concern, in particular since it is
being further exacerbated by the worsening drought
and subsequent acute food insecurity, both of which
disproportionately affect women and children.
According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, nearly 800,000 people have
been displaced by drought since early 2021, and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees recently reported that 4.8 million people
are experiencing acute food insecurity. Therefore,
my country calls on the international community to
swiftly respond to the crisis, double its humanitarian
aid to Somalia and ensure its safe and unhindered
delivery. In that context, last week the United Arab
Emirates, in cooperation with United Arab Emiratesbased humanitarian agencies, announced a new
financial assistance package to Somalia amounting to
approximately $11 million dollars.

We reiterate our support for the African Union
Transitional Mission in Somalia (ATMIS), which
remains a crucial partner in confronting Al-Shabaab

Thirdly, we would also like to highlight the
urgent need for ATMIS, the United Nations country
team and others to build on the pioneering climate

14/17

22-35752

23/05/2022

The situation in Somalia

and peacebuilding work in Somalia. Coordinated
investment in food, water and basic services in fragile
communities is one of the best investments that the
United Nations and its partners can make for stability
and recovery. We particularly note the breakthrough
model that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia (UNSOM) offers for bringing private capital
to build renewable energy infrastructure that powers
both peacekeepers and host communities, creating a
positive legacy that outlasts the international presence.
In conclusion, we would like to once again reiterate
the commitment of the United Arab Emirates to
promote peace, prosperity and stability in Somalia. We
also commend the tireless efforts of ATMIS and the
troop-contributing countries that support the Mission
and continue to pay the ultimate price for achieving
peace in Somalia. Furthermore, we also support the
mandates of the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia and UNSOM.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General James Swan
and Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia Francisco
Madeira for their respective briefings on the most
recent developments in Somalia. I also welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representative of Somalia
at today’s meeting.
The people of Somalia have the unique honour of
being Africa’s first democrats. The culmination of the
election process, although delayed, is an opportunity
to revive that legacy. The democratic process in
Somalia, despite its constraints, has finally resulted
in a peaceful transfer of power. That would not have
been possible but for the resolve and commitment of the
Somali leadership, as well as the persistent efforts of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union, the United Nations and the international
community. We welcome those developments and
congratulate the people of Somalia and its leadership.
We also extend our best wishes to His Excellency
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud and fondly recall
his long-standing association with India.
The challenges to the new Government in Somalia
are many. The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral referred to the priorities outlined by the new
President. At the top of the list is the security situation,
which has remained worrisome, with Al-Shabaab
continuing to perpetrate attacks in recent months against
the Somali security forces, the African Union Mission

S/PV.9040

in Somalia and the African Union Transition Mission in
Somalia (ATMIS). The Al-Shabaab terror attack on the
ATMIS forward operating base in Ceel Baraf, on 3 May,
once again demonstrated its striking power. We express
our deepest sympathy and condolences to the families
of the 10 Burundian peacekeepers who were martyred
in the attack and to the people and the Government of
the Republic of Burundi.
Terrorism is the biggest threat to Somalia and the
Horn of Africa region. Preventing terror outfits such
as Al-Shabaab from accessing financial resources is
crucial. Equally important is to recognize and address
the linkages between terrorism and transnational
organized crime.
Against that background, we encourage the new
Government to take measures to strengthen the security
forces and address the governance issues in the areas
dominated by Al-Shabaab, as well as other priorities,
including constitutional and judicial reforms. The
challenges posed by Al-Shabaab also require concerted
efforts and action from the countries in the region.
The implementation of the Somali Transition
Plan and national security architecture needs to be
prioritized with better coordination and integration of
regional security forces. ATMIS has several onerous
responsibilities, primarily to reduce the threat posed
by the terror group Al-Shabaab. We note with concern
that ATMIS financing issues have yet to be resolved.
Ensuring sustainable and predictable funding for
ATMIS is an obligation of the international community.
The consolidation of the security gains achieved in
Somalia in the recent years also requires constant
support from the international community to Somalia
and ATMIS.
The international community should not lose sight
of the humanitarian situation in Somalia. More than
7.7 million are need of urgent assistance, especially in
the wake of the worst drought in the Horn of Africa
in 40 years, which puts millions at risk of famine.
Scaling up humanitarian efforts must be a top priority,
as the 2022 humanitarian response plan, requiring
$1.5 billion, remains barely funded.
In conclusion, India and Somalia share two
millenniums of civilizational exchanges across the seas.
India continues to support Somalia through development
assistance and capacity-building programmes. As the
new Government in Somalia takes charge, we reiterate
our commitment to support Somalia and its people.

22-3575215/17

S/PV.9040

The situation in Somalia

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Swan for his presentation and for being with us
today. We commend him and his team’s work. And we
fully support the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, so that the
Mission can continue to serve its vital role in Somalia.
I also want to thank Ambassador Madeira for his
briefing, and I welcome the Permanent Representative
of Somalia at our meeting today.
Today I would like to focus on three aspects of the
situation in Somalia: the recent elections, the terrorist
threat from Al-Shabaab and the dire humanitarian and
economic crises.
First, the United States welcomes the completion
of Somalia’s electoral process. And we congratulate
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud for winning the
presidential election, as well as all the members of
Parliament on their elections. We are particularly pleased
to congratulate Deputy Speaker Saadia Samatar on her
election. The United States looks forward to working
closely with the country’s newly elected leaders to help
extend governance, security and economic opportunity
for the people of Somalia. We look forward to the timely
nomination and parliamentary approval of a prime
minister and cabinet. After more than four years of
political infighting, reconciliation among the national
Government and federal member states is vital for the
country to regain positive momentum and tackle the
serious challenges it faces.
Secondly, Al-Shabaab continues to pose a
menacing threat. The horrific attack on 3 May against
the Burundian National Defence Force base in Ceel
Baraf is all the proof we need. We strongly condemn
the attack, and we offer our condolences to the victims’
loved ones. Somalia’s security and that of the region rely
on us using every tool in our arsenal to fight terrorism.
That means providing support to the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia and Somalia’s security
forces. It means using the Somalia sanctions regime
to designate Al-Shabaab operatives, who continue to
threaten Somalia’s peace and security. It also means
alleviating the horrific humanitarian conditions that
inspire extremism.
That leads me to my third and final point. The new
Somali Government must address the dire humanitarian
situation, including the plight of the more than 6 million
16/17

23/05/2022

people who may go hungry or thirsty because of the
devastating drought. Of course, given the worsening
crisis, that is a challenge no country can address alone,
and it is not caused by Somalia alone.
As Secretary Blinken noted in the Security Council
last week (see S/PV.9036), if Russia’s brutal war of
choice continues to prevent wheat and other foods from
reaching Somalia, it may very well push the country
over the brink of famine. That is why we have to rally
the world to bolster the global food supply, strengthen
food resiliency and provide humanitarian aid to those
in dire need.
To meet that challenge, last week we hosted a
series of days of action on global food security. It is
why we led a road map for global food security — a
call to action — and we are proud of the more than 30
Member States that signed on. It is why, late last month,
the United States announced more than $200 million in
additional assistance to respond to humanitarian needs
in the Horn of Africa.
Of course, tied directly to the humanitarian
situation is Somalia’s economic well-being, which
will depend on its ability to meet the conditions
required for reaching the completion point under the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative. We call
on the President and the new Government to engage
international financial institutions as soon as possible
to ensure that that process remains on track.
The United States strongly supports the Somali
people. We want a Somalia that is abundant with
food and water and a Somalia that enjoys a thriving
democracy and plenty of prosperity. Let us all work
together to support the new Government to help them
address these crises and to work towards better days.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to again draw the attention of speakers
to paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Madam President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, and I wish you all the best in fulfilling
22-35752

23/05/2022

The situation in Somalia

your mandate. I want to thank the briefers for their
briefings on the recent developments in my country.
The presidential election took place on the eve of
the seventy-ninth anniversary of the founding of the
first political party in Somalia — the Somali Youth
League, which was singularly instrumental in achieving
the independence and unity of Somalia in 1960. In
the process, the Somali Youth League also helped to
create one of Africa’s first democracies. The optimism
and hope created by the Somali Youth League nearly
a century ago are also a major source of our current
optimism for achieving peace and prosperity, thereby
leading towards a better Somalia.
With the election of President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud, we continue our proud, long-standing
tradition of the peaceful transition of power in Africa.
The newly elected President and the Parliament are now
ready to continue to deepen federalism and reconciliation
and to tackle the socioeconomic, structural and political
issues that millions of Somali women, men and children
face in their daily lives. Those tasks will not be easy,
but we are confident in our partners’ support, especially
in clearing Somalia’s arrears to allow us to move along
a path towards the completion of the debt-relief process
and access to international financial institutions, which
are essential ingredients for economic development and
the improvement of the living conditions of the people
of Somalia.
The more immediate challenge, of course, is the
insecurity, namely, the threat of Al-Shabaab, which
has caused major losses in terms of both human
lives and wealth in Somalia. There is no doubt that
we are succeeding in the fight against Al-Shabaab
in a multipronged approach, embedded in the
political strategy. The brave Somali national forces
are dismantling Al-Shabaab hideouts and financial

S/PV.9040

networks as we prepare to assume full security
responsibility from the African Union Transition
Mission in Somalia, to pave the way for its agreed exit
by 2024. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
troop- and police-contributing countries’ personnel
and recognize their sacrifices.
As Council members are aware, my country is also
facing a protracted and recurring humanitarian crisis,
coupled with the convergence in 2020 into the triple
threat of flooding, desert locusts and the coronavirus
disease. We are grateful for our humanitarian partners’
generous recent appeal to assist in our response to the
life-threatening needs. Nevertheless, humanitarian
assistance alone cannot provide a sustainable or costeffective solution to the recurring shocks in Somalia,
as that requires substantial development investment
through our national development plan and strengthening
the nexus between humanitarian and developmental
assistance. That will help us utilize our Government
systems and achieve medium- to long-term solutions to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and target
our citizens, who are experiencing vulnerability.
In conclusion, we are committed to continuing to
work together to overcome any obstacles in our path
in a democratic way, in line with our Constitution. We
wish to reiterate our appreciation to the African Union
and the United Nations for their steadfast support of the
Somali people, and we look forward to working with
international and regional partners towards a peaceful,
secure and prosperous Horn of Africa.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion on the
subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

22-3575217/17
