asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6865

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6865th meeting
Monday, 19 November 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Piracy
Letter dated 6 November 2012 from the Permanent Representative of India to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2012/814)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-59537 (E)

*1259537*

S/PV.6865

Piracy and armed robbery against ships are of
global concern. They affect the freedom of shipping and
the safety of shipping lanes that carry about 90 per cent
of the world’s trade. Pirate attacks also endanger the
safety of seafarers, fishermen and passengers, and the
delivery of humanitarian aid. They damage maritime
industries such as ports, fisheries and tourism, thereby
hindering sustainable development.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Piracy
Letter dated 6 November 2012 from the
Permanent Representative of India
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2012/814)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Egypt, Estonia, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, the Republic
of Korea, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Somalia, Thailand,
Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the United Republic
of Tanzania and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/783, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2020 (2011) and on the situation with respect
to piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of
Somalia.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2012/814, which contains a
letter dated 6 November 2012 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper
on the item under consideration.
I welcome the presence of the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, and I give
him the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I welcome this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on piracy
and armed robbery at sea, and to introduce the annual
report of the Secretary-General on piracy off the coast
of Somalia (S/2012/783).
2

According to the latest reports of the International
Maritime Organization (IMO), there were 291 attacks
against ships in the first 10 months of 2012. Pirates are
still holding 293 seafarers hostage. As in 2011 and 2010,
the areas most affected are East Africa, West Africa and
the Far East. The latest report of the Secretary-General
notes a sharp decline in pirate attacks in waters off the
coast of Somalia in 2012 compared to 2011. However,
these gains can be easily reversed if we do not address
the causes of piracy, including instability, lawlessness
and problems of effective governance, notwithstanding
recent important political progress in Somalia.
Although piracy is a global problem, it takes
different forms. Off the coast of Somalia, pirates are
well organized, hijacking ships and crews to hold them
for ransom. In the Gulf of Guinea, piracy is related to
the theft of oil and linked with the regional black market
and organized crime. While hostages have been taken,
ransoms do not appear to be the driving goal. There are
also differences in the political and governance context
that contributed to the rise of piracy in these areas.
Still, our response in the Gulf of Guinea and
elsewhere can rely on the lessons learned from Somalia,
including
by focusing on modernizing counterpiracy laws, strengthening capacities for maritime
law enforcement and crime investigation, supporting
regional networks, and knowledge-sharing.
Combating piracy requires a multidimensional
approach. In Somalia, this has meant stabilizing the
country through a Somali-owned process. The new
President of Somalia has made an impressive start,
but challenges remain significant. We need to move
swiftly to support the Government so that it can finally
provide the security and peace dividends that Somalis
deserve. We welcome the Government’s commitment to
combating piracy, as stated in the programme endorsed
by Parliament last Tuesday.
Secondly, Somalia needs a comprehensive maritime
security and economic strategy with a proper legal
framework, including the proclamation of an exclusive

12-59537

S/PV.6865

economic zone, in accordance with the provisions of
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
We should translate the success at sea into progress on
land.
Thirdly, we need to strengthen the capacity of
States to prosecute individuals suspected of piracy and
to imprison convicted pirates. That effort must include
deterring and suppressing the financing of piracy and
the laundering of ransom money. The United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime’s counter-piracy programme
is helping in this regard, including to ensure that prison
conditions meet international standards.
Fourthly, the constructive engagement of Member
States and international and regional organizations to
build consensus on a joint response should continue.
The Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia
now comprises over 70 participants with impressive
expertise. Other initiatives complete these efforts,
including the Djibouti Code of Conduct, under the
auspices of the IMO, and the Regional Anti-Piracy
Prosecutions and Intelligence Coordination Centre
recently established in Seychelles.
The United Nations Political Office for Somalia
also plays a key role under resolution 1976 (2011)
in coordinating the efforts of Somalia with those
of United Nations agencies, regional organizations
and the international community. Consistent with
resolution 2039 (2012), the United Nations Offices
for Central Africa and West Africa are assisting the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Gulf of Guinea Commission in the preparations for a
regional summit on piracy in Cameroon in April 2013.
Fifthly, the shipping industry should be encouraged
to take steps to protect itself. Twenty per cent of
vessels transiting high-risk waters do not implement
security measures, and those vessels account for
the overwhelming number of successfully pirated
ships. The IMO is working closely with the industry
on a variety of measures and best practices that have
prevented pirates from boarding vessels and enabled
rescues.
Finally, the United Nations is grateful for the
robust counter-piracy support provided by the naval
presence established by NATO, the European Union,
the Combined Maritime Task Force and individual
Member States. Several Member States — including
China, India, Japan, Malaysia, the Republic of Korea

12-59537

and the Russian Federation — have deployed naval and
military assets in the region as part of international
counter-piracy efforts.
Let us also remember the seafarers themselves.
Hostages endure the most horrendous conditions and
are often threatened and tortured in an effort to extract
a ransom. I welcome the recent approval by the Board
of the Trust Fund to Support the Initiatives of States
to Counter Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, chaired
by the Department of Political Affairs, of a project to
provide medical care, accommodation, food and clothes
to hostages during the release phase, and to help them
return home swiftly. Let us not forget that human
dimension.
Looking ahead, three challenges require our
immediate attention. First, we must have better
coordination, information-sharing and trust-building
among countries and agencies involved in counter-piracy
operations. Secondly, capacity must be strengthened to
prosecute piracy cases and imprison those convicted in
accordance with international human rights standards.
Thirdly, a framework must be established to govern the
use of privately contracted armed security personnel
on board vessels. The work being undertaken by the
IMO should continue in order to ensure regulation and
accountability.
In closing, piracy is a problem that the international
community can address successfully if we continue to
work together. The United Nations remains committed
to working with its partners to consolidate international
assistance, coordinate our activities, and deliver a
comprehensive response to this threat.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his statement.
I now give the floor to the members of the Council.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his briefing. I
should also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
most recent report on piracy (S/2012/783).
The
international
community
has
made
sustained efforts to combat piracy, and the integrated
multidimensional approach we have pursued together,
in partnership with the private sector, has borne fruit.
The number of pirate attacks is dropping rapidly, and
pirates are holding fewer hostages. The United Nations
and the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of

3

S/PV.6865

Somalia deserve special thanks for building bridges
among the key actors to facilitate this progress.
While the situation has improved dramatically, even
one hostage is indeed too many. We express our deepest
sympathy for kidnapped seafarers and the suffering of
their families, and we call for their immediate release.
We note in particular the crew of the MV Iceberg, who
were long ago abandoned and have been in captivity
for almost three years. We also support the shipping
industry’s provision of all necessary assistance to
seafarers after their release.
Effectively countering piracy requires action on
multiple fronts. Identifying and apprehending the
criminal conspirators who lead, manage and finance
the pirate enterprise is central to our efforts. Those
individuals are ultimately responsible for hostage-taking
and other piracy-related threats to seafarers. We are
working in close coordination with our international
partners to connect and promote information sharing
among law enforcement communities, intelligence
agencies and financial experts in order to prosecute
pirate conspirators and disrupt their operations. In
addition, specifically in the Somalia context, the
international community can do more to enhance
Somali capacity and encourage their active involvement
in efforts to prosecute and incarcerate suspected pirates.
We continue to support the work of the United
Nations-managed Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of
States Countering Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, which
has funded, among other projects, the construction
of prisons, the training of judicial officials and the
purchase of equipment for law enforcement in Somalia.
We appreciate the important work under way by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United
Nations Development Programme and others to assist
Somalia and States of the region in conducting piracy
prosecutions, as well as in building and responsibly
operating suitable and sufficient prisons.
Among others, we thank the Government of
Seychelles for its willingness to host a regional
prosecution centre, contingent upon the establishment
of an effective post-trial transfer framework. We
welcome the opening, this year, of its regional
anti-piracy prosecution and intelligence coordination
centre. We also thank the Government of Kenya for its
recent prosecutorial efforts, and we note its pioneering
use of technology to cope with the logistical challenges
such cases present.

4

Somalia must do its part as well. Having completed
its transition, adopted a new provisional Constitution
and elected a new Parliament and President, Somalia
is poised to take greater action to counter piracy. In
particular, we urge the new Somali authorities to adopt
and enact appropriate anti-piracy legislation. The
establishment of a Somali exclusive economic zone,
consistent with the Convention on the Law of the Sea,
is also needed.
As the international community works to put pirate
financiers and facilitators out of business and help to
bring them to justice on land, the shipping industry
should continue to make merchant ships harder targets
to attack at sea. Clearly, preventing pirate attacks is
a more effective and efficient way to protect human
life and property than interrupting attacks in progress
or rescuing hostages after an attack. There are not
enough naval forces to maintain a sufficient presence
throughout the high-risk ocean areas to deter and defeat
all pirate attacks.
The routine implementation of best management
practices and the responsible use of armed security
personnel are vital adjuncts to national and coalition
naval patrols. We know that applying best management
practices on vessels transiting high-risk waters
greatly reduces the likelihood of a successful attack.
Furthermore, to date not a single ship employing
privately contracted armed security personnel has
been successfully pirated. For certain ships determined
to be at high risk, onboard armed security, including
privately contracted personnel, can be a helpful and
appropriate defensive measure, if so assessed by the
vessel’s operators.
The United States has mandated the deployment
of best management practices on United Statesflagged vessels sailing in high-risk waters. We have
also established requirements and guidance for United
States ships when the owner or operator determines that
armed security is needed. We will continue to work with
fellow International Maritime Organization member
States, along with labour and industry representatives,
on the development of appropriate standards.
The international community, in partnership with
the private sector, has made impressive strides towards
reducing the scourge of piracy. But our gains are not
irreversible, and we cannot let up. We look forward
to continued cooperation with, and support from, our
international partners, action by private industry and
a sustained commitment by the Security Council to
12-59537

S/PV.6865

ensure that seafarers are protected, that international
commerce is no longer threatened and that the guilty
are brought to justice.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the delegation of India
for its initiative in holding a meeting of the Security
Council on the issue of combating piracy in the context
of maintaining international peace and security. We are
also grateful to Mr. Eliasson for his briefing.
The Russian Federation is concerned about
increasing piracy activity in recent years in a number
of regions of the world’s oceans. We favour finding a
long-term solution to the problem.
Piracy threatens the safety of navigation, as well
as other types of economic activity at sea. We are all
familiar with the staggering statistics demonstrating
the sheer scale of the losses inflicted by piracy on
the global economy annually. Proceeds from hostage
ransoms often go to fund other types of criminal
activity, including that associated with extremists.
Piracy is often a further destabilizing factor that serves
to exacerbate situations in areas of conflict.
Piracy off the coast of Somalia has continued to be
a major scourge in recent years, to such a degree that
its negative impact has begun to affect the interests of
virtually all States — effectively becoming global in
character. The efforts of the international community
under the auspices of the Security Council have led
to positive changes in the region. In our view, a set of
factors are at work in that regard, above all improving
the situation on land. In that connection, stabilizing
the situation in Somalia is playing a role. Coherent
efforts by States have also proven to be effective, in
particular efforts by Russia and regional organizations
to patrol shipping lanes and fend off pirate attacks at
sea. Self-defence measures by the maritime industry
have also been helpful. We call on all international
partners involved in anti-piracy efforts, including
the International Maritime Organization, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, to
work together in that regard.
Nevertheless, in spite of the successes, Somali
piracy remains robust. The situation could go awry at
any point. Pirates are shifting their focus onto parts
of the Indian Ocean that are more difficult to control.
Many piracy groups have turned to new sources of
criminal proceeds. Hostage-taking for ransom on land

12-59537

has become more common. All of that indicates that it
would be premature to scale back international efforts
in this area. In that regard, Russia supports a one-year
extension of the powers to implement all the necessary
measures to combat piracy off the coast of Somalia,
including in its territorial waters. We intend to continue
to provide naval forces in the Gulf of Aden, working
in close coordination with other Stats and regional
organizations.
There is no doubt that tackling the problem of
piracy must be comprehensive in nature. We share the
conclusions of the London Conference on Piracy and
Somalia and the Istanbul II Conference on Somalia,
namely, that an approach is needed that brings together
efforts in the areas of development, strengthening
national anti-piracy capacity and establishing the rule
of law. An important part of that work continues to be
ensuring the effective prosecution of pirates and their
accomplices. We have also noted some positive steps
in that regard. It is important that the international
community be fully aware of the fact that, without
tackling the problem of impunity, it will be impossible
to fully eradicate piracy.
We welcome the willingness of States in the region,
including Seychelles, Mauritius, Kenya and Tanzania,
to intensify cooperation in this area. Overall, we are
satisfied by the work they have done on this issue with
the support of the various United Nations structures,
above all UNODC.
However, in spite of the importance of prosecuting
the perpetrators of pirate attacks, the focus now is on
identifying and neutralizing key actors in the pirate
industry. Doing that would be a blow to the very heart
of piracy. Without the masterminds and financial
mediators, the piracy business model would collapse. In
order to tackle that problem, we need to enhance legal
mechanisms for combating corruption and financial
malfeasance, including the legalization of criminal
proceeds. In that regard, we favour the introduction of
targeted sanctions against pirate leaders. However, that
proposal still does not enjoy full support from some
members of the Council. We trust that they will review
their positions.
We are closely following the new hotbed of piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea. In our opinion, the nature and
scope of the problem is different. What we are seeing
there are mainly acts of armed robbery close to the
coastline. We hope that the mobilization we have seen
of regional efforts with the necessary international
5

S/PV.6865

assistance will assist in preventing the escalation of the
threat.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Indian presidency for having organized
this debate and for the draft presidential statement. My
thanks also go to the Deputy Secretary-General for his
briefing.
It is important to remember that the scourge of
piracy affects the entire international community.
It threatens the stability of entire regions, disrupts
trade networks and feeds other trafficking activities.
Piracy must therefore be dealt with as a whole. As the
Secretary-General has urged, we must also work to
aid victims, in particular the seafarers who have been
kidnapped and held hostage, in some cases for several
years.
Since 2008, France has taken action to mobilize the
international community and the Security Council to
combat the threat of piracy off the coast of Somalia.
The European Union has played a pivotal role in that
respect, in particular via Operation Atalanta. Those
efforts have borne fruit. Since the beginning of the
year, the number of attacks has declined significantly,
while the success rate has declined even further.
Even if the scale has tipped slightly in our favour,
the situation will remain precarious, as long as no
noticeable change occurs in the security, political
and economic situations. Pirates continue to adapt
themselves, improve their operations, seek new targets
for their operations and often go unpunished owing to a
perennial lack of jurisdiction.
The positive gains must therefore be strengthened.
Developments in Somalia, including the conclusion of
the transitional period, the election of President Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud and the appointment of the new
Government provide such an opportunity.
I believe that there are three essential avenues to
follow in order to definitively resolve the scourge of
piracy off the coast of Somali. First, a presence at sea
has a deterrent role that remains crucial and must be
continued. The protection of vulnerable vessels by
private security forces cannot be considered to replace
naval operations, as the presence of such forces alone
is incapable of facing the threat. In that context, States
and organizations must continue to mobilize so as to
implement the authorizations of actions at sea provided
for in the resolutions of the Council.

6

Secondly, combating the impunity of pirates
impunity must be a priority. Eighty per cent of pirate
suspects who have been captured continue to go free,
which affects the effectiveness and credibility of the
operations at sea. Despite the fact that 20 States, of
which France is one, have started legal proceedings,
the burden of action at this stage falls on the countries
in the region. In that respect, particular tribute must
be paid to Seychelles for its strenuous efforts in that
context.
A judicial response will have little deterrent effect
as long as Somalia and its regional bodies are not in
a position to prosecute their nationals. Developments
under way in Somalia will open new ways forward
aimed at enabling durable control of the crisis.
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud has said that
establishing a new judicial system will be one of the
pillars of his policy in Somalia. The adoption of a
legal framework to criminalize piracy, as requested by
successive resolutions of the Council and the outcome
communiqué of the September mini-summit on Somalia
(see SG/2187), will represent an essential step.
We must also strengthen our efforts against the
backers who are at the heart of the piracy activities, as my
Russian colleague mentioned. To that end, international
cooperation will play a key role. The International
Criminal Police Organization also plays a pivotal role,
which must be encouraged. The adoption of individual
sanctions pursuant to resolution 1844 (2008), targeted
against those backing the pirates, would also contritube
to those efforts and enable the gathering of intelligence
to be used by States in undertaking legal proceedings.
It would also send a strong signal about the Council’s
determination to continue its actions against piracy.
Thirdly, bolstering the maritime and judicial
capacities of the States of the region is of fundamental
importance in consolidating the gains achieved. In that
context, the launching of the European Union mission
EUCAP NESTOR in July, for an initial two-year period,
marked a turning point. It is aimed at providing States
with capacities to ensure the security of their shipping
lanes, through advisory and training assistance aimed at
coast guard and maritime administration staff, as well
as the establishment of a coastal police for Somalia.
France is playing an active role in that regard.
In relation to the Gulf of Guinea, the adoption
of resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012) signalled
the mobilization of both the Security Council and

12-59537

S/PV.6865

the international community in that effort. France is
playing its full role in that connection, particularly
through its implementation, in mid-2011, of a regional
support programme aimed at training in the area of
maritime security.
We encourage the States of the region and the
relevant regional organizations, in particular the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Economic Community of Central African States, to
strengthen their involvement. In that respect, France
supports the initiative to organize a regional conference
in 2013 on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea with a view to
following up on resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012).
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me join previous
speakers in thanking the Indian presidency for
organizing this important open debate, and Deputy
Secretary-General Eliasson for his very insightful
briefing.
Today I would like to make three points, first, on
the lessons learned in dealing with piracy in various
regions and the approach that follows from that;
secondly, on the role of the various actors in counterpiracy activities; and thirdly, on the prosecution of
convicted pirates.
At the outset, I would like to align myself with the
statement to be made later on by the observer of the
European Union, which will provide an overview of
the activities of the European Union (EU) in combating
piracy. Germany actively participates in those efforts.
On the first point, we welcome, as have others, the
substantial progress made in the fight against piracy,
reflected in the sharp decline in the hijacking of vessels,
especially off the coast of Somalia, and the lower
number of hostages currently held in Somali waters.
That certainly reflects the success of the international
naval forces jointly patrolling the waters off Somalia
and better self-protection by the shipping industry.
Nevertheless, piracy continues to pose a serious
threat, since seafarers and vessels continue to be held
hostage and piracy attacks in other regions, particularly
the Gulf of Guinea, have been on the rise.
We are convinced that, in the long term, the fight
against piracy can only be won on land, by addressing
the factors facilitating piracy in an integrated and
strategic manner. Such a strategy needs to combine
elements for building State capacities based on the rule
of law and on functioning law enforcement structures,

12-59537

as well as social and economic circumstances that
provide for the livelihoods of the people on the ground.
It is obvious that the international community is called
upon to continue its support in that regard.
On my second point, the role of the division of
labour, it is primarily the responsibility of the States
concerned to prevent criminals from launching attacks
on vessels off their coasts. It is therefore important that
those States build the necessary police forces and coast
guards, with international support where that is needed.
Furthermore, we welcome the joint political
and military efforts undertaken by the international
community to secure the waters off the States concerned.
We also welcome the efforts of regional actors to
define and implement regional polices and strategies
in the fight against the scourge of piracy in Africa. In
that regard, we commend the initiatives taken by the
States in the Gulf of Guinea region, aimed at fostering
cooperation with a view to enhancing maritime safety.
We encourage the international community to support
those efforts.
Concerning Somalia, the activities of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and the Trust
Fund supporting the Group’s initiatives are the most
useful contributions in that regard. We have therefore
decided to make a new contribution of $2 million to the
Trust Fund. We call on Member States, but especially on
the shipping industry, to contribute to the Trust Fund,
which finances critical projects in various sectors of
counter-piracy, ranging from prosecution and detention
efforts to projects that focus on hostages.
The private sector also has a role to play when it
comes to the prevention of hijackings. The use of best
management practices launched by the International
Maritime Organization and developed by the shipping
industry has been crucial to the decrease in successful
attacks. We therefore reiterate our call on shipowners
and shipowners’ associations to further engage in the
promotion and implementation of the best management
practices.
My third and last point concerns the prosecution
of convicted pirates. The effective prosecution and
imprisonment of those responsible for piracy and armed
robbery has made progress, but remains a challenge. It
is the primary responsibility of the States concerned
to prosecute, sentence and imprison pirates operating
from their shores. As pointed out again in the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/783),

7

S/PV.6865

the Somali judicial system and its prisons still face a
number of challenges. Capacities must be enlarged,
and conditions further improved. Germany commends
and actively supports all initiatives in that respect,
especially those of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the United Nations Development
Programme.
In conclusion, let me stress again that modern
piracy remains a considerable challenge. In the past
few years, however, the international community has
achieved a lot with regard to the fight against piracy.
It must continue to coordinate, operate jointly and
support regional efforts to tackle the root causes and
effects of piracy.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Like
others, I welcome the Indian initiative to convene this
open debate on combating piracy, and I thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his briefing this morning.

Capacity should be built in a way that does not prevent
facilities and expertise from being used in other areas
of law enforcement.
Both the reward and the funding of the piracy
business model lie in ransom payments. Recognizing
that, my Prime Minister established an international
piracy ransoms task force at the London conference with
the ultimate ambition of stopping all ransom payments.
Task force members reached a clear consensus on a
number of substantive, practical steps towards the
long-term goal of stopping pirate ransom payments.
The task force’s conclusions will be presented to the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia at
its plenary meeting next month. We have heard how
INTERPOL is leading international efforts to track
ransom money to various parts of the world. It is vital
that the beneficiaries of ransom payments be brought
to justice.

The Security Council is central to the international
community’s response to piracy off the coast of
Somalia. Multinational, multi-agency naval operations,
the use of best management practices, vessel protection
detachments and privately contracted armed personnel
have all had an impact on reducing the number of
hijackings and attacks in the high-risk area off the
coast of Somalia. But despite the significant reduction
in the number of successful hijackings in the last year,
the threat of piracy remains serious, and we cannot be
complacent.

Developing regional maritime capacity in order to
enable littoral nations to manage their own waters is
also essential. In West Africa for example, the United
Kingdom is supporting the industry-led initiative to
develop a maritime trade information sharing centre,
and we welcome the kind offer from Ghana to host the
centre. The centre will provide important real-time
information, advice and warnings for commercial
shipping travelling in West Africa, while allowing
regional States to work in partnership to develop
a better understanding of their own — and their
region’s — maritime domain.

The Council also follows developments in other
parts of the world with growing concern, particularly
with respect to the growing violence seen in attacks
in West Africa, in the Gulf of Guinea, and the rise
of attacks in South-East Asia. Innocent seafarers are
still being held hostage in unacceptable conditions or
subjected to ever more violent acts of armed robbery
at sea.

In Somalia, the United Kingdom is implementing
a multimillion-pound development programme focused
on building institutions, creating jobs and opportunities,
developing health care and providing humanitarian
assistance. Across the Indian Ocean, we continue to
support States in developing prosecutorial and penal
capacity and maritime capabilities.

The United Kingdom remains strongly committed
to the fight against piracy. We believe that it is vital to
break the piracy business model. The key to achieving
that is a comprehensive approach that tackles piracy
directly at sea and its root causes on land. Poverty, a lack
of security and no job opportunities or prospects create
an environment where some believe that crime pays.
We must show those individuals that criminal activity
does not pay and will not go unpunished. We therefore
strongly support efforts to bolster investigation,
prosecution and penal capacity in regional States.

8

Piracy is organized crime. It thrives in places
where the rule of law is weak or has broken down. It
is therefore vital that we, the international community,
tackle those drivers of crime on land in an integrated
manner. We are starting to see results, so now is not the
time to be complacent and step back, but to forge ahead
with ambitious capacity-building and development
programmes.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for taking the initiative to hold this debate, which
allows us to voice our opinions and exchange views

12-59537

S/PV.6865

on the recurring issue of piracy, which has become a
genuine threat, around the world, to international peace
and security. I thank the Deputy Secretary-General for
his briefing on the matter.
The importance of this debate lies in the fact that,
although the problem of piracy varies in its severity
from region to region, it allows us to study the diversity
of challenges that the international community faces in
confronting that threat. That is particularly true since,
as with any other form of crime, piracy is inevitably
linked to other societal ills.
I would like to address the situation in the Gulf
of Guinea. Since the most recent public debate on
the subject, held on 29 February (see S/PV.6727), the
scourge of piracy has remained a very worrisome reality
in the region. It is true that the piracy that is developing
in the Gulf of Guinea cannot be addressed in the same
way as the piracy in the Gulf of Aden of recent years
or off the coast of Somalia, since the manifestations
and impact of that piracy are different in the Gulf of
Guinea, in particular because there is no failed State or
strategic maritime route there.
However, piracy still undoubtedly poses a threat to
the security, stability and economic development of the
States in the region, as recognized by resolutions 2018
(2011) and 2039 (2012). Since the adoption of those two
resolutions and the recommendations they contain on
supporting an effective struggle against the scourge,
we must note that progress on the issue has been slim,
despite the stated willingness and determination of the
States and organizations concerned. Worse, piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea is becoming even more worrisome,
given the methods used by the pirates to bring their
schemes to fruition and in particular when we look at
piracy’s relationship to the general situation in West
Africa.
Indeed, according to the most recent report of the
International Maritime Organization, while there was a
decrease in the number of acts of maritime piracy off
the coast of Somalia during the first nine months of the
year, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is making the area
increasingly dangerous, with 34 documented attacks
between January and September 2012, compared to just
30 last year. The report also states that the attacks are
often violent and planned.
Given such reports, Togo’s concerns can only
increase, especially because it is becoming increasingly
clear that there are links between piracy and other

12-59537

forms of crime in the region, as was discussed at our
debate on 21 February on the impact of transnational
organized crime in West Africa and the Sahel (see
S/PV.6717). Meanwhile, it has been established that
the income from such illicit activities as the diversion
of oil cargoes serve to finance networks that seek to
challenge or diminish States’ authority. Such networks
can therefore be considered true mafia organizations
that undermine the efforts of the States of the subregion
to ensure good governance and respect for human
rights.
The impact of piracy on State economies, especially
in the Gulf of Guinea, is clear, particularly given that the
port revenue of countries involved forms a major part
of their national income. For example, the Republic of
Benin, which continues to bear the brunt of the increase
in pirate attacks, has experienced a catastrophic drop
in activity in the port of Cotonou. The resulting major
financial losses for that country clearly highlight the
disastrous impact of piracy on the financial security of
countries in the region.
As close as it is to Benin, Togo is obviously not
immune to that impact. My country is therefore greatly
involved in efforts to strengthen national capacities in
the fight against piracy, with the help of such partners
as France and the United States of America. That help
made it possible, inter alia, for the Togolese navy to
fend off a pirate attack by a ship under the Panamanian
flag on 8 February.
At the regional level, beyond structures already in
place, such as the Regional Centre for Maritime Security
in Central Africa and the funding system created by the
Economic Community of Central African States, we
welcome the progress made towards the adoption of a
comprehensive strategic plan for fighting piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea, as called for in resolution 2039 (2012).
Togo commends the convening in Libreville on 22 and
23 October of the first meeting of a steering committee
to plan a summit of Heads of State and Government
on maritime piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea. The committee recommended that the summit
take place in Cameroon in April 2013 to adopt the plan.
We encourage the Economic Community of
Central African States, the Economic Community of
West African States, the Gulf of Guinea Commission,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
and the United Nations Office for West Africa in
their shared efforts to work for the critical adoption

9

S/PV.6865

of a strategy to combat piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
which would represent a major step forward towards
implementing practical, targeted measures to eradicate
that blight.
The Togolese delegation believes that the
maintenance of international peace and security with
respect to the threat of piracy, no matter in what region,
is a primary challenge for the international community
because piracy represents an attack on international
law and human rights by reason of the impingement
on the freedom of navigation and the many kinds of
violence inflicted at sea by pirates on their victims.
Such violence is an assault on human dignity. Togo
therefore supports the idea of developing strategies
to ensure the quick release of hostages and to support
their families.
The fight against piracy requires an urgent collective
response to prevent that scourge, once defeated in one
country or subregion, from moving to another. Clearly,
the international community’s efforts can achieve
significant results, as we have seen in the reduction of
the number of attacks in the Gulf of Aden. At the same
time, it is clear that the countries in question, despite
their individual or bilateral concerted efforts to fight
piracy, do not have the capacity effectively to prevent
or diminish the threat on their own.
The fight against piracy must therefore be waged
in the context of a coordinated juridical framework,
based on recognized international standards, with
States firmly resolved to effectively prevent impunity
for perpetrators. It must also take into account, in an
integrated manner, the various facets of the fight and
the individual national efforts of States, especially flag
States. We must also work collectively to exchange
information and intelligence, given the tentacular
networks that characterize this worldwide scourge.
Given the shifting realities from region to region,
it is important for the United Nations to play a primary
role in every aspect of the issue as the depositary
and clearing house for best practices. It must also
take the measures necessary to protect the maritime
environment in the course of support and protection
operations at sea. Lastly, the United Nations should
encourage affected States to seek international support
for their national efforts, and coordinate international
assistance, especially in the implementation of the
global strategy called for in resolution 2039 (2012).

10

Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his briefing
and for providing us with the main elements for our
debate on what is clearly a very serious manifestation
of organized crime in the twenty-first century and a
challenge to international peace and security. Portugal
naturally supports the position that will be presented
later on behalf of the European Union.
As we well know, maritime piracy may have major
human, economic and security consequences that go
beyond the region directly affected. One should also
keep in mind that most often piracy groups are part of
larger transnational criminal organizations dedicated
to other types of crime, such as drug trafficking,
trafficking of human beings or trafficking in arms.
The complexity of those activities and the way they
may interlink and potentiate dangerous national effects
require the international community to remain vigilant
and prepared to act whenever the situation so requires.
As Portugal has underlined before, there is a role for the
Security Council in monitoring these new threats, given
the potential they have to seriously endanger peace and
security. It is thus important that the Council continue
to play its preventive role in closely monitoring such
situations.
The causes of piracy are often related to lowintensity conflict that devastates a given country, such
as Somalia, to the unstable political situations in fragile
States that create lawless zones, or to the socioeconomic
context of local communities, particularly coastal ones.
For those reasons, Portugal advocates a comprehensive
approach to the piracy problem that includes structural
transformations at the political, social and economic
levels. With specific respect to law enforcement,
such transformations include the need to diversify the
mechanisms to fight impunity according to the principle
of proximity to justice, building regional jurisdictional
networks and building the capacity of local judicial
systems. In that regard, we would like to underline that
the prosecution of high-level suspects is decisive in
disrupting piracy networks.
Portugal welcomes the fact that, on the subject of
Somalia, the Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/783)
dedicates a significant part of its focus and
recommendations to the need to strengthen the legal and
judiciary capacities of the surrounding countries and
regions of the country, including in particular Puntland
and Somaliland. We fully support his efforts, and we

12-59537

S/PV.6865

think that reinforcing those capacities has become part
and parcel of the overall solution to piracy in the region.

Economic Community of West African States and the
Economic Community of Central African States, as
well as the Commission of the Gulf of Guinea and the
Maritime Organization of West and Central Africa.

The implementation of such measures, in our view,
should respect the principle of national ownership,
attributing the responsibility for concrete solutions to
local authorities, with the support of the international
community, as required. That is why we support the
strong involvement of Somalia in all the efforts being
undertaken, with appropriate Somali law and Somali
courts and judiciary — in sum, a Somali solution to a
problem that has its roots in Somalia.

To be effective, those different efforts must be
coordinated, respecting each organization’s particular
area of competence. We look forward to the summit
of regional leaders on piracy, which should pave the
way for a region-wide strategy that is also based on
best practices from individual countries and bilateral
assistance programmes already in place.

In that sense, we encourage the new Somali
authorities to adopt the necessary anti-piracy legislation
and to establish the necessary judicial structures, with
the participation of international assistance and relevant
expertise as necessary. Extraterritorial Somali courts
could also be useful tools, in our view, to be used as a
transitory measure.

I should like to conclude by stating that piracy
is a complex phenomenon requiring our regular and
close attention. Encouraging better capacities, better
knowledge and better coordination among actors in
their fight against piracy will prove to be a decisive
contribution of the Security Council to stability and
development.

Piracy affects countries with very different levels
of institutional capacity to deal with the problem and
cannot be solved through isolated measures by each
individual State. That is why regional initiatives are
also key to the successful combat against piracy and its
root causes.

Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): Mr. President, we
would like to thank you for having organized this very
important debate on piracy and also for having prepared
the comprehensive concept note (S/2012/814, annex).
We thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for
his useful and comprehensive briefing.

The United Nations should have a central role in
ensuring the coherence and overall coordination of
those initiatives as well as in mobilizing international
assistance to build the capacity of regional organizations
in crucial areas, such as surveillance, patrolling and
information-sharing.

South Africa is concerned about the scourge of
piracy and particularly its impact on the safety of
navigation and the danger it poses to seafarers. More
generally, piracy has a negative impact on the political,
social, economic and humanitarian situation of affected
States. We thus applaud the efforts of various States
and entities such as the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime in combating piracy.

In that regard, allow me to recall the important
role that the United Nations Development Programme
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
are called to play in helping build the solution to the
problem of piracy off the coast of Somalia.
The phenomenon of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
is a strong reminder of the need to develop regional
mechanisms to counter the impact that such illegal
activities have on the economy and security of States
in the region. As an example, I would simply recall that
West African economies have reportedly lost about
$2 billion in annual revenue as a result of piracy. Benin
in particular has seen its shipping activities decline by
70 per cent as a result of attacks in the past two years.
It is very positive that the number of regional
organizations in West and Central Africa are paying
attention to and addressing the problem of piracy: the

12-59537

South Africa remains committed to doing its part
to lend support by cooperating and coordinating with
other stakeholders on anti-piracy initiatives pursuant
to its international legal obligations. In the Southern
African Development Community region, South Africa
has deployed its naval assets and allocated 63 million
rands for anti-piracy operations in the Mozambique
Channel.
We recall that international law, as reflected in
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
sets out a comprehensive legal framework applicable
to piracy and armed robbery as well as other ocean
activities. It is important that current efforts to combat
piracy be fully consistent with that international legal
framework. Article 100 of the Convention affirms the
11

S/PV.6865

duty of all States to cooperate, as far as possible, in
the repression of piracy on the high seas. Moreover,
article 105 permits all States to seize a pirate ship and
exercise universal jurisdiction over persons committing
piracy. Those provisions should guide all States in the
fight against piracy. We should thus avoid seeking to
create new norms, as the emphasis should be on the
implementation of the existing framework.
The international community should also enhance
efforts aimed at the sharing of information and the
development of a strong network to alleviate the
challenges related to piracy. Stronger international
coordination could assist in addressing crucial issues
such as money laundering associated with piracy, the
involvement of international crime syndicates and
other major challenges related to piracy.
Allow me to turn to the issue of piracy off the coast
of Somalia, which in the view of my delegation is a case
sui generis. South Africa continues to insist that piracy
off the coast of Somalia must be seen in the context
of the peace challenges facing Somalia. In our view,
resolving the problem of piracy off the coast of Somalia
will require holistic solutions and an end to the current
conflict.
Piracy remains a symptom of a greater problem,
which is the political, security and economic challenges
on land. The international community should therefore
direct more efforts and resources towards addressing
the root causes of the Somali conflict while also
maintaining the required pressure at sea against the
perpetrators of piracy.
South Africa notes that the number of incidents
of piracy has decreased significantly since the recent
security and political gains in Somalia. In the light of
that development, the new Somali Government needs to
be equipped with its own mechanisms to combat piracy
on land and sea. In that respect, international support
for strengthening its maritime security ability and its
judicial and correctional service infrastructure, as well
as the provision of economic opportunities for coastal
communities, will be crucial.
In that regard, the report of Mr. Jack Lang, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Legal Issues
Related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, indicated
that:
“New measures to enhance the effectiveness of
counter-piracy efforts and successfully prosecute

12

alleged pirates will be crucial. The recommended
solution is to implement, on an extremely urgent
basis, a comprehensive multidimensional plan …
comprising three components — economic, security
and jurisdictional/correctional — that would be
brought to bear simultaneously.” (S/2011/30, annex
summary, p.3)
As stressed by the African Union Peace and
Security Council, one of the many issues that have to be
addressed in our search for solutions in Somalia must
include the curbing of the illegal plundering of Somali
resources, including the illegal fishing and dumping of
waste off the coast of Somalia. Somali authorities must
be assisted in their efforts to ensure that the benefits of
Somali resources are enjoyed by Somalia and its people.
We note that the Secretary-General has reported
that there is a lack of information regarding the
illegal fishing and dumping of waste off the coast of
Somalia. We hope that in the context of paragraph 24 of
resolution 2020 (2011), those States and organizations
with a naval presence in the area will provide the
Secretary-General with the information necessary
to enable the Council to take this matter further. If
we fail to take decisive action in that regard, we risk
creating the impression that the Council is willing to
act to curb piracy only because the vital economic
interests of some countries are threatened. Conversely,
any lethargy in acting against the plundering of Somali
resources could be construed as indicating a lack of
interest in the livelihoods of ordinary Somalis.
South Africa supports the call for Somalia to declare
an exclusive economic zone. However, the absence of
a declared exclusive economic zone cannot be used to
justify the illegal exploitation of Somali resources in
the zone. There is nothing in the Convention on the
Law of the Sea that suggests that the existence of an
exclusive economic zone is subject to its declaration by
the coastal State. Thus, even as we await the declaration
of an exclusive economic zone by Somalia, fishing and
dumping in the maritime zone 200 nautical miles from
its coastline without the consent of its authorities is
illegal.
Finally, I wish to conclude by stating that the
Council’s mandate remains the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Council can act
in relation to piracy only to the extent that a specific
situation, such as the piracy off the coast of Somalia,
amounts to a threat to international peace and security.

12-59537

S/PV.6865

Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Mr. President, we
thank you for having organized this Security Council
open debate on piracy. This is a timely and important
initiative. The concept paper (S/2012/814, annex)
prepared by the Indian delegation and the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2012/24) address piracy in a holistic
manner, enrich our discourse and strengthen the
decision-making process.
We also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson for his briefing.
In recent times, we have witnessed a resurgence of
piracy. Pirates, once fabled in chronicles of adventure
and crime, have re-emerged to haunt maritime traffic
and international commerce. As the ranks of pirates
swelled, the threat to the peace and stability and
economies of coastal areas and hinterlands increased
proportionately. The collusion of pirates with crime
syndicates, drug traffickers and human smugglers
grew stronger. In the old days, piracy flourished around
archipelagoes primarily due to the failure or laxity of
littoral Powers in patrolling trade routes. As the naval
power and justice sectors of nation States developed,
incidents of piracy decreased markedly.
Unlike medieval piracy, which was a global
phenomenon, modern-day piracy is localized mostly
off the coast of Somalia and the Gulf of Aden. An
inadequate governance structure, a lack of economic
opportunities and the exploitation of coastal areas
in Somalia are major contributory factors. In other
regions, such as the Gulf of Guinea, it can be attributed
to the proliferation of armed groups and the inadequate
preparedness of merchant ships. Elsewhere, piracy is an
incident, not a pattern.
After a surge in the past decade, it is gratifying to
note that incidents of piracy are not on the rise annually.
The Secretary-General’s latest report on piracy
(S/2012/783) recorded a decline in pirate attacks and
hijackings in 2012. The menace has only diminished;
it has not yet been eradicated. The serious threats
posed by pirates persist. Moreover, we are still dealing
with the consequences of piracy, armed robbery and
hostage-taking at sea. We have to take steps to ensure
the safety and security of seafarers.
We strongly condemn acts of hostage-taking and
violence against hostages. As we speak, pirates hold
more than 200 seafarers hostage. Regrettably, the
plight of hostages falls through the cracks of politics
and commerce and of the responsibilities of the public

12-59537

and private sectors. What is more, we lack unanimity of
views on ways and means to address the issue.
Hostages are a professional hazard for seafarers.
The issue merits our serious attention. The Security
Council is right in designating the welfare of seafarers,
in captivity and after release, as a priority. In that
context, we welcome the proposal of the hostage-support
programme developed by the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime. We hope that the proposal will
crystallize into a concrete action programme that can
be supported by the international community and
shipping organizations.
Pakistan is of the view that the eradication of piracy
requires a concerted and integrated approach that
encompasses the political, security and justice sector
tracks. We believe that such an integrated approach
must be based on four pillars.
First, we must address the root causes of the piracy
related to the political and security situation in Somalia.
Building the State capacity of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia and helping it in its economic
reconstruction is imperative to reducing the proclivity
of some segments of the local population to be lured
to piracy. Piracy should be defeated from inside and
outside Somalia. In that regard, adding the maritime
component to the African Union Mission in Somalia is
critical.
We welcome the formation of the Somali
Government and the progress made in consolidating
State institutions in Somalia following the successful
end of the transition period. We are confident that the
new Government will develop a comprehensive national
counter-piracy strategy and work with neighbouring
and regional States for its success.
Secondly, pirates must be deterred by active
naval deployment. The operational preparedness of
naval forces to undertake patrolling and surveillance
is essential. International naval cooperation off the
Horn of Africa, characterized by joint operations, is a
significant deterrence and a leading factor in reducing
piracy. For its part, Pakistan is contributing to a number
of counter-piracy operations. We are participating in the
two naval Combined Task Force (CTF) operations 150,
for countering piracy in the Gulf of Aden, and 151, for
countering piracy off the Coast of Somalia. Pakistan
will reassume the command of CTF 151 next month.

13

S/PV.6865

Thirdly, judicial measures and justice sector
development are essential elements of an integrated
approach against piracy. In view of Somalia’s unique
location, tackling piracy has become a shared obligation
of the States of the region. Resolution 2015 (2011)
decides to consider the establishment of regional courts
with international support in order to build capacity
for the prosecution of pirates. Countries of the region,
such as Seychelles, Kenya, Mauritius and Tanzania,
are providing critical support for prosecuting pirates.
Those countries should not be left alone in their efforts.
Their views must be given due weight.
International assistance for the judicial sector of
the countries of the region is important. An effective
post-trial transfer framework must be in place for the
regional prosecution centre to be effective. We value the
Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States Countering
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and its target-oriented
projects in the justice sector. The prosecution and
imprisonment of pirates must be accompanied by
disrupting the systems and networks of the financial
flows generated from piracy.
Fourthly, mercantile shipping companies need
to be cognizant of piracy. Shipping companies have
a responsibility to follow the guidelines for best
management practices and use the adequate protective
measures applicable under the law. In that regard,
we appreciate the role of the International Maritime
Organization. The presence of privately contracted
armed security personnel (PCASP) aboard merchant
ships is a matter that requires further clarity. Pakistan,
in principle, does not object to the presence of PCASP,
subject to prior indication on a case-to-case basis. It
is important that ships notify coastal States about the
presence of PCASP in advance and in a transparent
manner. Elaborate standard operating procedures
should be in place so that the security of coastal States,
at sea and on land, is not compromised. On a broader
plane, all legal and administrative questions associated
with PCASP need to be addressed, with a view to
developing an acceptable regulatory framework.
Pakistan is a willing and committed partner
of the international community in its fight against
piracy. In our national capacity, the Pakistan navy is
vigilant against piracy. Last year, Pakistan organized
the AMAN-11 multinational naval exercise, with the
objective of promoting cooperative and collaborative
efforts to combat crime in the maritime domain. We
are maintaining active surveillance and patrols to

14

pre-empt any piracy or armed robbery. Our territorial
and regional waters in the Arabian Sea are peaceful and
safe for maritime traffic.
On the legal front, we are amending domestic
legislation to further criminalize acts of piracy. The
draft territorial sea and maritime zone act is being
processed for parliamentary approval. No single country
can counter piracy by itself. We need a multilateral
effort. We need a cohesive United Nations role with
inter-agency cooperation.
Today’s draft presidential statement and the
upcoming draft resolution demonstrate the resolve of the
Security Council to eliminate piracy. With the resolve
of the Council and the commitment of the international
community, we are confident that credible and effective
measures can be taken to rid the world of this scourge.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank India for taking the initiative to
hold today’s open debate on piracy. I wish also to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his briefing.
Piracy is a common scourge facing the international
community. Over recent years, pirates have carried
out rampant activities off the coast of Somalia, in
the Gulf of Aden and in the Gulf of Guinea. They are
increasingly taking to it as a business model. Their
all-weather operational capacity has been further
strengthened, the area of attacks has further expanded,
and their activities are becoming more violent.
Acts of piracy have not only undermined the safety
of international navigation but have also affected
normal trade and economic activities. In addition, they
have made more vulnerable the situation of certain
areas that already pose threats to international peace
and security. The international community must pay
close attention and strengthen cooperation, and address
the phenomenon accordingly. In that context, I would
like to make the following comments.
First, it is important to strengthen international
cooperation in our fight against piracy. Such international
cooperation has achieved marked results, making piracy
attacks less successful than they have been. We hope
that the international community will continue to be
guided by the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea and relevant international law and will persist
in strengthening cooperation and coordination through
coordinated actions designed to further combat piracy.
In such activities the international community must
fully respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
12-59537

S/PV.6865

the countries concerned. We support the continued role
of the United Nations in coordination in that regard.
It is important to enrich and improve cooperation
mechanisms, strengthen information-sharing and
effectively prosecute and try those involved in piracy
so as to forge synergies in our fight against it.
Secondly, it is important to strengthen the
capacity-building of relevant countries and regional
organizations in fighting piracy. We support the
initiatives taken by the countries of the Gulf of
Guinea, which include formulating national strategies,
improving international legal regimes, strengthening
good governance and enhancing naval, judicial and lawenforcement capacities. All of those efforts will enable
them to play a better role in preventing and fighting
piracy. We commend the Economic Community of
West African States, the Economic Community of
Central African States and the Commission of the Gulf
of Guinea for having developed a regional strategy for
fighting piracy and on the establishment of a regional
centre for coordination. We call upon the international
community to be more responsive to the capacitybuilding efforts of relevant countries and regional
organizations by providing more financing and
technical assistance.
Thirdly, it is important to take a holistic approach
and address both the symptoms and root causes of
piracy. Piracy comes about as a result of deeply rooted
economic and social factors. Although piracy takes
place at sea, its genesis lies on land. The international
community must take into account considerations of
specific conditions of specific areas and address the
problem at its source so as to eliminate the conditions
upon which piracy thrives. As far as Africa is concerned,
poverty and economic and social underdevelopment are
the root causes of piracy. We call on the international
community to redouble its efforts to provide assistance
to African countries and the least developed countries
and to play a better, more active role in achieving
stability, eliminating poverty and attaining sustainable
economic and social development.
China has actively participated in the international
fight against piracy. Since January 2009, the Chinese
navy has dispatched escort convoys to the Gulf of
Aden and the coastal areas off Somalia. By early
November this year, China had dispatched in total 13
escort formation convoys, totalling 34 vessels. They
have carried out 515 operations, providing escorts to
4,901 vessels, of which half were foreign vessels, and

12-59537

they have achieved a 100 per cent success rate. China is
willing, on a voluntary basis and with coordination on
an equal footing, to continue strengthening coordination
and information-sharing about military operations with
the parties concerned.
China has also, within its capacity, provided
assistance to the countries in the Gulf of Guinea in
their fight against piracy. We are ready to continue
to strengthen cooperation and coordination with the
countries concerned in order to play a more active and
constructive role in our fight against piracy.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): First, I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
timely debate and for presenting the concept note that
guides our discussions today (S/2012/814, annex). I
also welcome the comments by the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Jan Eliasson.
Despite international efforts in the fight against
piracy, that phenomenon continues to affect the
safety of navigation, trade and the development of the
countries on some of the major international shipping
lanes, particularly in the Gulf of Aden and the Gulf of
Guinea. Although the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/783) refers, with respect to piracy off the coast
of Somalia, to a significant drop in the number of attacks
carried out over the past year, the total number of pirate
attacks remains high. Also worrying is information
about the presence and activities of pirates on land, the
high number of hostages remaining in captivity, the
cases of violence against crews and their use as human
shields.
Piracy is yet another of the pernicious consequences
of the institutional fragility and precarious economic
conditions that obtain in Somalia. Although Somalia
has taken important steps towards the goal of peace and
stability and the efforts of the international community
to provide safe navigation, forestall attacks and capture
pirates have yielded some positive results, we believe
that security off the coast of Somalia is formed on land.
That is why Somalia, as the main source and victim
of this crime, must fully participate in solving the
problem.
Somali authorities bear the main responsibility
in the fight against piracy off their coast and for
re-establishing security, political stability, the rule of
law and economic development. However, it is vital that
the international community continue to lend support,
assistance and capacity-building while acknowledging

15

S/PV.6865

the difficulties facing a State in the process of
consolidation. Any stable and lasting solution to the
problem of piracy must be founded on broad initiatives in
which the economic, security, judicial and penitentiary
components are implemented simultaneously.
An approach of that nature must be formulated
with regard to the prevention and punishment of acts
of piracy. It is vital that the Somali people perceive
piracy as an illegal activity that limits their options
for development. It is therefore essential to continue
the efforts of the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia through projects aimed at informing Somalis
about the dangers of piracy and discouraging young
people from joining networks dedicated to that criminal
activity.
In order to improve security, the international
community must continue to lend its support to the
security forces of the Federal Government of Somalia so
that they are able to deploy on land and in their coastal
waters. It is also essential to optimize the monitoring
and identification of violations of the general and total
embargo on arms and to impose sanctions as necessary,
given the devastating effects that the constant flow of
weapons has in the context of Somalia.
The Federal Government must give priority to
reforming the criminal and procedural framework
so that the legislation is consistent with the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. Equally, it
is important to re-establish Somalia’s sovereignty over
its maritime waters and resources. That means that
one of the fundamental areas where the international
community and particularly the United Nations are
called upon to provide technical assistance to Somalia
is that of the legal issue of the delimitation of maritime
areas so that they can be in line with international law
and make it possible to clearly establish its territorial
sea, the exclusive economic zone and the maritime
borders with Kenya, Djibouti and Yemen.
All of that will contribute to strengthening
Somalia’s capacity to exercise sovereignty over its
maritime waters and resources and protect the marine
environment and its resources, and will facilitate the
development of fishing and port-linked activities as
viable economic alternatives for the people, as opposed
to piracy and ancillary criminal activities.
The international community must apply the
lessons learned in other regions that have been affected
by this phenomenon in the past. Indeed, in the Strait

16

of Malacca, the incidence of piracy has decreased
thanks to the commitment of national authorities and to
regional and international cooperation, which included
coordinated maritime patrols, overflights, the exchange
of intelligence and joint actions against pirates and
those who gave them support and shelter on land.
In the regions afflicted by this criminal activity
there also happens to be an extremely high level of transit
in goods and resources under particular geographic
conditions, coupled with politically and economically
unstable situations, so that a stable and lasting solution
to the problem of piracy requires that preventive action
at sea be accompanied by action on land, including
strengthening the rule of law and building capacity and
institutions that can ensure governability, development
and the creation of economic alternatives for the people.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for convening
this open debate and for submitting a concept note on
the topic (S/2012/814, annex). We are also grateful to
the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson, for his
briefing.
Maritime piracy and armed robbery at sea have
risen significantly in recent times, and, along with
transnational organized crime, including the trafficking
of illicit weapons and drugs, constitute a serious threat
to peace, security and the economic development of the
countries and regions concerned. We fully support and
commend recent efforts and initiatives undertaken at
the national, regional and international levels to focus
international attention on the problem and to enhance
maritime safety and security.
The Security Council has also dealt with the problem,
focusing primarily on piracy in Somalia and the Gulf of
Guinea. It is encouraging that over the past two years a
combination of measures has contributed to a decline in
the number of attacks and to a reduction in successful
attacks at sea off the coast of Somalia. The problem and
capabilities of criminal networks still remain, however,
and require constant attention and resolute measures.
It is important that efforts be continued to develop and
implement appropriate legal frameworks and national
maritime security strategies and mechanisms, as well
as to strengthen law enforcement and judicial capacity
for preventing, combating and suppressing piracy and
armed robbery at sea.
Pirates are able to operate successfully in
environments characterized by political, security,

12-59537

S/PV.6865

social and economic instability. A sustainable response
to piracy therefore requires full and effective control
on the part of the Governments concerned over their
territories, their social and economic development, their
establishment of the rule of law and the implementation
of effective measures against impunity. Obviously,
most States cannot prevent or effectively manage
threats to maritime security in their coastal waters
on their own. It is essential that countries in regions
affected by piracy continue to emphasize interaction,
cooperation and coordination among themselves and
with international partners.
At the same time, while the primary responsibility
for eradicating piracy rests with the States concerned,
part of dealing successfully with piracy proceeds from
a concept of collective commitment to fighting this
form of criminality, which affects the interests of the
international community as a whole. As a complement
to national efforts, international assistance remains
crucial in that regard. It is therefore important that the
relevant States and regional organizations continue to
receive all the necessary support from the international
community. Such support should also contribute to
the development of early-warning mechanisms for
effective and timely information-sharing with States
that may potentially be affected by incidents of piracy
or armed robbery at sea. Any measures undertaken to
fight piracy or prevent potential piracy attacks should
be in full accordance with the standards and principles
of international law, particularly those relating to the
sovereignty of the States concerned.
The United Nations plays an important coordinating
role in mobilizing international support and developing
global and regional anti-piracy strategies to help affected
States and regions in this area. We look forward to future
reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the Security Council draft presidential statement
to be made on this topic today, including discussion
of possible ways to promote international efforts to
combat piracy and armed robbery at sea.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would first like to thank the delegation of India
for its initiative in convening this timely open debate
on maritime piracy, which is a major challenge for
the international community. We also express our
appreciation to the delegation of India for presenting
a concept note on the subject (S/2012/814, annex).
And we thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson

12-59537

for his introductory remarks on the issue before the
Council today.
It is interesting that the international community
must not only face new challenges to international
security, but also has to deal with one of the challenges
that have plagued our ancestors for centuries, namely,
piracy. Piracy and armed robbery at sea are a serious
threat to the lives of the personnel and passengers aboard
ships. They make navigation unsafe, hinder the supply
of international humanitarian assistance to countries
such as Somalia, and harm international trade, causing
substantial economic losses to many States. It therefore
becomes imperative for us to act decisively to combat
this worrisome trend.
For the past few years this issue has been on the
agenda of the Security Council, which has already taken
steps to address the challenge. Its decisions, consistent
with the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea, create a legal basis for safety measures for
navigation in various regions and send a powerful signal
to Member States on the importance of a committed
response to piracy. It is important that Security Council
resolutions respect existing international law.
That is why the fight against piracy must become a
truly concerted effort, wide-ranging and transnational
in nature. We are certain that only full cooperation
between the United Nations, the countries affected,
the relevant international organizations and the private
sector will bring about successful results. We are well
aware that no country can tackle piracy by itself and
that in recent years the phenomenon has reached a
global scale, particularly affecting the Gulf of Aden
and more recently the Gulf of Guinea.
The United Nations should help mobilize resources.
The United Nations agencies in the region, in particular
the United Nations Office for West Africa, the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the International
Maritime Organization, should play an important role
in regional efforts to combat piracy and address issues
related to terrorism, illicit drug trafficking and arms
proliferation, which together conspire to destabilize the
region.
It is regrettable that most cases of piracy and
armed robbery go unpunished, due in large part to the
inadequate legal and practical processes in place for
their prosecution. We support the more active use of
international legal instruments to ensure the safety of

17

S/PV.6865

navigation and the improvement of legal regulation in
this area, taking into account the unique characteristics
of the situation.
Achieving the swift and appropriate prosecution
of those suspected of acts of piracy and ensuring their
imprisonment following trial is essential to preventing
impunity and deterring further attacks. We fully
support the strengthening of United Nations assistance
to the States of the region to build their capacities to
prosecute and imprison pirates. The United Nations
should focus its efforts on the following key elements:
legislative reform, capacity-building in prosecuting and
processing piracy cases, effective law enforcement,
and improving prison infrastructure in the States of the
region, in particular Somalia.
We share the view expressed in the concept note
prepared for this debate that a comprehensive approach
is needed to combat piracy, and that we must address
the underlying causes of this phenomenon to eradicate
it. We are concerned, for instance, that a significant
gap still exists in land-based programmes in Somalia
to address piracy, as noted in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2012/783). In the specific case of Somalia,
we believe that the time has come to strengthen the
capacities of both Somalia and neighbouring countries
in funding and capacity-building. We also believe
it is important for Somalia to proclaim an exclusive
economic zone off its coast, as provided for by the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Finally, although the attacks and kidnappings
committed by pirates have decreased, as has their
income, we are deeply concerned that parallel illegal
activities sponsored by pirate financing continue
to threaten the stability and security of States. The
Security Council would have a greater impact on the
fight against piracy if it could succeed in adopting
forceful measures to limit the capacity of leaders who
finance and instigate piracy.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank India for its initiative to organize this open
debate on piracy, a historic challenge that has resurged in
recent years to become a significant and direct threat to
the stability and security of many States, especially in
Africa. Our consideration of this topic today has been
aided by the concept note prepared by the presidency
of the Council (S/2012/814, annex) and by the briefing
of Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, for which we
thank him.

18

Piracy is a source of concern to the international
community due to the high human cost it exacts in terms
of hostage-taking, the threat it poses to the security and
economic development of countries, and the havoc it
wreaks on international navigation and trade. Acts of
piracy are on the increase, especially in regions where
countries in fragile political situations face major
challenges in enforcing respect for and application of
the rule of law, and in ensuring the security of national
territory. As a result, tackling piracy at sea must begin
with a focus on the internal challenges on land.
While primary responsibility for the fight against
piracy falls to the States concerned, shouldering that
responsibility requires the means and capacity to face
the scourge, with the support of international partners.
Clearly, a legislative framework that penalizes acts
of piracy in line with international law, the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 1982 and
international standards for the protection of human
rights is indispensible for ensuring effectiveness in
meeting these challenges.
The building of national capacities — whether in
enacting legislation, prosecuting and incarcerating
pirates, or monitoring national waters — is of crucial
importance for any strategy for combating piracy.
Stepping up international and regional cooperation
and coordination, in particular involving the United
Nations and the International Maritime Organization,
as well as exchange of information among all actors
and services engaged in combating piracy, are further
indispensible elements if this scourge is to be combated
effectively. Finally, counter-piracy activities must also
target the persons who finance, plan and organize
acts of pirac,y given the major role they play in this
continuing problem.
Despite the substantial reduction in acts of piracy
noted in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/783)
and their reduced success rate off the Somali coast in
2012, the scourge remains cause for concern due to
the number of hostages still being held, the threats
posed to stability and safe navigation in the region, and
the destabilizing consequences thereof on Somalia’s
society and economy. With the assumption of power by
legitimate authorities in Somalia, the liberation of many
areas of the country from Al-Shabaab control, and the
gradual extension of State authority to other parts of
Somali territory, conditions are now in place to combat
piracy more effectively, with the adequate support of
the international community. The political stabilization

12-59537

S/PV.6865

under way in Somalia should promote respect for the
rule of law and more effective national action for the
pursuit and imprisonment of pirates in order to end
impunity. That stabilization will also allow for the
extension of Somali State authority and its application
throughout its maritime zone, in accordance with the
Convention on the Law of the Sea.
I take this opportunity to commend the assistance
provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the United Nations Development Programme
to support the efforts of Somalia and other States of the
region in their work in the legislative, judicial and penal
spheres. Efforts to improve economic development in
Somali society, the creation of job opportunities for
young people and the provision of basic services to the
population will all help to mitigate the intensity of this
scourge.
Coordination and cooperation at the international
and regional levels to combat piracy off the coast of
Somalia have produced encouraging results and should
be stepped up. In that respect, we welcome the efforts
of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia
and its working groups, which have worked tirelessly to
find a coordinated and comprehensive solution to this
problem.
In recent years, the international community has
been alerted to the developments and dangers posed
by piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and to the danger that
the phenomenon could spread throughout the African
Atlantic region. My country has striven to establish
and strengthen cooperation at the cross-regional and
interregional levels among the Atlantic coastal States of
Africa, in particular to confront the challenge of piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea and transnational organized
smuggling. Indeed, those two themes were at the origin
of the establishment of the Ministerial Conference of
African Atlantic States in Rabat in 2009, and are the
pillars of its plan of action on security, adopted in 2010.
That African Atlantic spirit was bolstered by
the decision taken by the countries of the region to
hold a summit among the leaders of the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission in order to forge a mechanism for
heightened interregional dialogue and cooperation.
In order to extend this dynamic of action-oriented
cooperation and coordination, in the coming weeks
Morocco will host a conference of security ministers of

12-59537

African States bordering the Atlantic Ocean at which
we will discuss, inter alia, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
and ways to enhance synergies with a view to ensuring
the stability of that shared space and to strengthening
regional cooperation and coordination. All these efforts
seek to enhance sustained and vigorous international
cooperation to end piracy and its multidimensional
consequences.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of India.
Let me begin by thanking Deputy SecretaryGeneral Jan Eliasson for his briefing on piracy and
armed robbery at sea and on the annual report of the
Secretary-General on piracy off of the coast of Somalia
(S/2012/783).
Even though the problem of piracy is as old as
the history of maritime navigation, the international
community is today facing it in unprecedented and
growing dimensions. Having started off the coast of
Somalia, the threat now looms over an area of more
than 2.8 million square miles, posing a formidable task
to patrolling naval forces. Not only is piracy a threaten
to the freedom of maritime navigation; it is having
destabilizing effects on global and regional trade and
security. The negative humanitarian impact of the
threat on seafarers, who are the lifeline of maritime
shipping, can no longer be ignored.
The Secretary-General’s successive reports present
an alarming picture. Despite increased naval presence,
pirate attacks off the coast of Somalia have continued
with little change in the level of violence employed
by the pirates against seafarers and others. As of
22 August, Somali pirates still held 11 ships and 188
hostages, including 43 Indian seafarers. The problem is
also intensifying in the Gulf of Guinea.
Given the adverse impact of acts of piracy and
armed robbery at sea on maritime trade, seafarers and
security, India attaches high priority to combating
piracy, including in waters off the coast of Somalia
and in the Gulf of Guinea. India has actively supported
international efforts at the operational level, including
by participating in anti-piracy patrols in the Gulf of
Aden since 2008, and has also deployed its ships in
the eastern and north-eastern Arabian Sea. Operations
of the Indian Navy have helped to neutralize several
attempts of piracy.
While we will continue the counter-piracy
operations, there is also an urgent need for the
19

S/PV.6865

international community to address the serious
problem of seafarers who are taken hostage and the
consequent humanitarian problems faced by them and
their families. That will require active cooperation in
sharing information, evidence and intelligence related
to the investigation, prosecution and sentencing of
suspected pirates, as well as efforts to achieve an early
release of seafarers being held by pirates.
Although naval ships deployed in the Gulf of Aden
pursuant to the establishment of the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia have successfully
thwarted several piracy attempts and provided security
escorts to merchant marines in those waters, the growing
scope and expanding coverage of the problem indicates
that naval operations alone may be insufficient, and
that there is a need to adopt a comprehensive counterpiracy strategy that includes efforts to deter pirates and
ensure their effective prosecution.
No effort to prosecute and imprison pirates can
succeed without the effective involvement of the States
of the region. Capacity-building not only of Somalia,
but also of other States of the region, is an essential
component of that strategy. We commend the efforts
of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
the United Nations Development Programme in that
regard, and urge them to continue their efforts. Their
assistance to the States of the region should focus on
four main areas: legal reforms to criminalize piracy,
capacity-building for the prosecution and trial of piracy
cases, effective law enforcement, and improvement of
prison infrastructure in Somalia and safe States in the
region.
India is of the firm view that steps to disrupt
land-based pirate activities and associated financial
flows are absolutely necessary to a multidimensional
counter-piracy approach. Therefore, it is essential to
investigate and prosecute individuals and networks
that provide the leadership, support and financial
flows for the sustenance of piracy. That would
require broader criminal legislation covering the
crimes of extortion, kidnapping, conspiracy, moneylaundering and financing of pirate activities, as well
as active collaboration and sharing of information
and intelligence among the private sector, States and
relevant international organizations. It should also be
kept in mind that combating maritime piracy is an
important issue that is intrinsically linked with the

20

security situation in Somalia and in the States bordering
the Gulf of Guinea.
We hope that the new Government of Somalia
will fully implement the counter-piracy measures
delineated in the road map and will be supported by
the United Nations and the international community.
We also encourage States on the Gulf of Guinea and in
the region to continue making all collaborative efforts,
including through regional organizations, in combating
piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea.
In conclusion, we would like to note that the
increased presence of international and national naval
forces has had a variable impact on the success rates of
piracy attempts in different areas. For example, action
by the Indian navy has ensured that there has been no
successful act of piracy in the area just off the western
coast of India in the past year. Such trends require the
high-risk area for piracy to be regularly reviewed in a
transparent manner, based on confirmed incidents of
piracy. That is an absolute necessity for coastal States
in the region and should be given due priority.
In addition, we fully endorse the conclusion of the
Deputy Secretary-General that three challenges require
our immediate attention: better information-sharing
and trust-building among countries and agencies
involved in counter-piracy efforts, stronger capacity to
prosecute piracy-related cases, and the establishment of
a framework governing the use of privately contracted,
armed security personnel on board vessels to ensure
appropriate regulation and accountability. We look
forward to the Secretary-General’s next report,
including on measures for the implementation of the
draft presidential statement that the Council will adopt
today.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The Council has before it the text of a draft
presidential statement on behalf of the Council on the
subject of today’s meeting. I thank the Council members
for their valuable contributions to the draft statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/24.
It is so decided.

12-59537

S/PV.6865

Since the Council has some urgent business to
attend to, I will, with the concurrence of the members

12-59537

of the Council, suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at noon.

21
