THIRTY-SECO.ND

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

30 JUNE

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/201

Adoption

of the agenda

8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . , . . , . . .

, . , . , . . . . . .. . . . . , . I . . . . . . . .

Complaint
by Mozambique:
Letter dated 22 June 1977 from the Permanent Kepresentative
of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12350 and Add.1)
. . , . , . . . . , .. . . . , . , . . .. . , . , , . . . . . , . . .

1
1
A

1

1

S/PV.2018
-

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2018TH

MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday,

30 June 1977, at 10.30 a.m.

President: Mr. William H. BARTON (Canada).

(German
Democratic Republic), Mrs. Jearme Martin CYss&
_ (Guinea), Mr. C D. Moiapo (Lesotho), Mr. J. A! Garba
(Nigeria), Mr. C B. Djigo (Senegal), Mr. MO Medarzi (Sudan),
Mr. N. A4 Malinga (Swaziland), Mt: A/r. Allaf‘ (Svriatz Arab
Republic), Mr. B. Mkapa (hited
Republic of Tatzzatzia)
and Mr. S. G. Mwale (Zambia) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Cour~cil chamber.

hesent: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

3. The PRESIDENT: I received a letter this morning from
the representative of Panama, in his capacity as Chairman
of the Latin American Group for the month of June,
requesting that the representative of Brazil be invited to
participate, on behalf of that Croup, in the discussion of
the question on the agenda. Accordingly, I propose, in
conformity with the usual practice and with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative lo participate in
the discussion without
the right to vote, under the
provisions of Articlc 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/201 8)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Mozambique:
Letter dated 32 June 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Mozambique to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12350 and Add.1)
The meetitlg was called to order at 1 I. 05 a. tn.

4. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I invite the representative of Brazil to lake
the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that he will be invited to
take a place at the Council table when it is his turn to
address the Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agertrla was adoptl’d.
Complaint by Mozambique:
Letter dated 22 June 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2350 and Add.1)

At the ittvitatiotz of the President, Mr. S. CorrPa da Costa
(Brazil) look the place reserved jbr him at the side of the
Coutlcil chamber.
5. The PRESIDENT: The members of the Council have
before them the draft resolution contained in document
s/12353

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2014th meeting, I invite the Minister for
Development and Economic Planning of Mozambique to
take a place at the Council table.

6. The first speaker is the Minister for Public Service and
Information Services of Botswana. I welcome him and
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

At the ittvira tiotl vj’ the President, Mr, M. dos Sarztos
(il/lnzambiquc) took a place at tltc Corrt~il table

7. Mr. KWELAGOBE [Botswana): Sir, allow me to extend
to you my delegation’s very warm congratulations on YOUI
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of June, 1 should like to thank you and the
other members of this august body for affording us the
opportunity to participate in this very important debate. It
is pleasing to see you. a representative of a country with
which Botswana enjoys cordial relations, presiding over this
debate. We are confident that your considerable diplomatic
experience and skill, and the inspiration engendered by
your country’s commitment to human rights will enable
you to guide this debate to a successful conclusion.

2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken at previous meetings, 1 invite (he representatives of
AJgeria, Angola, Botswana, Cuba, Egypt, Gabon, the German Democratic Republic, Guinea, Lesotho, Nigeria, Senegal, the Sudan, Swaziland, the Syrian Arab Republic, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia to take the places
reserved for them at [he side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Rahal (Algeria),
Mr. J. 1:: dos Sattrs
(Attgola), Mr. D. K Kwclagobe
(Botswana), Mr. R. Alar&n (aba),
Mr. A. E, Abdel
Me&d f&ypt), Mr. G. Rawiri (Gabon), Mr. I? Florin
1

Zimbabwean refugees, and about the 527 wounded
8. To my brother, Marcelino dos Santos, member of the
between May 1975 and mid-June1977 alone-not to speak
Permanent Political Committee of FRELIMO and Minister
of the many heroic Mozambican soldiers and militiamen
for Development and Economic Planning of the People’s
who fell in defence of their motherland, and many more
Republic of Mozambique, may I say that I would have liked
still, both military and civilian, who perishedbefore this
to have been here by his side when this crucial debate began
period, for indeedthe attacks againstMozambique beganat
on 28 June, but circumstances beyond my control preindependencein 1975-when we hear about the razing to
vented me. I need not reassure you here of Botswana’s total
the ground of peaceful villageswhich were beingdeveloped
support for the People’s Republic of Mozambique in its
at great sacrifice following the long colonial war againstthe
greatest hour of need, We have stood solidly together in the
Portuguese,when we are told that highly destructive and
ranks of the front-line States and of the Organization of
sophisticatedarmsof war, including Mirages,are now being
African Unity. Our unconditional support should be taken
for granted, for your struggle is ours, Botswana has employed by the regime in its adventures, and when we
profound admiration for your country’s uncompromising listen to the boisterous rebels in Salisbury threatening
so-calledhot pursuit-a euphemismfor armed invasioncommitment to the liberation of southernAfrica.
againstZambia, Mozambique and Botswana,then we arein
no doubt that a state of war exists in the region, a war for
9. The question of which the Council is seizedtoday-that
of the flagrant and repeatedacts of aggression
by the illegal which Smith and his supportersare solely responsible.
racist lninority regime in Southern Rhodesia againstthe
heroic sister Republic of Mozambique, acts of aggression 14. The enemy is no longer content with brief, quick,
sporadic incursions.Thesehave now developedinto a series
which have created a situation of tension and insecurity in
of well-planned and systematicinvasionsdirected mainly
our region-is a very grave one indeed. After hearing the
lucid and sound statementby the Minister for Development againstthe civilian population and againstthe vital points
of the social and economic infrastructure of Mozambique.
and Economic Planning of the People’s Republic of
Mozambique /2014th meeting], no one can be in doubt
15. The threats and attacks againstMozambique, Zambia
about the urgency, the precariousness
and the gravity of the
and Botswanaare clearly intended. first, to causepanicand
situation, no* l?n anyone fail to be deeply moved and
blunt the will of the peoplesof those countries to support
concerned.
the liberation of Zimbabwe and give succourto thosewho
flee from oppressionand, secondly, to internationalize the
10. The fact tiul the front-line States of Angola,
conflict \.‘ih!. i.r.,‘ hope that those who have nefarious
Botswana, Tanzania and Zambia arereprese;-,It,L‘lere at the
interests in &c area will cometo the rescueof the rebelsat
ministerial level, and the fact that the OAU Council of
Ministers gave the Foreign Ministers of Algeria, Gabon, Salisbury. Botswana, Mozambiqueand Zambia have stated
publicly that no amount of harassmentor attack will
Lesotho and Nigeria a mandateto assitMozambique in this
debate, clearly demonstrate the importance Africa attaches intimidate or blackmail them into abdicating their internationalist duty to support unconditionally the total
it. We arc confident that the Council will treat this matter
liberation of Zimbabwe, On this, Africa speakswith one
with the seriousness
it deserves.
voice.
11. When Botswana appeared before the Council in
16. At this juncture, 1 should like to pay a tribute to the
January this year, we and others warnedthat the continued
valiant Government and people of Mozambique, and
existence of the illegal racist regime at Salisbury was a
especially to the membersof the Mozambique People’s
threat not only to the peaceand stability of our region but
to international peace and security as well. What leas Liberation Forcesand the f’eople’sMilitia, for standingfirm
happened in Mozambique attests to the accuracy of those in the face of naked aggression.
warnings. So long as the racist minority rCgimesin southern
17. In dealing with the racist minority in Southern
Africa exist, debates such as this one will be the order of
Rhodesia,one must guard againstentertaining fdk
hopes,
the clay, and the road to the Council will never be without
the footprints of the victims of aggression.
hopes which usually derive from an inadequateanalysisof
the settler racist minority’s intentions and ultimate objec12. It will not be necessaryfor me to detail here the
tives. Only when certain basicfacts are borne in mind can
numerous instances of invasions, attacks, destruction of
those who seek to change the situation in Rhodesia
property, murders, bombings and other atrocities perprescribeeffective remedies.
petrated by the illegal rCgimeagainst Mozambique; these
have been adequately described by my brother from
18. First, Rhodesiawascolonized by an intending settler
Mozambique and the other speakersbefore me. It will
population in the 18’)0s-“intending” in the sensethat they
suffice to say that the long catalogueof acts of aggression intended, then as now, to stay, regardlessof the pressures
clearly demonstrates that, as the heroic and legitimate put upon them and especiallyif the pressureswere timid
struggle of the people of Zimbabwe intensifies, so will the
and frail.
renegade rCgimeseek scapegoatsin its desperateand vain
attempt to forestall the inevitable independenceof Zim19. Secondly, they had determinedthat the Only way to
babwe.
remain in power was to create in liliodesia a society Of
unequals,that is, of rulers and ruled.
13. When we talk about 143 acts of aggression
committed
between March 1976 and March 1977, when WChear about
10. Thirdly, over the years the settlersdevised, under the
the death of 1.432 innocent civilians, including scoresof
nose of the British Government, the administeringPower,
2

the rlecessarY
apparatus to entrench themselves politically
legallY,
militarily, socially and economically. The aim ha;
a’waYs
been, and still is, statements to the contrary
nlltwitllstanding,
to exclude Africans from effective particiF’ation
in the vital organs of the State. This would ensure
~l~~nliiJatio*~ in perpetuity.

that the policies of South Africa constituted a grave threat
to the security and stability of the whole area,
27. The Security Council has been seized of the question
of Southern Rhodesia for a long time now. The prescribed
solutions have not toppled the illegal rCgime. Bearing that
in mind, and in the light of the rapidly deteriorating
situation in the region, the Council should now prescribe
solutions that will match the gravity of the situation. It will
not be enough merely to condemn unanimously the rebels.
Unanimity in moral condemnations and disunity in action
is what has enabled the rCgime to survive thus far. What is
needed now is concerted, resolute and concrete action
aimed at bringing to book the illegal regime and those who
support it.

21.
FoLirthlY,
in the face of internal and international
E~ress~~res, minor adjustments could be made, but never
wt’llld
white direction and control of Rhodesian affairs be
ah:tndoned.
22.
Anyone
who bears these basic facts in mind cannot
but be suspicious when the rebels in Rhodesia suddenly
Licclrlre
their acceptance of majority rule, as Smith was
bclicved
by some to have done last year. Subsequent
h:~PPenings
nt Geneva, however, showed that Smith’s
interE?retatiOn
of majority rule was nothing but a deliberate
;ittcItlpt
to hoodwink the international community and so
hlly time for himself,

28. In our view, the Programme of Action adopted at the
International Conference in Support of the Peoples of
Zimbabwe and Namibia, held at Maputo recently [see
S/12344/Rev. I], provides a framework for specific action
in the furtherance of our common purpose of achieving
independence in Zimbabwe.

2.3. 1n the absence of any concrete proof that the rebels at
Snlisbury
now want authentic majority rule, the intermIti~.~r~nl community, especially those who deal closely with
the illegal rdgime in attempts to resolve the Rhodesian
E~rr~tl1em, should exercise great caution if they are to avoid
Ili%_tppointnient.

29. We appeal to the international community to rally
behind Mozambique politically, diplomatically and, especially. financially and materi?lly, because, in fact, by
unconditionally
supporting the liberation struggle, by
closing the border with Rhodesia and by scrupulously
observing the sanctions against the rebel colony, Mozarn.
bique has brought upon itself untold hardships, including
attacks against it. The People’s Kepublic of Mozambique is,
in fact, carrying the burden that should correctly be fully
borne by the international community. That burden is seen
to be especially onerous when it is borne in mind that
Mozambique emerged from a long colonial war with a
shattered economy and that, just as it is enthusiastically
reconstructing its society, the rebel regime is destroying
everything.

24, We do not begrudge those who seek a solution to this
prt,blenl.
Yet, from our experience in dealing with the
slippery
characters at Salisbury, we must caution against
filsc
llopes which can easily lead to the prescription of
ur~~cceptable
solutions which would, in effect, entrench the
riic”isL nlinority
rCgime with all its privileges.
25.
ln formulating solutions to the Rhodesian problem, it
is important
not to view Rhodesia in isolation. The illegal
rigime
has survived for over 11 years despite verbal
ct~~~J.cn3nations
of it. Surely, Rhodesia could not possibly
stand
alone. It has been able to survive because it gets the
military
and economic support that it needs. It is able to
rleighbouring
African States because it has the
attack
\rlllcrewithal
to launcl~ those attacks, A war machine of the
rtragni t II de that we see in Rhodesia would not be possible
\I;itllout
a generous supply of weapons and oil. All these
1<1lt,rlesia obtains from South Africa, the most intransigent
all~l ciefiant
of all sanctions busters. South Africa has not
rna~c
a11y bones about this state of affairs. The Foreign
Minister
of czpm’theid South Africa, addressing a New York
ScIllErlar
on the topic, “Why invest in South Africa? “, on
J() JL~I~C 1977, declared that South Africa would not
p;lrticipatc
in sanctions against Rhodesia.

30. It is essential and imperative that the international
community should provide Mozambique with the means to
defend itself effectively against aggression. Only when it is
strong can Mozambique safeguard its hard.won independence and play its full role in the liberation of
Zimbabwe. Mozambique also needs assistance in order to
rebuild what has been destroyed and to care for those who
flee from oppression. In his statement, Mr. Marcelino dos
Santos outlined the nature of the assistance that Mozambique needs. His are modest requests to which the international community should be willing to respond.
31. The international community should also intensify its
efforts to bring down the rebel rkgime. In addition to
political and diplomatic action, this calls for, first, the
tightening of existing sanctions and their expansion as
provided for under Article 41 of the Charter, and, secondly,
increased assistance from the international community to
the Zimbabwean freedom fighters, because, ultimately, it is
they who will bring down the rebel rCgime.

20. StlE>porred by such a powerful trading partner, which,
trades with highly industrialized Western nations,
ir\ turn,
~~~~~~~~~~ is assured of a long survival. Any proposed
s~,l~,~ti~I~s must therefore take this reality into full account.
sl, lclrlg aa apar’t/zeid continues to exist in South Africa, the
sr,utl,crn
African problem will persist. South Africa is the
I1c’s,,s of this iniquitous system. At their recent meeting in
l,.clllrlo,-t,
the Commonwealth Heads of Government recognzicd that fact when they declared that “South Africa plays
B cct~tri~l
role in perpetuating the problems in southern
difrica
which are all interrelated”, and went on to assert

32. The draft resolution before the Council is quite
straightforward
and provides for the barest minimum of
action necessary to deal with this very serious situation. It
should be possible for the Council to adopt this draft
3

resolution unanimously. The people of Mozambique, the
people of Zimbabwe,
the people of Africa and the
peace-loving peoples of the world await resolute action by
the Council. Let its decision be worthy of their trust.
33. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Brazil, who wishes to make a statement on
behalf of the Latin American Group. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
34. Mr. CORREA da COSTA (Brazil): Availing myself of
the prerogative afforded by the provisional rules of procedure
of the Council and having supplied the Secretariat with
copies of the English version of my statement, I should like
to address the Council in my own language, which is also
the language of our sister African nations of Mozambique,
Angola, Guinea-Bissau, Cape Verde and Sao Tome! and
Principe.
[The speaker continued in Portuguese.] 1
35. The Latin American Group, which has been following
the events in southern Africa with the keenest interest and
deepest concern, could not fail to take part in the debate
held by the Council in connexion with the repeated acts of
aggression perpetrated by the illegal regime of Ian Smith
against the Republic and people of Mozambique.
36. I am particularly gratified to have been selected by the
Latin American Group as its spokesman at this meeting, for
Brazil enjoys the closest ties with Portuguese Africa-ties of
all kinds, ethnic, historical, cultural, as well as those of
affection.
37. It would be impossible for me to quantify the extent
to which Africa has contributed to the racial composition
of the Urazilian people simply because our aversion to any
kind of racism, no matter how subtle, is so great that all
questions relating to racial origin were.withdrawn
from our
demographic census forms many years ago.
38. It is not only Brazil but all of Latin America that is
concerned with the current situation of insecurity that
exists in southern Africa, for the international community
can no longer countenance, by inaction, acts of violence
that are strongly condemned by the universal conscience.
39. As the Minister for Development and Economic
Planning of Mozambique, Mr. Marcelino dos Santos,
pointed out in the Council 12014th meeling], the escalation of aggression against his country is, above all, a
challenge to the international community itself and an
affront to the authority and prestige of the United Nations,
40. For the second time this year, the Security Council is
meeting to examine a complaint of a Member State victim
of a racist and illegal rCgime: that of Ian Smith. That
rCgimc. it is worth while recalling, has earned general
opprobrium and condemnation and is the target of sanctions which have been imposed by the Organization.
Military actions-ever
more frequent-are
now directed
1 The
I<nglish version of
dclcgation.

his

statement

was

supplied

by t]lc

against a young African nation whose independence was
won on the battlefield and which, in its first few years, at
the cost of heavy sacrifice, has sought to build its economy
and provide for its nationals living conditions compatible
with human dignity. That is the nation which has bravely
decided to close its borders with Southern Rhodesia and
strictly implement the decisions and recommendations of
the United Nations against the Salisbury rCgime. However,
the price exacted of the noble people of Mozambique is
excessive and unjust for a militarily and economically
unprepared nation, unequally matched in a struggle against
an enemy equipped with modern armaments, including
highly efficient air support.
41, The account presented here by Minister Marcelino dos
Santos is a summary of the situation which has been
steadily deteriorating. The treacherous and cowardly
attacks against civilian localities situated in Mozambique
territory in the provinces of Tete, Manica and Gaza have
caused numerous deaths and heavy losses. Those attacks
reflect, on the other hand, the determination of the
Salisbury regime to attempt, at any cost, to prolong its
spurious existence through military escalation and a possible in ternationalization of the conflict. The incursions
against hlozambique are, in this context, manoeuvres
intended to divert attention from the central problem
which is, as we know, the independence of Zimbabwe.
43. When the Security Council, in March of last year,
adopted resolution 386 (1976), we were already fully aware
of the duty of the international community to provide
Mozambique with the necessary technical and financial
assistance without which it would be impossible for that
country to proceed in the difficult task of rebuilding its
economy and at the same time implement the measures
adopted by the Organization. To that appeal the international community responded with aid which, though
significant, was not sufficient to compensate for tosses
suffered as a result of the military escalation of the conflict.
Fifteen months have elapsed and a new and vehement
appeal is being made by the Government of Mozambique to
the international community to provide this time the
material means indispensable to the survival of its sovereignty and the preservation of its territorial integrity which
are threatened by the troops of Ian Smith.
43. The mission which Mozambique has proposed to fulfil
is not its alone. The eradication of racism and the remnants
of colonialism is a task which has been incumbent upon US
all ever since we signed the Charter. Therefore we cannot
passively witness aggression against a sister nation which has
assumed the commitment to implement, in their totality,
the sanctions adopted by the Security Council. And it is to
this same Council that that nation, Mozambique, brings its
appeal-an appeal with which Latin America associates
itself whole-heartedly-that
the Security Council should
strengthen the measures required for the fulfilment of a
task to whose success we should all contribute.
44. On behalf of the countries of Latin America, 1join in
this appeal, certain that the Council will respond positively
and adopt, also by consensus, the draft resolution sponsored by Benin, India, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritius. Pakistan, Panama and Romania [S/12353], It is

our duty to lend to Mozambique, and through it to the
whole of Africa, our decided and unequivocal support in a
cause which is common to Us all, particularly to those
nations which, at a given moment in their history, have
shed their blood to gain liberty and win independence.

countries and to prevent them from implementing
resolutions adopted against it.

the

50. In those circumstances the Security Council, as the
organ entrusted with the task of eliminating aggression and
maintaining international peace and security, cannot remain
idle or inactive. What the victims of the racist minority
rCgimes today need is not more words of sympathy or more
unimplemented resolutions but, rather, concrete action
capable of toppling the usurping racist regimes and establishing the long-awaited majority rule in southern Africa.

45, The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement,
46. Mr, ALLAF (Syrian Arab Republic): Mr. President,
permit me first of all to associate myself and my delegation
with all the well-merited praise of your country and your
person that has been expressed on the occasion of your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I am confident that, before the end of the day
and of your term of office, the Council will be able to take
the necessary action awaited from it on the important
matter that has been brought to its attention.

51. The Minister for Development and Economic Planning
of the People’s Republic of Mozambique and the other
eminent ministers mandated by the Council of Ministers of
the Organization of African Unity to present the issue
before the Security Council have put before it the facts, in
all their details, about the systematic and calculated acts OF
aggression committed by the outlaw rCgime at Salisbury
against the people of Mozambique. The Security Council
has heard how the People’s Republic of Mozambique has
suffered an average of tnore than one attack every three
days since it began to impose the United Nations s!nctions
against Southern Rhodesia, how more than 1,400 persons,
mostly Zimbabwean refugees, have been murdered by the
army of Ian Smith, how dozens of villages and other
localities have been completely levelled by the racist
aggressors, how the forces of the illegal Ian Smith rCgime
are using fragmentation bombs, napalm, heavy artillery,
tanks and even Mirage fighter planes against the African
population.

47. I should also like to express to you and the other
members of the Council the gratitude of my delegation for
permitting us to participate in this important debate. In
fact, we consider ourselves a closely concerned party in the
struggle of our African brothers against racist-settler
regimes, because our people is waging the same struggle
against an identical racist-settler r6gime in our region and
we are the first to know what it means in terms of
suffering, frustration and anger for a people to bc subjected
to repeated attacks and harassment by alien racist invaders
for no reason except the adherence of that people to the
Charter and resolutions of the United Nations and its
determination to reject racism, alien domination and the
foreign occupation of its territory.

52. The appearance of such sophisticated weapons in the
arsenal of the illegal racist Southern Rhodesian regime, at
the very time when international sanctions are supposed to
be in full implementation against it, raises many questions.
It provides the proof-if any is needed-of the collaboration
and the unholy alliance between the racist regimes in
southern Africa and similar rCgimes in proximity to the
African continent. It proves also that some Powers are not
the opponents of the racist minority rigime that they
pretend to be. Furthermore, the types of such sophisticated
weapons used by the forces of the illegal Smith regime
bring to mind recent exchanges of visits and contacts on the
highest level between the leaders of certain racist rCgimes,
as well as ensuing reports on secret agreements between
them, especially in the military field. The similarity in
tactics and patterns of the acts of aggression is additional
evidence of the close co-operation between these rCgimes.

48. I do not think that I have very much to add, at this
late stage in the debate, to what the Council has already
heard from previous speakers. Africa has, in fact, delegated
a number of its most eminent sons to present the cause of
the heroic struggle of the people of Mozambique against the
illegal racist rdgime of Ian Smith, The repeated acts of
aggression committed by that r6gime against the people of
Zimbabwe, and most recently against the neighbouring
peoples of Mozambique, Botswana and Zambia, must not
remain unpunished. The international community can 110
longer sit idly by while such criminal aggressive acts are
being perpetrated by the racist minority r6gimcs against the
freedom, dignity and sovereignty of the African peoples.

53. The Arab front-line States and their populations,
towns and villages have continuously suffered from savage
attacks and criminal raids under the guise of so-called hot
pursuit, exactly like their African brothers. The Palestinian,
Lebanese, Jordanian, Syrian and Egyptian peoples have
been subjected thousands of times to similar acts of
invasion and murderous raids under the pretext of pursuing
the freedom fighters and the members of liberation
movements and striking at their bases.

49. The repeated acts of aggression against the People’s
Republic of Mozambique arc in reality directed not only
against that courageous newly-independent country, but
also against the international community as a whole and
against the United Nations. For it was in faithful impiementation of the relevant resolutions and decisions of the
General Assembly and Security Council that the People’s
Republic of Mozambique closed its borders and applied
SatKtiOns
against the illegal racist
r6giIne
in SOUtherIl
Rhodesia-in fact, to the detriment of its own vital
eCOllOniic
interest, In other words, the illegal regime of
Salisbury, in attacking the People’s Republic of Mozambique and other front-line African States, is trying to
punish the United Nations itself, to intimidate other

54. It is quite logical in this light that the first Afro-Arab
Summit Conference Meeting, which was held at Cairo last
March, should have reaffirmed in its Political Declaration
the need to strengthen the united front of the African and
5

Arab peoples in their struggle against racist policies and
regimes

consider the struggle of the African peoples its own
struggle.

“under the forms in which they appear in southern
Africa, Palestine and the other occupied Arab and African
territories” f S/12298, annex, para. 51.

58. I should like to conclude by quoting the following
declaration, made only two weeksago*by PresidentAssad
of the Syrian Arab Republic, in solidarity with our African
brothers. He said:

The conference decided, furthermore,
should be made in order to find

that increased efforts

“Our people considersthe struggleof the peoplesof
Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania againstapartheid, racism
and colonialism asits own struggle.This is not only out
of faithful adherenceto humanhigh idealsand values,nor
exclusively becauseof our own suffering at the handsof
colonialists throughout history , . . but becausewe too
are at present confronting colonialismunder a newform,
as representedby racist zionism, which hasmanagedto
establish on a part of our Arab territory, through
conquest and military force, a colonialist regime whose
ideology and practices are identical to the ideologiesand
practicesapplied in southernAfrica.”

“the most effective ways and means of accentuating, at
the international level, the political and economic isolation of Israel, South Africa and Rhodesia, so long as the
regimes of these countries persist in their racist, expansionist and aggressive policies” [ibid., para. 81.
To this effect, the Conference affirmed
“the need to continue to impose a total boycott,
political, diplomatic, cultural, sporting and economic and,
in particular, an oil embargo against these regimes”
[ibid.].

59. Mr. AKHUND (Pakistan): First of all, I wish on behalf
of the delegation of Pakistanto offer a very warmwelcome
to His Excellency Mr. MarcelinodosSantos,memberof the
Permanent Political Committee of FRELIMO and Minister
for Development and EconomicPlanning of Mozambique.

55. The People’s Republic of Mozambique is being subjected to the ferocious attacks of the minority racist
regimes because it supports the struggle of the people of
Zimbabwe against the minority illegal regime at Salisbury.
Therefore, as long as that illegal regime is permitted to
remain in power, the People’s Republic of Mozambique and
other front-line African States will remain the target of
aggression and attack by the racist mercenaries. The only
way to restore peace and justice in the region is to deal a
final blow to such racist regimes and to put an end to their
illegai usurpation of power against the will of the African
peoples and the international community,

60. The Minister has given an account [2014th meeting]
of the acts of aggressionwhich continue to be launched
against his country by the illegal Smith regime. Those
armed attacks are full-fledged military operations employing sophisticated weapons,and they have levelled to
the ground whole villagesand localities. So far, they have
cost the lives of more than 1,400 personsand have done
extensive damage to the vital points of the developing
economic and social infrastructure of Mozambique, The
extent, the frequency and the savagery of those violent
forays have opened a new phase in Mr. Ian Smith’s
desperatestruggle to hold on, at all costs, to the power he
and his racist minority regimeusurped 12 years ago and
until recently continued to enjoy in comparative tranquillity.

56. The courageous struggle waged against the racist
minority regimes by the national liberation movements and
the front-line States is not sufficient by itself, in spite of the
heroism and huge sacrifices of the African peoples, to bring
down these regimes without the serious assistance and
support of the international community and the Members
of the United Nations. Speedy action is therefore needed in
order to provide all forms-l stress all forms-of assistance
to the People’s Republic of Mozambique in its struggle
against the acts of aggression of the illegal regime in
Southern Rhodesia and in order that it may overcome the
great losses it has suffered as a result of those acts of
aggression and its faithful adherence to United Nations
resolutions. The international community must also render
all assistance to the heroic people of Zimbabwe in order to
speed its accession to majority rule and to defeat its racist
oppressors.

61. There can be no doubt about the nervousnessand
senseof insecurity which today afflict the Smith regime.It
is no less true that, for a decade after the unilateral
declaration of independence,the minority regime continued to function in the belief that its existencewould
remain essentially unchallengedand that such punitive
measuresand sanctions as the world community could
agreeupon either would prove ineffectual or could beeasily
countermined. Who can deny, indeed, that the imposition
of selective santions in 1965 and of extensive mandatory
sanctionsin 1968 have proved to be ineffective? The Smith
regime, far from being brought to book, hasin fact grown
stronger year by year, both economically and militarily,
and even today seemsto be in no fear of effective reprisals
when using the instruments of war and aggressionin its
efforts to prolong its survival,

57. The Syrian Arab Republic, for its part, wishes to
reaffirm its commitment to and unreserved support of the
peoples of Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania,
and all African front-line States in their struggle against the
racist minority regimes and their allies. Syria, as an active
member of the Committee of 242 and the Special Cornmittee Against Apartheid, and as a member of the Arab
Group and the Group of Non-Aligned States, will always

62. Speaking in the National Assembly on 10 June, the
Prime Minister of Pakistan,Mr. Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, asked:

2 Special Committeeon the Situation with regard to the Implementationof the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.

“Would Mr. Ian Smith’s regimehave lastedwithout the
support of Great Britain and other white membersof the
6

Comonwe&h?
Was the embargo imposed on Rhodesia
effectively
pursued? If it had been, Mr. Smith’s rkgime
would Ilot have survived.”

68. The situation is southern Africa does indeed carry the
seeds of racial conflict; however, it is not the black majority
which threatens to provoke it but their racist overlords,
who are prepared to risk anything in order to perpetuate
their Privilege, their exploitation and their usurpation.

63. These questions are not rhetorical in nature but lie at
the very core of the complexities which beset the situation
today and which are so often put forward in order to
just%’
inaction. As the Council considers the havoc
wrou&t
by the illegal rbgime in neighbouring States, the
threat its actions pose to the peace of Africa and the racial
conflict
the rdgime seems bent upon inviting, we must
SWelY
ask how SUCh a state of affairs has been allowed to
arise.

69. The struggle of the peoples of southern Africa for
liberation from racist domination and economic servitude,
for freedom and human dignity, is rooted in principles
which are valued by all the great religions and civilizations.
It is sanctioned by the principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. If the struggle has assumed violent
form and may, in fact is bound to, intensify, it is because
no other recourse has been left open. Indeed, if the racist
r&nIes in southern Africa today seem shaken in their
erstwhile arrogance and certitude, it is largely because the
freedom fight has gained strength over the Years. As
Minister dos Santos put it so well, liberty is neither a gift
nor a concession; it must be conquered through sacrifice
and by struggle. This lesson of history will, it seems, have to
be learnt all over again in southern Africa by Smith, his
likes and his mentors.

64, A handful of men were able to shake loose the
authority
of the administering Power, while that Power
stood by apparently powerless to put down the rebellion by
force-force
SO readily used in other colonies against the
people engaged in legitimate struggles for independence.
6.5. Alm.ost 011 the eve of the unilateral declaration of
independence by the settlers, military equipment, including
aircraft,
was transferred into the hands of the Smith
administration.
Nine years after the imposition of mandatory sanctions, oil companies continue supplying oil to
Southern
Rhodesia in defiance of the Security Council’s
decision and the laws of their home countries, and this even
th0~g11 the dodges and devices by which this is managed are
known to all concerned.

70. Meanwhile, the Council must assume its responsibilities and take prompt and effective action to put a stop to the depredations of Smith in neighbouring countries. It
is the duty of the international community to respond to
the call for international assistance made by Mozambique.
My own country, in pursuance of resolution 386 (1976).
has decided to place at the disposal of the Government of
Mozambique the sum of 1 million rupees for the purchase
of its requirements from Pakistan. We only wish that we
were. in a position to make more than this modest
contribution which is a token of the growing friendship
between the peoples of Pakistan and Mozambique and of
Pakistan’s solidarity with the role of Mozambique in
assisting the liberation struggle in southern Africa.

66. Weakness and vacillation, commercialism and political
expediency
and, yes, racial sympathies-these
are the
elements which have rendered the Rhodesian issue ip
tractable and have made impossible fulfilment of the pledge
given in the Council on 12 November 1965 by the then
lhitish Foreign Secretary Mr. Michael Stewart, who assured
the Council:
“It is, clearly and unmistakably, a British responsibility
to re-establish the rule of law in Southern Rhodesia so
that in due time that country may enjoy not the mere
natfe of independence but the full substance of freedom
for all its peoples.” [1257th meeting, para. 19.1

71. In the same spirit, my country is glad to sponsor the
draft resolution which is before the Council and which, we
hope, will be not only unanimously adopted but fully and
unreservedly implemented. We hope in particular that
effective measures will be taken to stop completely the
flow of oil to Southern Rhodesia. The delegation of
Pakistan believes further that, as a first step, action should
be taken under Article 41 of the Charter in its entirety and
that consideration should be given to initiating action under
Article 42 if necessary. It is necessary above all to consider
the application of an arms embargo against South Africa,
for the problem of’ Rhodesia cannot be isolated from the
larger problem of racial discrimination and minority rule in
South Africa.

67. Three years later, when the Council, by resolution
253 (1968),
imposed mandatory sanctions on Southern
Rhodesia, the representative of the United Kingdom, Lord
Caradon,
assured the Council that the measures adopted
would bring about a just solution to the problem. Those
assuratlces
have been repeated over and over in the nine
rears w]lich have elapsed. In reality, a peaceful settlement
of the Khodesian problem is as yet nowhere in sight. While
we do not belittle the efforts made to bring about a
liegatinted settlement, it is evident that the resort to force
by tile illegal Smith rigime has given a set-back to the
prospect
and is perhaps designed to do SO. The minority
rGgimes of southern Africa are not interested in settlement
but iI1 perpetuating their dominion in one guise or another.
They
describe themselves as distant bastions Of Western
civiIizntion
and Christian values. They talk of the cornmunist
danger and would perhaps be glad to embroil
outside Powers in the conflict. They try to arouse racial
atavisln and stir racial sentiments by asserting that majority
rule would
spell suicide for the white inhabitants of
southern Africa.

72. My delegation has taken note of the reSOlUtiOn On
Mozambique
adopted the other day by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity [see s/12352/.
We have also listened with attention and sympathy to the
statements made in the Council by the Ministers of Algeria.
Angola, Botswana, Gabon, Lesotho, Nigeria, Tanzania and
Zambia. The presence here of so many African cabinet
ministers is a measure of the widening concern felt on the
continent of Africa at the deteriorating SitUatiOn in its
southern part, It is a manifestation of African solidarity in
the fight against racial discrimination and minority rule.
7

77. Southern Rhodesia is not yet a State; its status is still
that of a British colony, whose decolonization went off the
rails. The Ian Smith group, which was responsible for that
aberration, has no status in international law and no rights
whatsoever. Indeed, that so-called rCgime has no right to
exist at all, except with the consent of the majority of the
people of Southern Rhodesia. Unfortunately, all that the
Security Council has done against it so far has been to
impose a system of sanctions which have proved ineffective,
Demands have therefore been made for an arms embargo as
well as an oil embargo, and we support these demands. But
the immediate problem is to secure the safety of Mozambique.

Speaking as the represcntativc of an Asian country dedicated to the eradication of colonialism and racism, opposed
to aggression and intervention and devoted to fostering the
mutual solidarity of the third world in the interests of
justice and peace all over the world, I wish to place on
record and pledge the support, moral and-to the extent
permitted by our means-material, of the Government and
the people of Pakistan for the achievement of the just aims
of the people of southern Africa.
73. Mr. President, as this is the last day on which you will
be presiding over our meetings, may I take this occasion to
place on record my personal admiration for the effective,
firm and skilful manner in which you have conducted our
proceedings on the many difficult matters which we had on
our agenda.

78. The Minister for Development and Economic Planning
of Mozambique has appealed for arms and equipment to
defend his country and also for other forms of assistance to
cover the losses sustained. My delegation regards this appeal
as having been made in the exercise of “the inherent right
of individual or collective self-defence” under Article 5 1 of
the Charter. In the face of such an appeal, there can be only
two courses of action open to the Security Council: either
the Council itself should take the measures necessary to
liquidate the threat to Mozambique or it should make it
possible for Member States to provide such assistance as is
needed to strengthen the capability of Mozambique to
defend itself. It is the latter course of action that is now
being sought by Mozambique, evidently because the
Council is unable to act itself.

74. Mr. JAIPAL (India): The Security Council is dealing
with a somewhat curious situation in which a Metnber State
finds itself facing massive attacks by a well-armed group of
men from Southern Rhodesia, a country which those men
now control illegally. An average of one attack every three
days has taken place against Mozambique, causing the
deaths of over 1,400 persons and the destruction of villages,
refugee camps, hospitals, schools, shops, reservoirs, bridges,
communication centres and so forth. The nature and scale
of the attacks indicate a calculated plan to undermine the
economic and social infrastructure of Mozambique. The
attackers have been using heavy artillery, armoured vehicles, tanks and helicopters and even aircraft. There is no
doubt that there have been several gross violations of the
sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Mozambique.
Furthermore, the attacks have posed a challenge to the
authority of the United Nations, particularly to that of the
Security Council.

79. It must be remembered that we are not dealing with a
case of ordinary aggression which, by legal definition, is the
use of armed force by one State against another State. We
are instead dealing with an armed group, which is regarded
as illegal by the international community. It is legitimate
for those States threatened by that illegal group, as well as
for the people who are held in subjugation by it and the
international community as a whole, to co-operate in order
to liquidate that group politically and, if necessary,
militarily, and thus liberate the people of Southern Rhodesia the attainment of whose independence is an international obligation.

75. The importance of this debate is underlined by the
presence among us of the Vice-President of FRELIMO and
Minister for Development and Economic Planning of
Mozambique, whose statement (2014th meeting] we listened to with profound sympathy, and also by the
participation of Ministers from Algeria, Angola, Botswana,
Lesotho, Nigeria, the United Republic of Tanzania and
Zambia.

80. A ‘collective demonstration of international assistance
and support for strengthening the defensive capability of
Mozambique and other neighbouring States should bring
the Ian Smith group to its senses and facilitate the success
of any peaceful initiatives that may be taken to rectify the
present illegal situation in Southern Rhodesia. The draft
resolution before LIS seeks to achieve precisely these
objectives and is commended to the Council for unanimous
adoption.

76. The attacks against Mozambique are mounted by a
group-some refer to it as a rCgime-which usurped power
from the British colonial authorities and, as it were,
hijacked the colony of Southern Rhodesia in order to
perpetuate its own form of colonialist exploitation. It has
been holding its inhabitants as hostages and has been
violating the sovereignty of three neighbouring States, The
inhabitants of Southern Rhodesia, whose interests the
United Nations has recognized as paramount and who are
entitled, in terms of Article 73 of the Charter, to real
independence, have been prevented by this Ian Smith group
from fulfilling their natural and legitimate political aspirations. They have a right to liberate themselves and we are
all obliged to assist them to do so. The responsibility for
assisting them is particularly heavy for the neighbouring
countries of Mozambique, Botswana and Zambia. It is as
much our duty to help those neighbouring countries as it is
our duty to help the people of Southern Rhodesia to rid
themselves of the control of the Smith group.

81. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
82. Mr. ALARCON (Cuba) (irlterpretation jkom Spanish):
Mr. President, first of all, I should like to add the voice of
my delegation to those of ail who have congratulated YOU
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We do so with special pleasure, given the relations
of Friendship between our two countries, which are proof
that it is’ possible to develop international co-operation
8

among States with different political and social systems on
the basis of mutual respect. Furthermore, knowing your
experience and skill, we can view this important debate
with optimism. I’ thank you and all the members of the
Council for having acceded to our request to participate in
the debate.

more than anyone else, are bound to implement fully the
sanctions against Smith--sanctions
they themselves approved, but which they nevertheless violate by daily acts.
87. While a small, newly independent country, a country
without major resources and facing numerous material
difficulties, was able to take a consistent, dignified and
responsible attitude, some Western Powers have made a
mockery of the sanctions and continue to give material and
political assistance to the Salisbury clique, attempting every
kind of diplomatic manoeuvre in order, as President Machel
stated, “to impose upon the people of Zimbabwe
a
settlement designed to present Ian Smith as an essential
part of any solution to lhe conflict in this British c010ny”.

83, In his statement of i8 June [S/l235O, an/le~ ~11, the
President of FRELIMO and of the People’s Republic of
Mozambique, Comrade Samora Moises Ma&et, described
the gravity of the situation which the Council is considering
and clearly stated the reasons which compelled the international community, and above all this United Nations
organ, to act urgently to put an end once and for all to the
dangers for international peace and security posed by the
racist clique of Ian Smith and the other colonialist rggirne
in southern Africa.

88. Their policy towards the Rhodesian regime reveals the
true intentions of those who, while verbally condemning
racism, are the ones most to blame for its continued
presence in southern Africa. As early as 1965, the white
settlers rebelled against the British Crown and, in defiance
of the United Nations, proclaimed an illegal “independence”
which is nothing but a perpetuation of the racist colonial
oppression of the African population constituting the vast
majority in the country. Since then, giving one excuse after
another, the allies of IMr. Smith have paralysed the international community and prevented the adoption of effective measures LO quell the racist rebellion and eliminate a
grave hot-bed of international tension. As a result, a new
generation has been born in Zimbabwe which lives under
the yoke of a gang of Fascist exploiters.

84. Given that solemn, sincere and firm statement by the
senior spokesman of the people of Mozambique, no one has
the right to harbour doubts or to be reticent. The situation
prevailing in the vicinity of the Rhodesian colony is
alarming and requires the immediate adoption of effective
and definitive measures, in order to restore peace and
eliminate one of the most serious hot-beds of tension in the
world today.
8.5. The international community has an unshirkable duty
towards the Mozambican people. The People’s Republic of
Mozambique is one of the youngest States on our planet,
having only a few days ago celebratccl the second anniversary of its inclependence. Its people took the reins of
self-government under very difficult conditions, emerging
from a colonialism which had plundered its wealth, fleeced
its workers, distorted its economy and yolced it to the
markets of the neighbouring Territories still subjected to
colonialism and racism. European colonialism brought not
civilization but wretchedness and hunger; it pitilessly
exploited the Mozambican people and, at the end of four
centuries of exploitation, ‘,lbandoncd that Territory, without schools or hospitals, or the infrastructure essential for
the construction of an independent society.

89. During the same period in which they refused to take
action against Mr. Smith and his henchmen, those same
Powers did not hesitateto use their armedforces to combat
liberation movements all over the world, or to support
puppet and reactionary rkgimesanywhere and everywhere.
When it came to the Salisbury rCgime,thosePowers argued
here in favour of moderation and negotiation, and objected
to the use of force, whilst they themselves,in universally
repudiated rage, were using force againstpeoples who had
taken LIP arms to fight for their rights, from Indochina to
the Caribbean. Whenever the delegations of the African
States and their allies and friends affirmed that the
situation in southern Africa was a threat to world peace
requiring resolute action by the Security Council, it was
those same voices which attempted to minimize the
seriousnessof the conflict and justified the inaction and
paralysisof the international community.

86. Thus the people of Mozambique had an uphill battlc.
under particularly adverse circumstances, in beginning the
development of an independent national economy. In doing
SO, they had to overcome all the obstacles inherited from
the cotonial past and to face hostile neighbours. Yet they
pursued their internationalist policy of consistent solidarity
with their African brothers who are still victims of foreign
oppression, in Zimbabwe and in the rest of southern Africa.
That is the policy which has been and still is being
followed, firmly and unalterably, under the wise direction
of FRELIMO and of President Ma&et. An example of this
attitude was Mozambique’s decision of 3 March 1976 to
close its borders with Rhodesia and fully implement the
sanctions imposed by the international community against
that spurious rbgime. In so doing, in complying with the
decisions adopted by the Council, the Mozambican people
bravely bore the sacrifices cntaited in their praiseworthy
conduct Thus Mozambique evinced a degree of loyalty and
sincere devotion to its international commitments and to its
status as a Member of the United Nations that is in contrast
to the behaviour of certain members of the Council, who,

90. Those who promoted that bungling policy were
betting 011 a lost cause. With their racist and arrogant
mentality, they were unable to understand an inevitable
historical process and underrated the African peoples’
fighting ability. Senselessly,they trusted in the soundness
of the Portugueseempire and of minority tyrannies. They
gave all their political, military and economic support to
Portuguesecolonialismuntil it fell, and with it the Fascist
system in Portugal itself, under the impetusof the glorious
fighters of MPLA, FRELIMO and PAIGC.
91. It was then, and only then, when the echo of freedom
had reached the very borders of the Territories still
dominated by racist minorities and when they had lost theil
support bases in Angola and Mozambique, that certain
9

96. It is not a matter of giving aid to Mozambique. It is a
matter of complying with the duty that we all share to
contribute to the common struggle in which Mozambique is
honourably and courageously assuming the largest share of
sacrifice.

capitalist countries began to become concerned about the
situation in southern Africa. Then, and only then, did they
begin to try to use seemingly more sensitive language about
the problems of African peoples. Never before had their
spokesmen shown so much interest in visiting the African
continent; never before had their so-called free press shown
SO much curiosity
over what was happening in that part of
the world. In belated manoeuvring, their spokesmen seek to
sow confusion and divert the African combat from its
certain and victorious course. Today, as yesterday, imperialism seeks to gain time for its partners in Salisbury and
Pretoria; today, as yesterday, it seeks to halt the advance of
African revolution; today, as yesterday, it is concerned,
above all, with preserving its major investments in southern
Africa and the lucrative profits obtained thanks to
apar&&! and the racist exploitation of African workers.

97. Obviously, the problem being considered by the
Council would not exist had the United Nations acted
consistently with regard to the racist regimes of Pretoria
and Salisbury. Words are useless to describe the crimes
committed by Rhodesian troops against the people of
Mozambique. Any who tried even at this late hour to
prevent effective international action would be responsible
for the atrocities, killings and destruction caused by the
racists, The advocates of deceitful formulas for a peaceful
settlement in southern Africa should explain to us how
much longer they think that violence should continue that
razes to the ground African villages, annihilates their
peaceful inhabitants, destroys their harvests and reduces to
rubble their schools and hospitals. Do they not consider
intolerable the acts of violence that victimize Africans?
How long will certain Western Powers insist on seeking
peace for Europeans alone while ignoring the sufferings of
Africans? Is this not simply and clearly a racist attitude?

92. Imperialist policy towards African peoples constitutes
a justified source of alarm. The large monopolistic consortia
and the Governments which represent their interests are not
yet convinced that the era of colonialism has ended and
that the time has come for them to let the African peoples
forge their own destiny.
93. The independent States of Africa are constantly the
targets of aggression promoted by imperialism and its
colonialist and neo-colonialist agents. The South African
invasion of the People’s Republic of Angola, the mercenary
attack on Benin, the constant provocations against Zambia
and Botswana and the other front-line States, the reactionary threats and conspiracies against Ethiopia and other
progressive States and the systematic aggression carried out
against Mozambique all prove that the imperialists have not
renounced their designs to maintain domination over the
African peoples.

98. I should like to extend our greetings to the delegation
or the People’s Republic of Mozambique which has
participated in this debate headed by Comrade Marcelino
dos Santos, Vice-President of FRELIMO and Minister for
Development and Economic Planning of Mozambique. On
many past occasions we have had the opportunity of
meeting with Comrade dos Santos at the United Nations
and in many other international bodies which he attended
representing his fighting people in the difficult times when
they had to wage the armed struggle against Portuguese
colonialism. His presence here among us is a source. of
genuine pride and satisfaction for those of us who were
always with him throughout that arduous struggle in which
FRELIMO consistently and determinedly defended the
interests of his people. But his presence here must also serve
as a warning and a reminder to all members of the Council.
Some day, just as today we welcome a delegation from a
free and independent Mozambique, we shall receive with
equal joy and satisfaction the representatives of a liberated
Zimbabwe, of a liberated Namibia and of a South Africa
free of I-acism and colonialism.

94. Ever since Mozambique attained its independence in
1975, it has had to face an undeclared war waged against it
by the Salisbury rigime. That conflict has cost the lives of
more than 1,400 civilians, caused large-scale destruction of
material goods and brought indescribable sufferings to the
Mozambican people,
95. That situation cannot continue. It is the duty of the
international community to do what it can to put an end to
it. The progressive States and forces must comply with their
duty of solidarity with the people’s Republic of Mozambique and contribute
to assist its firm resistance to
aggression. It is not a matter of giving aid to Mozambique;
neither its people nor its Government are asking favours of
anyone. Those who are not familiar with the history of
Mozambique may be unaware that its motto, “The struggle
continues”, was no passing fancy nor was it created for the
benefit of international oratory, “The struggle continues”
was the heroic motto of the FRELIMO fighters in the most
arduous moments of their struggIe against Portuguese
colonialism. It was the salute that those marching to
combat gave those who ITad laid down their lives on the
hazardous road to freedom, It was the expression of’ the
commitment of a revolutionary vanguard that was able to
transform words into action and to persevere to total
victory. On 15 June 1975, on winning its independence, the
people of Mozambique made that motto a reality. History
will prove its indomitable force sooner than the colonialists
suppose.

99. The people and Government of Cuba once again renew
the expression of their militant solidarity with their
brothers and sisters of Mozambique. Despite the geographical distance that separates us, we are united in the
common struggle for freedom and socialism. Together with
them, we proclaim that the struggle continues and will
Continue until victory.
100. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (translation fionz Chinese):
First of all, the Chinese delegation wishes to express a warm
welcome to the ministerial representatives sent by many
African States to this meeting. We have listened attentively
to the statement made by His Excellency Mr, Marcelino dos
Santos and to those made by the representatives of other
African States and many third-world
countries. Those
statements give full expression to the militant unity of the
numerous third-world
countries in the common struggle
10

,

against colonialism, neo-colonialism, imperialism and
racism. With an abundance of irrefutable facts, the representative of Mozambique /2014th meeting/ exposed the
serious crimes committed by the Smith racist regime of
Southern Rhodesia during the massive armed invasion of
Mozambique and and strongly condemned those crimes in
categorical terms. The Chinese delegation expresses firm
support for all this,

wall in desperation”. ‘The Smith racist rCgime tries to
obstruct the numerous African States and people from
supportingthe armed struggle of the Zimbabwe people by its
adventurous acts of military threats, provocations and
invasion of the front-line countries so as to save itself from
imminent extinction. This, of course, is sheer day-dreaming
and wishful thinking, Its iniquitous acts have, however,
further educated broad sections of the African people and
made them more deeply aware that the most reactionary
racists will never transfer power and step’ down from the
stage of history willingly; nor will they abandon the violent
force in their command in dealing with the revolutionary
people. Only by using revolutionary violence to deal with
the counter-revolutionary
violence and by strengthening
and developing the people’s armed struggle will the people
of Zimbabwe and the rest of southern Africa find the
reliable road towards indcpcndence and liberation.

101. Since the beginning of this year, the Southern
Rhodesian racist regime has ceaselessly carried out military
threats, provocations and aggression against the neighbouring independent African States of Zambia, Botswana
and Mozambique. According to incomplete statistics, the
Smith racist rCgime has carried out military provocations
and attacks against Mozambique on more than a hundred
occasions in less than a year, Wherever they went, the
invaders stopped at nothing in commiting arson, kidnapping, plundering and killing, causing heavy losses to the
lives and property of the people of Mozambique.

105. At the same time it can be seen clearly that the
military provocations and invasions of a number of independent African States by the Southern Rhodesian racist
rCgime have been carried out with the support of the
South African. racist r&irne and the connivance of one
super-Power. What is more, a grave incident took place not
long ago in which the other super-Power had organized
mercenaries for large-scale invasion of another African
sovereign State. The occurrence of all those events is closely
linked with the intensified rivalry between the super-Powers
over southern Africa and for world hegemony. Nevertheless, the criminal acts of the super-Powers are bound to
evoke stronger resistance from the African States and
people which will be able to realize further the significance
of “guarding against the tiger while repulsing the wolf’. No
force on earth can check the historical trend of national
liberation of the southern African people. With the support
of the entire African people, the people of Zimbabwe and
the rest of southern Africa, heightening their vigilance,
strengthening their unity, relying on their own strength and
acting according to their own wishes, will surely frustrate
the racists’ trouble-making and the different schemes of the
super-Powers and finally achieve their independence and
liberation.

102. What arouses particular indignation is that, less than
a month after their massive invasion of Mozambique last
May when they occupied the Mapai area and flagrantly
assaulted the Zimbabwe guerrilla camps, the Southern
Rhodesian racist armed forces, defying world opinion,
committed another act of massive military aggression
against Mozambique, slaughtering the civilian population of
Espungabera and seriously damaging the town. They have
reached a new high in their reactionary arrogance. It is even
more intolerable that Ian Smith has shamelessly denied
those crimes by saying “this is not an aggression at all” but
a mere “defensive action”. This is sheer gangster’s logic in
its full sense. The frenzied acts of aggression committed by
the Smith racist rCgime constitute not only a most serious
encroachment upon the State sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Mozambique but also a rabid provocation to
the entire African people and the people all over the world.
The Chinese delegation expresses utmost indignation at this
and condemns it most strongly.
103. The solemn statement made by President Samora
Machel on 18 June /S/32350, a/ll?ex U/ has greatly
encouraged the fighting will of the Mozambican people and
the people of southern Africa. The Chinese Government
and people fully sympathize with the Mozambican people
and the people of southern Africa, and we express our firm
solidarity with and support for them in their just struggles
against the white racist rCgimes. WC are deeply convinced
that, under the leadership of President Ma&cl, the heroic
Mozambican people will mete out due punishment to the
Southern Rhodesian invaders and that the crime-steeped
reactionary rCgimcs of Smith and Vorster will come to the
ignominious end of thorough defeat.

106. The Chinese delegation considers that the Security
Council should uphold justice, condemn the Smith racist
r6gime in the slrongest terms for its criminal acts of
invading Mozambique and other independent African
States, condemn the South African racist authorities for
their criminal acts of working hand in glove with the Smith
rCgime, firmly support the people of Zimbabwe and the rest
of southern Africa in their just struggle for national
liberation, firmly support the Government and people of
Mozambique in their just struggle to defend their national
independence and territorial integrity, and call upon all
countries and people to give them all the necessary support
and assistance.

104,. The recent rabid acts of aggression committed by the
Smith racist regime against the neighbouring independent
African States do not show its strength, but rathet
demonstrate that, under the heavy blows of the mounting
armed struggle of the Zimbabwe people, it has increasingly
found itself in an inextricably hopeless impasse. As the
Chinese saying goes, “A cornered beast tries to leap over a

107. In view of the above, the Chinese delegation will vote
in favour of the draft resolution contained in document
S/12353, sponsored by Benin and six other countries.
The meeting rose nt 12.50 p.m.

11

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS
may
your

PUBLICATIONS
be obtained
bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sent cn vente dans les librairies
depositaires
du mondc entier. Informcz-voua
aupr& de votre libraire
j : Nations
Units. Section dea ventes, New York OLI GenBve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIES
et les agences
ou adressez-vous

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
es&in en vcnta en librerias
buidoras
en todas partcs
de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirijase
Unidas. Secci6n tie Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U,S.

1.00

(or equivalent

in other

currencies)

y casas distris: Naciones

77-70001-April

1978~2,200
