A /70/PV.56

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

56th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 17 November 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Denmark)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Zinsou (Benin),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 87 (continued)
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting
the report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (А/70/219)
Draft resolution (A/70/L.8)
Mr. Bustamante (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina would like to express its appreciation of and
support for the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and its thanks for the Agency’s annual report for
2014 (see A/70/219). Argentina believes that the Agency
plays a very important role in international cooperation
for scientific and technological development in the
nuclear field and non-proliferation.
Argentina stresses the technical and procedural
nature of the draft resolution (A/70/L.8), which does
not introduce distorting political elements. We thank
the Federative Republic of Brazil for its efforts..
The efficiency of the Agency’s verification system
with regard to nuclear activities is fundamental for
achieving the non-proliferation objectives. Our country
has steadily maintained that the central matter of
the future design of the nuclear security architecture
should be the responsibility of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, as it is the relevant body of the United

Nations system in the area of the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy.
Argentina believes that one of the pillars of the
Agency’s work is nuclear and radiation security and
the safe transport and management of radioactive
waste — areas that my country considers very
important. A central objective of the Agency is to foster
and encourage international cooperation on nuclear
issues, and Argentina has continuously contributed
with various programmes and activities.
International safeguards constitute another pillar of
the Agency. Along with nuclear and radiation security,
they are especially important for facilitating nuclear
development. My country reiterates its conviction that
those guarantees should be developed in an atmosphere
of cooperation and dialogue between the Agency and
the States.
Argentina believes that joint efforts are necessary
in order to generate stronger nuclear infrastructures
that are more solid, efficient and sustainable over time.
Mrs. Natividad (Philippines): On behalf of the
Philippine Government and the Filipino people, allow
me to express our solidarity with and sympathy to the
people of Beirut and Paris in this time of great sorrow
following the recent terrorist attacks that killed hundreds
of people. We stand in solidarity with the international
community in condemning those horrific attacks and in
the fight against terrorism. It is urgent, now more than
ever, to bolster the global non-proliferation regime so
that terrorists are not able to possess nuclear weapons
or weapons of mass destruction.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-37314 (E)

*1537314*

A/70/PV.56

In the face of those threats, the Philippines recalls
the recent assistance provided by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), as well as the United
States Department of Energy, in strengthening the
Philippines’ nuclear security measures to ensure the
security of all our visitors and nationals within our
borders. For that, the Philippines is most grateful.
The Philippines welcomes the report of the
Agency for the year 2014 (see A/70/219) and lauds the
continuing balanced manner in which its objectives
have been pursued and implemented. The IAEA’s active
involvement in the deliberations for the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) is also
worth noting and commending. There is no doubt that
nuclear science and technology will play a crucial role
in the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals, such as in the areas of health, energy, water,
agriculture and food security and climate change, to
name but a few.
The Philippines has tremendously benefited from
the Agency’s Technical Cooperation Programme over
the years. IAEA Director General Yukiya Amano was
in the Philippines in January to witness the country’s
latest advances in nuclear science and technology.
Our electron-beam irradiation facility, which was
established with the Agency’s assistance, is now fully
operational and is handling the grafting of abaca fibres
to produce metal adsorbents and honey alginate for the
dressing of wounds.
Next month, the Philippines will hold its third
Nuclear Congress, which will provide a useful platform
for the exchange of information on the current state of
global, regional and national applications in nuclear
science and technology for development and inclusive
growth.
In the area of nuclear safety, the Philippines
welcomes the approval by the IAEA Board of Governors
of the six new safety requirements, which will be
established as safety standards in an effort to further
strengthen the global nuclear safety framework.
We also support the establishment of the Emergency
Preparedness and Response Standards Committee and
intend to participate actively in its work. The Philippines
also commends the IAEA’s report on the Fukushima
Daiichi accident, which was the product of extensive
international collaboration among experts from 42
member States, including my country. The Philippines
is working with the IAEA to enhance its capability to

2/7

17/11/2015

cope with nuclear or radiological emergencies through
the establishment of an online environmental radiation
monitoring system, comprising initially five stations.
On nuclear security, the Agency is assisting us
in setting up a nuclear security support centre. The
European Commission Joint Research Centre and the
United States Department of Energy are also providing
a radiation portal monitor for training front-line and
border control officers.
The Philippines is also an active partner in the
implementation of the Integrated Nuclear Security
Support Plan. To strengthen cooperation among our
various Government agencies in the field of nuclear
security, we convened a workshop on threat assessment
and design basis threat in April.
The Philippines welcomes the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) agreed to by the E3/EU+3
and Iran, as well as Security Council resolution 2231
(2015) endorsing the JCPOA. The Philippines calls for
full compliance with that agreement and the resolution
of outstanding and remaining issues. We also look
forward to the December 2015 report of the Director
General, which will provide the final assessment on
the resolution of all past and present outstanding issues
concerning Iran’s nuclear programme of action by the
Board of Governors.
The Philippines also continues to urge the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to abandon all
its nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programmes,
to return to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and to fully comply with IAEA
safeguards and relevant Security Council resolutions.
In closing, allow me to reiterate the Philippines’
strong commitment to the work of the IAEA and to
contributing, as a member of the Board of Governors
for 2015-2016, to improving the Agency’s operations
and looking into ways that nuclear science and
technology can improve people’s lives and contribute
to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda.
Mr. Moselle (United States of America): The United
States fully supports the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and the great breadth of work reflected
in the IAEA’s 2014 annual report (see A/70/219). We
would also like to thank Director General Amano for
his leadership.
For many years we have joined the consensus
in this forum on the draft resolution before us today

15-37314

17/11/2015

(A/70/L.8), expressing our strong collective support for
the IAEA and its work.
The IAEA annual report for 2014 is the report
of the IAEA Board of Governors mandated by the
IAEA Statute. It was approved by the IAEA General
Conference without reservations, in accordance
with the IAEA Statute. It is submitted to the General
Assembly in accordance with the United Nations/IAEA
relationship.
It is a shame that this routine resolution of support
for the IAEA should be politicized. We were similarly
disappointed by Russia’s efforts to suggest changes to
the 2014 IAEA annual report when it was considered
by the Board of Governors in Vienna. Russia’s position
is a clear attempt to amend technical IAEA documents,
including this annual report, to imply recognition of
Russia’s attempted annexation of Crimea. Those efforts
are inconsistent with resolution 68/262 on Crimea’s
sovereignty, and they were roundly rejected in Vienna.
Crimea remains an integral part of Ukraine. Ultimately,
the IAEA Board of Governors, subsequent to the IAEA
General Conference, made it clear that such political
efforts had no place in a technical document from a
technical agency.
We commend Brazil’s efforts with regard to the
draft resolution, and we stand with Brazil as a sponsor.
We encourage all States to join us in supporting the
draft resolution, as we have done in years past.
Mr. Špokauskas (Lithuania): Let me thank the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), Mr. Yukiya Amano, for his presentation
of the Agency’s annual report (see A/70/219) and the
update on its activities in 2015.
Lithuania is pleased to co-sponsor and will vote in
favour of the draft resolution on the report of the IAEA
(A/70/L.8), reaffirming the indispensable role of the
Agency with regard to non-proliferation and the use of
atomic energy for peaceful purposes, as well as nuclear
verification, safety and security. We thank Brazil for
its skilful guidance in the difficult negotiations on this
important draft resolution.
Lithuania associates itself fully with the statement
made on behalf of the European Union (see A/70/
PV.55).
Nuclear energy is a viable solution in the face of
the challenges facing the international community
arising from climate change and the need to ensure

15-37314

A/70/PV.56

energy security. Yet nuclear energy has a future
only if developed in the most responsible way and in
conformity with the spirit and letter of the international
safety standards and requirements. Lithuania
appreciates the role of the IAEA in setting high nuclear
safety standards through the constant improvement of
regulations, assistance in implementation and efforts to
foster the concept of safety culture.
The comments by the Russian delegation with regard
to the IAEA report and the nuclear facilities on the
Crimean peninsula (see A/70/PV.55) are disconcerting
and do not reflect reality. Lithuania is concerned that
the work of the Agency is being politicized by bringing
up the issue of the illegal occupation and annexation
of Crimea by the Russian Federation. We regard that
as a detrimental attempt to influence the work of the
Agency, which is an independent and technical agency.
The position of the Assembly regarding Crimea is
very clear. Resolution 68/262 affirms its commitment
to the sovereignty, political independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within the internationally
recognized borders. Crimea remains part of Ukraine,
and its illegal annexation constituted a breach of the
Charter of the United Nations and its principles.
Moreover, the decision of the IAEA to classify
all nuclear facilities in Sevastopol, including
research reactor IR-100, as belonging to Ukraine was
completely in line with resolution 68/262, which calls
upon all international organizations and specialized
agencies not to recognize any alteration in the status
of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol and to refrain from any action that might be
interpreted as recognizing any such altered status.
For those reasons, Lithuania urges all Member
States to maintain their support for the draft resolution,
as in previous years.
Mr. An Myong Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea would like to state its position on
a nuclear issue that was mentioned in a prejudicial
manner in the annual report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) (see A/70/219).
The nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula is
the direct product of the hostile policy of the United
States and its nuclear threats against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. If the United States had
not acted with hostility against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and had not threatened it with its

3/7

A/70/PV.56

nuclear weapons, the nuclear issue would never have
been created on the Korean peninsula. Since the
nuclear issue of the Korean peninsula was created by
the United States, its solution will depend entirely upon
the United States terminating its hostile policy against
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Nevertheless, each year, the IAEA presents
its partial and unjust report and draft resolution,
intentionally following the hostile policy of the United
States against the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. If the IAEA sincerely wants a solution to the
nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula, it should call
to account the United States, which created the nuclear
issue and constantly threatens the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea with its nuclear weapons.
However, the IAEA report mentions the nuclear
issue of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
only in a discriminatory manner, without mentioning
even one word about the nuclear threat and blackmail
by the United States. The attitude of the IAEA cannot
be construed otherwise than as being unfair, which is
far short of impartiality in its work. It is none other than
the IAEA that in the past created suspicion regarding
the peaceful nuclear activities of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, at the instigation of the
United States; and none other than the United States
and the IAEA that compelled the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to take self-defensive action by
withdrawing from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons.
The IAEA should learn a lesson from having
produced such unprecedented serious consequences by
blindly followed the hostile policy of the United States
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea takes this opportunity to urge the IAEA not to
blindly follow the hostile policy of the United States
any longer. The IAEA should bear in mind that the
annual submission of this kind of report, which is full
of prejudice and distortions, does not at all help address
the issue.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
never recognized the relevant resolutions of the IAEA
Board of Governors, not to speak of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
As long as the United States’ extremely hostile
policy against the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea continues, no solution can be expected with

4/7

17/11/2015

regard to the nuclear issue or to the peace and security
of the Korean peninsula and beyond.
The aggressive joint nuclear military exercises
staged every year by the United States in South Korea,
despite strong condemnation of the international
society constitute concrete manifestations of the United
States’ hostile policy against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. As long as United States continues
to infringe upon the sovereignty and dignity of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and drives dark
clouds of nuclear war towards the Korean peninsula,
the nuclear issue cannot be solved. On the contrary,
such actions will only lead to the further modernization
and qualitative and quantitative improvements of the
nuclear deterrent capability of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
As has already been clarified, the nuclear power
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea serves
to deter attacks and aggression against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, defend the nation’s security
and safeguard the peace and security of the region. The
nuclear power of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea does not constitute a threat to non-nuclearweapon States that are not engaged in attacks or
aggression against the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will
fulfil its obligations assumed before the international
community with a high sense of responsibility as a
nuclear-weapon State.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): There is universal agreement that the real
nuclear threat in the Middle East is Israel’s possession
of nuclear weapons, including long-range missiles that
can threaten the whole region and, with their range of
5,000 miles, can even reach the Chinese border.
Yet some do not recognize that obvious fact,
preferring to draw attention to other, illusionary issues
in order to avoid any focus on the real threat resulting
from Israel’s nuclear reality. This tendency lacks
integrity and objectivity and unveils their allegations
when they espress keenness to establish a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East. For decades they
provided Israel with nuclear technology and material
that enabled it to acquire nuclear weapons, including
advanced submarines capable of carrying and
launching nuclear missiles. They have done their best,
quite illogically, to keep the international community

15-37314

17/11/2015

from focusing on that important issue during the
Review Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which
were held in 2010 and 2015 in New York. They also
worked to thwart the 2012 Conference on a nuclearfree zone in the Middle East in order to help conceal
the fact Israel was still acquiring a nuclear weapon at
the expense of the safety and security of the peoples in
the region, proving once again their policy of double
standards.
In his statement, the Director General of the
IAEA referred to the fact that the Agency had recently
concluded that it was highly probable that a building
destroyed at Dair Alzour was a nuclear reactor, which
should have been declared to the Agency. In that
context, please allow me to state the following.
First, the Director General of the IAEA knows quite
well that Syria made the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons one of its national priorities in both words and
deeds. Therefore, early on, back in 1968, Syria started
by acceding to the NPT. It also signed the Safeguards
Agreements with the Agency in 1992. Moreover, on
27 December 2003, Syria, on behalf of the Group of
Arab States, submitted to the Security Council a draft
resolution on the topic that is still in blue. That draft
sought to establish a zone free of nuclear weapons and
all other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle
East. All of that underscores the fact that the credibility
of our national commitment to non-proliferation cannot
be questioned. That is particularly the case since that
draft, which is in line with the provisions and objectives
of the IAEA, met with the objection of the United States
of America, which threatened to use the veto against it.
Second, the Security Council and the IAEA did
not condemn the Israeli military aggression against
Syria or Israel’s refusal to cooperate with the Agency,
nor did the Council allow Agency inspectors to inspect
the pollution that is potentially due to the Israeli
missiles and the materials used to destroy and pollute
that site. We must also take into consideration Israel’s
continued refusal to cooperate with IAEA requests, its
ongoing development of its nuclear military capabilities
beyond any international supervision or control and its
disregard for all calls to turn the Middle East into a
zone free of nuclear weapons.
All of this threatens the credibility of the
Non-Proliferation Treaty and the safety and security
of the States and the peoples in the Middle East and
undermines the universality of the Treaty. Those are
15-37314

A/70/PV.56

very dangerous issues. The facts have been corroborated
and documented, and are known to the IAEA. We
expected the Director General of the IAEA to refer to
those facts in his statement instead of using expressions
devoid of any real meaning, such as “It was very likely
that...”.
Third, it would be useful here to read a paragraph
from the memoirs of Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, the
previous Director General of the IAEA, entitled The
Age of Deception: Nuclear Diplomacy in Treacherous
Times. I quote from pages 228 and 229:
(spoke in English)
“One of the strangest and most striking example
of nuclear hypocrisy, multilateral and multifaceted,
must surely be Israel’s bombing of the Dair Alzour
installation in Syria in September 2007, and the
aftermath of that attack. Speculation began almost
immediately that the site had housed a nuclear
facility. Syria denied the accusations. Israel and the
United States remained officially silent, although
American officials spoke anonymously on the
subject to the media. I spoke out strongly, noting
that any country with information indicating that
the bombed facility was nuclear was under a legal
obligation to report it to the IAEA. But no one
came forward with such a report. For the six weeks
following the bombing, the most crucial period
in terms of our seeing inside the facility, we were
unable to obtain any high resolution images from
commercial satellites.”
(spoke in Arabic)
Despite that account, Mr. Amano has, for four
consecutive years, been repeating the same erroneous
and misleading statements that he repeated this
morning.
Fourth, the commitment of the member States
to the Statute of the IAEA would have required the
United States of America to inform the Agency with
the information they had before they destroyed the
building, and not eight months after it was destroyed.
The same applies to Israel, which did not provide the
Agency with any information. Not only did it not provide
all the information — that is, if the information was
correct — but it also launched a military aggression on
sovereign Syrian territory by infiltrating the air space
of a neighbouring country, namely, Turkey. The Agency
did not deal with the issue according to its mandate. It
did not follow the necessary procedures in accordance
5/7

A/70/PV.56

with its responsibilities and prerogatives with regard to
Israel’s violation of its international obligations.
Fifth, most of the conclusions of the Agency
under the current mandate of Director General Amano
with regard to the Dair Alzour site have been based
on the photos and analysis submitted by the Central
Intelligence Agency. That raises a lot of questions as
to the credibility of that information received by the
IAEA and the nature of the supporting documents. The
fact that a State that follows a hostile policy towards
my country’s interests presented the documents should
also be taken into account, as should the precedents on
the issue relating to the catastrophic Iraqi dossier. That
file is misleading and led to the invasion of Iraq, the
destruction of its infrastructure and the promotion of
terrorism. The result came years later, in 2008, when
the report of the United Nations Special Commission
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
687 (1991 (UNSCOM) was placed in a box marked
“Confidential”, not to be opened for 60 years. Why
is that? Because the report concluded that UNSCOM,
which was looking for weapons of mass destruction in
Iraq, could not find any.
Sixth, the recent report of the Director General
includes inconclusive conclusions based on information
that lacked credibility and comprehensiveness, and
which contradicted the assessments of his predecessor,
Mr. ElBaradei. That also raises a lot of questions that
require justification and clarification.
Seventh, it is obvious that there is an intermingling
between the legal commitments of member States to the
safeguard agreements and the voluntary procedures for
accession to the additional protocol, which is not based
on any legal foundation and which seeks to impose
further political pressure on my country.
Eighth, we have a question for the countries that
have provided a cover-up for Israeli nuclear weapons,
as well as for the Director General of the IAEA and for
the Agency itself. What have they done to implement
Security Council resolution 487 (1981), which has
been on record for 30 years? Allow me to quote from
paragraph 5 of that resolution, in which the Security
Council called for
(spoke in English)
“Israel urgently to place its nuclear facilities under
the safeguards of the International Atomic Energy
Agency”.

6/7

17/11/2015

(spoke in Arabic)
Ninth, an important report on armament and
disarmament and international security, which was
issued by the Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute, has devoted an entire chapter to what it calls
Israeli nuclear “powers” — not “power”. I call on the
Director General of the IAEA to read that chapter in
order to draw on the lessons learned and to immediately
and conclusively deal with Israeli nuclear weapons,
which threaten the lives of the peoples and States of
the region, in implementation of the resolutions of the
Agency, along with those of the General Assembly and
the Security Council.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 87.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/70/L.8, entitled “Report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed on the draft
document, the following countries have become
sponsors of A/70/L.8: Argentina, Australia, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, Georgia, Germany,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Norway,
the Philippines, Poland, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Singapore, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Belarus, Belgium, Bhutan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
15-37314

17/11/2015

Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Myanmar, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam
Abstaining:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Chad, Cuba,
Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Draft resolution A/70/L.8 was adopted by 99 votes
to none, with 10 abstentions (resolution 70/10).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Malta informed
the Secretariat that it had intened to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like once again to express my deep condolences to the
peoples, families and Governments that were targeted
by the heinous terrorist attacks in France and the
previous terrorist attacks in Egypt, Lebanon and Iraq.
In recent years, my country has been part of
the consensus on the resolution on the report of
the International Atomic Energy Agency. We had
hoped that today’s resolution would avoid making
any indirect reference to political matters that should
not be addressed here but that properly belong in the
framework of bilateral interactions, especially between
two countries with deep historical relations. I would like
to note that the two countries concerned have friendly
relations with my country. My delegation will continue
to support all of the paragraphs of the resolution.

15-37314

A/70/PV.56

Therefore, in accordance with our explanation of vote,
our delegation decided to abstain in the voting on the
resolution.
Mr. Zdorov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Belarus
voted in favour of resolution 70/10, because it supports
the activities of the International Atomic Energy
Agency and its annual report on the substance.
At the same time, we wish to express our concern
about the fact that we were unable to reach consensus
on the adoption of the resolution, which we could have
done if we had taken into account the specific positions
of States on issues important to them. We hope that,
in the future, we will be able to find a format that
will allow us to avoid such a situation and to focus on
discussion of the mandated issues of the International
Atomic Energy Agency.
Mrs. Del Sol Dominguez (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to why my delegation abstained
in the voting on resolution 70/10, on the report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency for 2014. Cuba
abstained because my country laments the fact that
not all possible efforts were exhausted in all possible
forums to accommodate the legitimate concerns of
all delegations and to preserve the traditional and
important consensus on the resolution.
Mr. Vallejos (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation abstained in the voting. We acknowledge,
however, the importance of the work of the International
Atomic Energy Agency and its valuable cooperation
with our countries. Nevertheless, we profoundly regret
that we were not able to adopt resolution 70/10 by
consensus and that it was not possible to accommodate
all delegations by taking their legitimate concerns into
account. We hope that the debate on this issue will
continue so that we can find a solution and arrive at
the consensus we need so badly on this as well as other
important resolutions.
Our delegation appreciates the work of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, and we will
continue to cooperate with the Agency.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 87?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 3.55 p.m.

7/7
