S/2019/251

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 March 2019
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolution 2334 (2016)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, the ninth quarterly report on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2334 (2016), provides a review and assessment of the
implementation of the resolution since my previous report on the subject, which was
delivered orally by my Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative on 18 December 2018. The report covers developments from
15 December 2018 to 15 March 2019.

II. Settlement activities
2.
In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council reaffirmed that the
establishment by Israel of settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967,
including East Jerusalem, has no legal validity and constitutes a flagrant violation
under international law and a major obstacle to the achievement of the two -State
solution and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. In the same resolution, the
Council reiterated its demand that Israel immediately and completely cease all
settlement activities in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
and that it fully respect all of its legal obligations in that regard. No such steps were
taken during the reporting period.
3.
During the reporting period, Israeli authorities advanced, approved or tendered
some 3,150 housing units in Area C of the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. This figure comprises plans advanced for some 2,500 units and
announcements of tenders for about 650 units.
4.
Nearly half of the total units promoted are to be built in outlying locations, deep
inside the occupied West Bank, including 500 units in the Nablus area and 120 in the
Hebron Governorate. One of the plans effectively legalizes the outpost of Ibei
HaNahal as a neighbourhood of the Ma’ale Amos settlement in the Hebron
Governorate. This is the first such decision in almost five years.
5.
On 19 December, the Knesset passed, in a preliminary vote, a bill endorsed by
the Government to advance the legalization of some 66 illegal outposts throughout
the occupied West Bank within two years of its adoption. The bill would also require
Israeli authorities, during the two-year period, to provide the outposts with funding,

19-04732 (E)

250319

*1904732*

S/2019/251

electricity and other services and to freeze the implementation of demolition orders
unless instructed otherwise by the Government.
6.
In a separate step, in mid-December, the Israeli Government established a team
to fast-track the legalization of outposts and housing units in settlements built
illegally according to Israeli law. The move followed an opinion issued by the
Attorney General’s office on 13 December that allows the Governme nt to initiate
steps to retroactively legalize settlement units built “in good faith”, including on
private Palestinian property, which, at the time of construction, was mistakenly
believed to be “State land” under Israeli law. Some 2,000 settlement units throughout
the occupied West Bank could be retroactively legalized using this mechanism,
commonly referred to as the “market regulation” principle.
7.
On 3 January, following an order by the Jerusalem District Court, the Israel
Defense Forces evacuated dozens of settlers from the site of the former Amona
outpost, on the outskirts of the Ofra settlement in the northern occupied West Bank,
which was evacuated in February 2017 in compliance with a ruling of the Israeli
Supreme Court. On 12 February, Israeli authorities removed and confiscated several
mobile homes used as outposts near the settlement of Itamar.
8.
During the reporting period, demolitions and seizures of Palestinian -owned
structures continued across the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusale m. In all,
133 structures were demolished or seized by Israeli authorities, resulting in the
displacement of 252 people, and leaving 20,157 others affected, on the grounds of
lack of Israeli-issued building permits, which are almost impossible for Palestin ians
to obtain.
9.
Among the structures demolished were parts of three water connections in Area
C, that supplied, or were about to supply, Beyt Dajan and Beyt Furik villages in
Nablus (housing approximately 18,000 people), 13 herding communities in the
Masafer Yatta area of Hebron (1,200 people), and the Bedouin community of Wadi
Abu Hindi now living in Jerusalem (320 people). All of these communities suffer
from severe water shortages, especially in the summer. Two of the water connections
were funded by international donors as part of humanitarian assistance efforts.
10. In occupied East Jerusalem, on 17 February, following an Israeli court decision,
Israeli security forces evicted a Palestinian family from their home in Jerusalem’s Old
City and facilitated its handover to Israeli settlers, who had invoked an Israeli law
that allows Israelis, but not Palestinians, to claim lands owned prior to 1948. The
eviction displaced eight family members, including three children. Another seven
families in the Old City are at risk of eviction and, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, a total of 200 Palestinian families in occupied
East Jerusalem face similar evictions. In the Sheykh Jarrah neighbourhood,
32 Palestinians are also facing imminent risk of eviction.

III. Violence against civilians, including acts of terror
11. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called for immediate steps to
prevent all acts of violence against civilians, including acts of terror, as well as all
acts of provocation and destruction, for accountability in this regard and for
compliance with obligations under international law for the strengthening of ongoing
efforts to combat terrorism, including through existing security coordination, and to
clearly condemn all acts of terrorism. The reporting period, however, was
characterized by acts of violence throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including the continued use of lethal force against Palestinian demonstrators in Gaza

2/12

19-04732

S/2019/251

and the firing of rockets, mortars and incendiary devices from Gaza towards Israel by
Hamas and other Palestinian militants.
12. Overall, 27 Palestinians, including 10 children, were killed by Israeli security
forces, including during demonstrations, clashes, airstrikes, security operations and
other incidents.
13. In Gaza, ongoing demonstrations continued at the perimeter fence, with
relatively small crowds participating during the week and numbers approaching
10,000 every Friday. While most demonstrations remained peaceful, some
participants engaged in violent activities, such as launching incendiary and explosive
devices towards Israel, planting improvised explosive devices or attempting to breach
the fence. The Israeli security forces responded using tear gas, rubber -coated metal
bullets and live ammunition.
14. In February, after a lull of several months, Palestinian militants resumed the
launching of balloons carrying incendiary or explosive devices into Israel from Gaza:
one such device exploded near a house, causing damage to it. During the reporting
period, 40 incendiary devices were flown towards Israel. No casualties were reported.
The Israel Defense Forces responded by striking what they identified as militant
targets in Gaza.
15. During the reporting period, in Gaza, 20 Palestinians were either killed by
Israeli security forces using live ammunition, or died of wounds sus tained previously,
including 1 woman, 7 children and 1 person with a mental disability. In addition,
some 3,415 people were injured; and 4 Israeli soldiers were injured by firebombs,
explosive devices, stones and gunfire.
16. During the reporting period, Palestinian militants launched 46 rockets and six
mortar shells towards Israel. The Israeli Air Force fired 123 missiles on military sites
and open areas in Gaza. On 22 January, Palestinian militants from Gaza opened fire
twice at soldiers of the Israel Defense Forces patrolling the perimeter. One soldier
was lightly injured when a bullet fired by a sniper struck his helmet. The Israel
Defense Forces responded by firing shells at militant observation posts, killing one
member and injuring four other members of the Hamas Al-Qassam Brigades. In
response, the Israeli Air Force also launched five missiles on Hamas military targets,
with no injuries reported. On 14 March, militants fired 10 rockets towards Israel,
including two towards Tel Aviv for the first time since the 2014 conflict. Israel
responded by striking what the Israeli Air Force identified as over 100 militant targets
in Gaza. No casualties were reported.
17. Health providers in Gaza continued to struggle to treat those injured during the
demonstrations. A significant number of the wounded have required complex medical
procedures not currently available in Gaza. Overall, 67 per cent of patients who
sought treatment outside Gaza during the reporting period were granted permits by
Israel. Out of the patients who were injured during the demonstrations, 5 per cent of
those seeking treatment outside of Gaza were granted permits by Israel.
18. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) reported shooting incidents at sea off the shore of Gaza, which resulted in
the injury of 11 Palestinian fishermen, including 1 injured with live ammunition fired
by the Israeli Navy; 20 others were arrested, including a child, and nine boats were
confiscated during the incidents.
19. Beginning on 14 March, and lasting for several days, thousands of Palestinians
in Gaza protested the dire economic situation and the injustice due to Palestinian
division and the Hamas takeover of Gaza by force and violence. Hamas security
forces responded by conducting a campaign of arrests and violence against protesters,

19-04732

3/12

S/2019/251

including women and children. Journalists and staff from the Independent
Commission for Human Rights were also brutally beaten and had their homes raided.
20. During the reporting period, in the occupied West Bank: 7 Palestinians were
shot and killed, including 3 children; and 797 were injured by Israeli security forces,
including 193 children injured during demonstrations, clashes, security operations
and other incidents. Overall, Israeli forces arrested 127 Palestinians, including
20 children.
21. On 7 February, a 19-year-old Israeli woman was attacked, sexually assaulted
and stabbed to death in a forest south-west of Jerusalem. Israeli security forces
arrested a Palestinian suspect, who confessed to having a nationalist motive behind
his crime. He was indicted for murder and sexual assault on 7 March.
22. During the reporting period, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs recorded 71 incidents in which Israeli settlers attacked Palestinians or
damaged their property, a 23 per cent increase in the number of attacks compared with
the previous reporting period. The Office also recorded 47 Palestinian attacks against
Israeli settlers in the West Bank, which resulted in 12 injuries a nd damage to 37
vehicles.
23. On 25 December, the convoy of the Palestinian Prime Minister was hit with
stones, injuring two bodyguards. The attack occurred in the same location where
settlers had thrown stones at a Palestinian car in October, killing a P alestinian woman.
In addressing the latter crime, on 24 January, Israeli authorities charged a 16 -year-old
Israeli for the killing of the Palestinian woman.
24. On 26 January, armed Israelis from the Adei Ad outpost entered neighbouring
Mughayyir village near Ramallah, where they attacked Palestinian residents,
including with live ammunition. The ensuing clashes resulted in the killing of a
38-year-old Palestinian man and the injury of 15 others. The Israel Defense Forces
stated that it dispersed the crowd with “riot dispersal means”. According to
eyewitnesses, the Israel Defense Forces used tear gas canisters and live ammunition
to disperse the Palestinians but did not intervene to prevent the violence on the part
of the settlers. An investigation into the incident by the Israel Defense Forces and the
Israeli Police is reportedly ongoing.
25. OHCHR has also observed a rise in settler violence and harassment in the H2
area of Hebron following the 28 January decision of the Government of Israel not to
renew the mandate of the Temporary International Presence in Hebron. On
12 February, two settlers accompanied by four Israeli security forces entered the
house of a Palestinian family living in Hebron’s Old City, adjacent to a settlement,
and reportedly threatened to kill them and take over their house. On 17 February, a
14-year old Palestinian boy of the same family was arrested, handcuffed and
blindfolded by the Israeli security forces in the Old City for alleged stone -throwing:
the boy released the following day. Pressure by settler organizations also reportedly
led another organization, the World Council of Churches, to temporarily suspend its
protective presence through the Ecumenical Accompaniment Programme in Palestine
and Israel. In the weeks following the withdrawal of the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron, Israeli security forces declared closed military zones over
various parts of the H2 area for varying lengths of time, further hindering access of
humanitarian and human rights organizations, including protective presence
organizations.

4/12

19-04732

S/2019/251

IV. Incitement, provocations and inflammatory rhetoric
26. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called upon both parties to
act on the basis of international law, including international humanitarian law, and
their previous agreements and obligations, to observe calm and restraint and to refrain
from provocative actions, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric with the aim, inter
alia, of de-escalating the situation on the ground, rebuilding trust and confidence,
demonstrating through policies and actions a genuine commitment to the two -State
solution and creating the conditions necessary for promoting peace. Provocation,
incitement and inflammatory rhetoric continued during the reporting period.
27. Some officials from Fatah and the Palestinian Authority continued to glorify
perpetrators of attacks against Israelis, including on social media accounts, by
regularly referring to them as “heroes” or a “source of pride”, and welcoming attacks
when they occurred. In late February, an official Fatah social media account shared a
contemptuous anti-Semitic falsehood suggesting that Jews are morally corrupt and
therefore deserved their fate in the Holocaust. The post was later removed. In
mid-February, a senior Fatah official declared that Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu had attended the Warsaw Conference on peace and security in the Middle
East “in order to remind us of the Holocaust and Auschwitz, [ while] in every city in
Palestine… there is an Israeli Auschwitz to massacre Palestinians”. Hamas and the
Palestinian Islamic Jihad in Gaza also continued to use inciteful and inflammatory
rhetoric during the reporting period. On 22 February, a member of t he Hamas
politburo told the media that the Great Return March was a message that Palestinians
will “cleanse their land of the [impurity] and would stop only at martyrdom or
victory.”
28. At the same time, some Israeli politicians also continued to make inf lammatory
statements. Several ministers openly rejected the Palestinian right to statehood,
stating that a Palestinian State would “endanger” Israel’s existence. Others called for
the creation of “facts on the ground” with the annexation and application of
sovereignty over Area C. In February, a member of the Government and leader of a
party running for the upcoming legislative elections, proposed annexing the West
Bank Area C and granting “full citizenship” to Palestinians living there. One member
of the Knesset also called for Israel to “go back to targeted assassinations” in the Gaza
Strip.
29. In Jerusalem, tensions erupted at Haram al-Sharif/Temple Mount on
16 February, when Israeli police installed a metal fence and a lock at the top of the
stairs leading to the Bab al-Rahmah (Gate of Mercy), two days after prayers were
held there for the first time since 2003. The Gate and the building located therein had
not been used since 2003, when an Israeli court banned the Islamic World Heritage
Committee from accessing it because of claims that the site was being used for illicit
activities. The Waqf Council maintains that the building should be opened for Muslim
prayers and restored for use. Between 17 and 21 February, Israeli Police and
Palestinian worshippers clashed repeatedly when worshippers tried to remove the
metal fence to access and conduct prayers at the Bab al-Rahmah area. Tensions
between Palestinian worshipers and Israeli Police have continued since that time.

V. Affirmative steps to reverse negative trends
30. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called for affirmative steps
to be taken immediately to reverse the negative trends on the ground that are
imperilling the two-State solution. Some positive developments were witnessed

19-04732

5/12

S/2019/251

during the reporting period, but they were significantly outweighed by negative
trends.
31. Significant headway was made in the implementation of the package of urgent
humanitarian and economic projects endorsed by the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of International Assistance to Palestinians in September in an effort
to stabilize the situation in Gaza, prevent an escalation and support Egyptian -led
reconciliation efforts. Since then, nearly $110 million (out of $210 million) has been
raised by the United Nations: $60 million for fuel; $4.6 million for health care; and
$44.25 million for cash-for-work programmes.
32. The implementation of the cash-for-work programmes has created 4,200 jobs,
with another 15,000 expected soon. These developments occurred against the
backdrop of high levels of unemployment (50 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2018),
poverty and food insecurity. Over 2,370 families, some 13,300 people, remain
internally displaced as a result of the 2014 hostilities. During the reporting period,
funding cuts by donors have forced the World Food Programme to reduce its cash based transfer entitlements for 166,000 people across Gaza by 20 per cent, from $10
to $8 per person per month.
33. Funding received to date has enabled a temporary increase in the supply of
electricity in Gaza to between 9 and 12 hours of electricity per day, supporting the
delivery of large quantities of essential medicines and allowing thousands of
emergency surgeries to be carried out. Despite the increase in the supply of electricity,
emergency fuel for back-up generators for emergency and surgery rooms during
power outages is still needed and is running out. This shortage has forced the
reduction or suspension of services at some hospitals and clinics, especially with
regard to sterilization, diagnostic imaging and cleaning services. The situation is
exacerbated by shortages of essential medicines and supplies due to lack of funding.
The lack of generator fuel has also had a negative impact on critical water and
sanitation facilities.
34. In February 2019, the Central Emergency Response Fund allocated $8 million
for the Occupied Palestinian Territory, 70 per cent of which is for health, water and
sanitation needs in Gaza. On 4 March, the humanitarian pooled funds managed by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs also announced an allocation of
$12 million, 75 per cent of which is for Gaza.
35. Progress continued on the repair of houses totally destroyed or partially
damaged during the 2014 conflict, with the reconstruction of 167 houses and the
repair of 44 others completed during the reporting period. An additional $23 million
was disbursed towards the housing reconstruction effort.
36. The temporary Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism continued to play an important
role in reconstruction efforts, as well as in new construction work. The reporting
period witnessed significant improvements as a result of the joint review of the Gaza
Reconstruction Mechanism conducted by the Government of Israel, the Palestinian
Authority and the United Nations. The improvements are expected to significantly
enhance the effectiveness, functionality, predictability and transparency of the Gaza
Reconstruction Mechanism, including by making it more user-friendly, expediting
approval times for the entry of materials and stimulating economic activity.
37. In addition, and in order to support the implementation of critical humanitarian
and economic projects, the United Nations has established a project management unit
in Gaza. The unit, which began its work in January 2019, provides guidance and
support to users of the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism. The unit also works with
United Nations agencies to increase the effectiveness of programmes on the ground,
and to support the implementation of the above-mentioned package of urgent
6/12

19-04732

S/2019/251

humanitarian and economic projects for Gaza being undertaken by the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee.
38. The Rafah crossing between Egypt and Gaza remained open in both directions
during the reporting period, despite the recall of its personnel from the crossing by
the Palestinian Authority on 7 January. A total of 9,405 people entered Gaza and
14,473 exited through Rafah between 15 December and 11 March. Monthly exit rates
of Palestinians from Gaza into Israel reached their highest in over two years in
December, January and February, with the volume of exports from Gaza also peaking
since the tightening of closures by Israel in 2007.
39. On 2 January, for the first time since 2000, Israel extended a small section in
the middle of Gaza’s fishing zone to 12 nautical miles. Fishing in the areas off the
northern and southern shores of the Gaza Strip is still restricted to 6 nautical miles.
Fishing, however, is still not permitted outward to the full 20 nautical miles of the
Maritime Activity Zone L agreed upon in the Oslo Accords.
40. On 14 January, Israeli and Palestinian ministers participated alongside their
counterparts from Cyprus, Egypt, Greece, Jordan and Italy in a regional summit in
Cairo, in which they discussed cooperation on developing recently discovered natural
gas resources and related industries in the Eastern Mediterranean.
41. On 10 March, Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas asked Mohamed Shtayyeh
to begin consultations on the formation of a new government, following the
resignation of the cabinet of Prime Minister Rami Hamdallah on 29 January.
42. Negative trends continue to overshadow positive developments. On
17 February, the Israeli Government began implementing the law adopted by the
Knesset in July 2018 obliging the Israeli Government to freeze, from the clearance
revenues it collects on behalf of and transfers to the Palestinian Authority, an amount
equal to the sums paid by the Palestinian Authority “directly or indirectly” to
Palestinians, or to the families of Palestinians convicted by Israeli courts of
involvement in alleged “terrorist activities” or other security-related offenses, as
defined by Israeli law, or who were killed while carrying out such activities. The legal
view of Israel is that such payments violate the obligation of the parties to the Oslo
Accords, namely to “take all measures necessary to prevent acts of terrorism, crime
and hostilities directed against each other” and to prevent incitement. Accordingly,
on 17 February, Israel announced that it would freeze approximately $139 million
from the Palestinian Authority’s clearance revenues over the course of 2019,
amounting to a little over 6 per cent of the total amount of revenue transfers in 2018.
43. On 21 February, the Palestinian Authority informed the Israeli Government of
its rejection of this unilateral decision, stating that under the Paris Protocol no amount
may be deducted without the consent of both parties and that it will not cease its social
welfare payments to the families of prisoners. The Palestinian Authority has since
refused to accept any clearance revenue transfers from Israel, noting that it will only
accept the revenue if the full amount payable is transferred. Clearance revenues from
Israel constitute up to 65 per cent of the total revenues of the Palestinian Government.
This decision has prompted the Palestinian Government to take severe austerity
measures, including reduced salary payments to Government employees, cessation of
all promotions, appointments and bonuses, purchase of property and cars and reduced
expenses on travel, hospitality and fuel. In addition, the Palestinian Authority has
delayed the transfer of social payments to some of the poorest families in the country.
44. On 28 February, the independent international commission of inquiry on the
protests in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, mandated by the Human Rights
Council in its resolution S-28/1, released its report on the demonstrations held in Gaza
between 30 March and 31 December 2018, the response of Israeli security forces to
19-04732

7/12

S/2019/251

the demonstrations and the impact on civilians in Gaza and Israel. The commission
found reasonable grounds to believe that, in all but two of the 189 fatalities and more
than 300 injuries it investigated, the use of live ammunition by Israeli security forces
against demonstrators was unlawful.
45. Tensions between Fatah and Hamas increased during the reporting period,
further entrenching the divide between Gaza and the West Bank. The lack of progress
in advancing intra-Palestinian reconciliation has also adversely affected the already
deteriorating conditions of the health and education sectors in Gaza. During the
reporting period, the salaries of over 5,000 public sector employees in Gaza were cut.
In January, the Ministry of Health in Gaza stated that 263 of its employees, most of
whom were doctors, were not paid by the Palestinian Authority. Another 400
employees in the education system, including approximately 270 teachers, reportedly
also did not receive their salaries in January 2019.
46. The Cairo agreement enabled the Palestinian Authority to take over the control
of crossings into Gaza in November 2017. However, as at the end of February 2019,
the Palestinian Authority no longer had a presence at either the Kerem Shalom or the
Rafah crossing. The Palestinian Authority withdrew its personnel from Rafah on
7 January as a result of increased tensions with Hamas. Staff hired by Hamas also
reassumed control of the Palestinian side of the Kerem Shalom crossing on
17 February. These changes led to a temporary and partial closure of Rafah, which
has since reopened in both directions. To date, no changes have been recorded i n the
procedures or flow of goods through the Kerem Shalom crossing.
47. In December 2018, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) announced that it had raised sufficient funds to
cover its 2018 funding shortfall of $446 million. Over 42 donors increased their
contributions from 2017 and UNRWA undertook internal measures to reduce costs.

VI. Efforts by the parties and the international community to
advance the peace process and other relevant developments
48. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called upon all States to
distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between the territory of the State of Israel and
the territories occupied since 1967. There were no known developments related to
States doing so during the reporting period.
49. In resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council also called on all parties to
continue, in the interest of peace and security, to exert collective efforts to launch
credible negotiations and urged in this regard the intensification and acceleration of
international and regional diplomatic efforts and support aimed at achieving, witho ut
delay, a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, including the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map, and
an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967.
50. At the invitation of the Russian Federation, representatives of 12 Palestinian
factions, including Fatah and Hamas, participated in the third intra -Palestinian
meeting in Moscow, held from 11 to 13 February. Fatah officials welcomed the
meeting as an opportunity for Egypt to resume its efforts to implement the agreements
previously signed in Cairo. Hamas also stated that Palestinian factions agreed, inter
alia, on the need to end division, to strengthen national unity and to achieve the right
of return. In the course of the meeting, 8 out of the 12 participating factions agreed
on the proposed text of a final statement, with the Palestinian Islamic Jihad and
Hamas notably abstaining over the reference to the Palestine Liberation Organization
8/12

19-04732

S/2019/251

as the sole and legitimate representative of the Palestinian people. and over the
reference to the establishment of a Palestinian state on the territory occupied since
1967 with its capital in East Jerusalem.
51. On 18 and 19 February a group of Arab and European Foreign Ministers met in
Dublin to discuss the Middle East peace process. Participants expressed alarm at the
deterioration of the situation on the ground and reaffirmed their continued support
and commitment for the two-State solution, in line with relevant United Nations
resolutions, long-standing international parameters and prior agreements. Participants
also emphasized the importance of advancing Palestinian reconciliation.
52. On 25 February, during their first joint summit in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, the
leaders of the League of Arab States and the States members of the European Union
reaffirmed their common positions on the Middle East peace process, including on
the status of Jerusalem, and on the illegality under international law of Israeli
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories. They reiterated their commitment
to reaching a two-State solution based on all relevant United Nations resolutions, as
the only realistic way to end the occupation that began in 1967, including of East
Jerusalem, and to achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive peace between Israelis
and Palestinians through direct negotiations between the parties that address all final
status issues. They recalled the importance of upholding the historic status quo for
the Islamic holy sites in Jerusalem, including with regard to the Hashemite
custodianship of the sites. They also called on all parties to take immediate steps to
produce a fundamental change for the better in Gaza, in full respect of international
law, including human rights and humanitarian law, especially with respect to the
protection of civilians, and reaffirmed the indispensable role of UNRWA.
53. On 28 January the Prime Minister of Israel announced that Israel would not
extend the mandate of the Temporary International Presence in Hebron beyond
31 January. On 1 February the Foreign Ministers of the contributing countries for the
Temporary International Presence (Italy, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and Turkey)
issued a joint statement regretting Israel’s unilateral decision and stating that it
constituted a “departure” from the Oslo II Accord and undermined one of the few
established mechanisms for conflict resolution between Israelis and Palestinians.

VII. Observations
54. The expansion of illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, continues unabated. The advancement, approval or tender
of more than 3,000 units in the occupied West Bank is the largest batch since May
2018. I reiterate that the establishment of settlements in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem, has no legal effect and constitutes a flagrant
violation of international law, as stated in resolution 2334 (2016), and must cease
immediately and completely. The existence and expansion of settlements fuel anger
and disillusionment among the Palestinian population and significantly undermine the
prospects for ending the occupation and achieving the two -State solution by
systematically eroding the possibility of establishing a contiguous and viable
Palestinian state. Moreover, attempts to pass legislation that would directly apply
Israeli law to the territory of the occupied West Bank raise fears of future annexation
plans.
55. The demolition and seizure of Palestinian structures also continues. The
demolition of structures linked to vital water connections in Area C communities
already suffering water shortages is particularly troubling. I am concerned by the
continued pressure being placed on Palestinians in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem. The forced eviction of Palestinians from their homes in East
19-04732

9/12

S/2019/251

Jerusalem and the risk of high numbers of further evictions to facilitate the expansion
of future settlements highlight the growing problem of Palestinians in East Jerusalem
facing displacement. Such policies must be reversed and Israel should abide by its
obligations under international law.
56. The situation in Gaza continues to be at risk of a major escalation, and the
immense suffering of the people continues. I remain gravely concerned by the number
of deaths and injuries of Palestinians along the Gaza perimeter fence. Serious
concerns remain over Israel’s use of force during the Gaza protests at the perimeter
fence with Israel. Israeli security forces have the responsibility to exercise restraint
and lethal force must be used only when strictly unavoidable in order to protect life.
Force must not be used against medical personnel exclusively carrying out their
medical duties. Children should never be the target of violence and Hamas and other
militant groups have an obligation to protect children, ensuring that they are never
put in harm’s way. The indiscriminate launching of rockets and mortars toward s
Israeli civilian populations is prohibited by international humanitarian law and must
immediately cease. The launching of incendiary and explosive devices towards Israel
must also stop. The organizers of the demonstrations must ensure that protests remai n
peaceful.
57. The violent response by Hamas security forces against protesters, including
women and children, in Gaza is unacceptable. The long-suffering people of Gaza have
the right to protest without fear of reprisal.
58. There is no justification for terrorism and I call on all members of the
international community to join the United Nations in condemning it unequivocally.
59. I am concerned by reports of increased number of settler attacks and incidents
of harassment compared to the previous reporting period. I am very concerned about
the Palestinian population, protective presence actors and human rights defenders in
the H2 area of Hebron following the withdrawal of the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron on 1 February 2019, particularly no ting that parts of the H2 area
were designated as closed military zones. I call on Israel to ensure the safety and
security of the Palestinian population, to refrain from any steps that may cause further
tension, to allow humanitarian actors and human rights defenders to carry out their
activities freely and safely and to ensure that any attacks are thoroughly, impartially
and independently investigated and the perpetrators held accountable.
60. Provocative and inflammatory rhetoric by Palestinian and Israe li officials
during the reporting period also continues to deepen the divide and fuel mistrust and
hatred between the parties, while undermining efforts to advance the goal of peace.
Leaders have a responsibility to demonstrate a willingness to pursue comp romise and
to promote positive dialogue between both sides. Fuelling tensions, promoting
conspiracy theories and cultivating hate between communities only serves to
perpetuate the conflict.
61. I am deeply concerned about developments relating to the clear ance revenues
of the Palestinian Authority, in particular the political, economic and security
implications for both Palestinians and Israelis, which undermine the Oslo Framework
and the chances of achieving the two-State solution. At $2.3 billion, clearance
revenues account for over 65 per cent of the total annual revenue of the Palestinian
Authority. Both sides need to engage in a constructive manner with the goal of
restoring the revenue transfers in full, in line with the Paris Protocol on Economic
Relations. They must do their utmost to prevent a further deterioration and to
recommit, with the support of the international community, to the basic tenets
enshrined in long-standing bilateral agreements.

10/12

19-04732

S/2019/251

62. I note the criticality of continued support for UNRWA, which requires
$1.2 billion in funding in 2019 for its regular programmes and humanitarian
operations. To avoid any disruption in services in 2019, UNRWA needs its donors to
maintain funding levels and to increase the number of multi -year agreements to
ensure enhanced financial stability. The recent establishment of a developmental
“Waqf” fund for Palestine refugees, as announced by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization for Islamic Cooperation, is an important step in this regard. I call upon
Member States to continue their support for UNRWA.
63. Regrettably, the few and modest affirmative steps taken by the parties were
insufficient for reversing negative trends. Instead, the viability of the two -State
solution is under increasingly grave threats. I once again call on all parties to refrain
from unilateral steps that undermine the prospects for a two -State solution and that
are not in line with bilateral agreements, including the Paris Protocol.
64. I remain deeply concerned by the deteriorating humanitarian and economic
situation in Gaza. Taking into consideration its legitimate security concerns, I urge
Israel to ease the restrictions on the movement of goods and people to and from Gaza,
with the goal of ultimately lifting them. Only by fully lifting the debilitating closures,
in line with Security Council resolution 1860 (2009), can we hope to sustainably
resolve the humanitarian crisis. Restrictive measures by the Palestinian Authority
continue to compound the impact of the long-standing closures, further widening the
intra-Palestinian political and administrative gap. Funding received to date has
enabled the temporary increase in energy supply in Gaza and has supported the
delivery of a large quantity of essential medicines and the performance of thousands
of emergency surgeries. However, with the funding provided by Qatar for fuel for the
Gaza power plant set to run out in April 2019, there is a real concern that, without
additional funds or a sustainable solution for the energy crisis, energy outages will
again reach 20 hours per day, significantly impacting the provision of essential
services. This comes against a backdrop of rising needs, with humanitarian partners
facing record-high funding cuts and an increasingly restricted operating space. The
2019 Humanitarian Response Plan, launched on 17 December, called for $350 million
for the Occupied Palestinian Territory, $270 million of which is for Gaza. I urge
donors to increase their contributions to allow for a modicum of relief to the needs of
the population.
65. On a positive note, improvements in the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism are
expected to significantly enhance its effectiveness, functionality, predictability and
transparency, to make it more user-friendly and to help stimulate economic activity. I
also welcome the decision by Egypt to keep the Rafah border crossing open, with due
respect for its security concerns. In addition, I welcome the expansion of Gaza ’s
fishing zone to 12 nautical miles in a small area off the Gaza coast, but remain
concerned by ongoing arrests of and injuries to Palestinians fishing within permitted
waters.
66. These are positive steps that can avert another violent confrontation between
Israel and Hamas in Gaza, but any long-term solution requires restoring
intra-Palestinian national unity, returning Gaza to the control of a legitimate
Palestinian Government and lifting the crippling Israeli closures.
67. It is critical that the important Egyptian-led intra-Palestinian reconciliation
efforts continue. The United Nations stands firm in its support of Egypt ’s efforts in
this regard, and I call on all Palestinian factions to make serious efforts to ensure the
reunification of Gaza and the West Bank under a single, democratic, national
government. Only then can we hope to sustainably resolve the humanitarian crisis and
begin the important task of development. Gaza is, and must remain, an integral part
of a future Palestinian state as part of a two-State solution.
19-04732

11/12

S/2019/251

68. I remain greatly concerned by the state of our collective efforts and the
weakening of the international consensus to achieve an end to the occupation and the
realization of a negotiated two-State solution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and I
have repeatedly raised the alarm about the conflict’s dangerous trajectory. Given the
interconnected nature of conflicts throughout the region and the potential of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict to fuel extremist narratives worldwide, creating con ditions
for the parties to return to meaningful bilateral negotiations remains critical. In the
absence of a political process to end the conflict, the United Nations partners in the
Middle East Quartet provided a series of recommendations in the report of July 2016,
which, if implemented effectively, would begin to establish such conditions.
69. The United Nations has advocated for a strengthened commitment to bilateral
agreements and is implementing a series of humanitarian projects aimed at supporting
Gaza and Palestinian reconciliation, and ultimately lifting the closures. We have
continued to stress that the recommendations contained in the 2016 report of the
Middle East Quartet remain deeply relevant. I reiterate that there is no viable
alternative to the two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side in
peace and security with Jerusalem as the capital of both States. What is needed, first
and foremost, is the necessary leadership and political will to take concrete steps in
support of ending the military occupation and realizing a lasting peace. Until that can
be found, for yet another generation, Israelis and Palestinians are destined to spend
their lives searching in vain for an elusive peace.
70. I express my deep appreciation to my Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov, for his outstanding service in what remains a
challenging context. I pay tribute, too, to all staff working under difficult
circumstances in the service of the United Nations.

12/12

19-04732
