S/PV.7354

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7354th meeting

Tuesday, 30 December 2014, 5 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cherif . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chad)

Members:

Argentina. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mr. Asselborn
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

14-72122 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1472122*

S/PV.7354

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 5.15 p.m.

I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements after the vote.

Adoption of the agenda

Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you very much, Mr. President, for convening this
emergency meeting of the Security Council.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in French): I wish to warmly
welcome Minister Jean Asselborn of Luxembourg to
the Security Council Chamber. His participation is
an affirmation of the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Israel to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations, to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2014/916, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Jordan.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Luxembourg and Russian Federation
Against:
Australia, United States of America
Abstaining:
Lithuania, Nigeria, Republic of Korea, Rwanda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland
The President (spoke in French): There were 8
votes in favour, 2 votes against and 5 abstentions. The
draft resolution has not been adopted, having failed to
obtain the required number of votes.

2/13

30/12/2014

Jordan submitted, on behalf of the Group of Arab
States, the text of a special Arab draft resolution
(S/2014/916), setting a deadline for ending the Israeli
occupation and the establishment of the Palestinian
State, in implemention of the resolution of the Council of
the League of Arab States at the ministerial level. This
is based on our belief that the Security Council must
respond to the legitimate Palestinian demand to live in
freedom and dignity in its independent, fully sovereign
and viable State within the borders of 4 June 1967, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, in peace and security and
within secure borders with all other States of the region,
in accordance with the accepted terms of reference in
this matter, including the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council — inter alia, resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 1397 (2002) — and the Arab Peace
Initiative.
Jordan has proceeded in this process within the
Security Council guided by the Arab consensus,
and primarily in support of the political decision of
the Palestinian leadership, represented by President
Mahmoud Abbas. In the Security Council and all
other international forums, Jordan will remain at the
forefront of the champions of the Palestinian cause
and all the rights of the brotherly Palestinian people,
because Jordan is committed to resolving this matter
and to achieving its own higher, vital interests.
We had hoped that the Security Council would today
adopt the draft Arab resolution because the Council
bears both the legal and the moral responsibilities to
resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which is the
core of the conflict in the Middle East. All elements of
the draft resolution were acceptable to the members not
only of the Security Council, but of the international
community as a whole. These elements include the right
of the Palestinian people to sustainable development
and to the attainment of a peaceful solution that would
end the occupation of Palestinian territory, realize the
two-State solution, justly resolve the question of the
Palestinian refugees and other issues, and establish
East Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian State.
The failure to adopt the draft resolution will in no
way prevent us from continuing to urge the international

14-72122

30/12/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

community, and the United Nations in particular,
towards effective engagement in achieving a settlement
to the conflict. We will continue to work assiduously
for a resumption of the peace negotiations between
the Palestinians and the Israelis, within a serious and
committed framework, leading to an embodiment of
the two-State solution within a reasonable time frame
and to an end to the conflict through the resolution of
all substantive issues — including Jerusalem, refugees,
security, borders and water — pursuant to the accepted
international terms of reference and the Arab Peace
Initiative in all its elements and in a manner that fully
addresses and protects Jordan’s higher, vital interests.
The Jordanian position on this matter is very well
known. We submitted the draft resolution without
prejudice to our legal positions and on the understanding
that its content in no way indicates a change in our
positions. Our submission of the draft Arab resolution
can in no way be interpreted as a unilateral step. It
reflects a legitimate right of the Palestinian people,
who have opted for the path of peace and turned to
the United Nations as a forum of last resort now that
Israel has blocked all paths leading to the achievement
of their legitimate aspirations. It is Israel that engages
in unilateral moves, including in particular settlement
activities and the adoption of discriminatory legislation,
such as the Nationality Law, in addition to its other
illegal practices in the occupied Palestinian territories,
which draw us further away from peace every day and
threaten the future of the two-State solution.
The international community must address the
gravity of the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the growing suffering of our Palestinian
brothers in the Gaza Strip as a result of the most recent
Israeli war there. It must recognize that the status quo
cannot be maintained without pushing the region into
further cycles of violence and conflict. The outcome
of today’s decision must not prevent us from stepping
up our efforts through consultations, negotiations
and discussions with a view to achieving a just and
comprehensive solution of the Palestinian question,
leading to the establishment of a contiguous, viable,
independent and sovereign Palestinian State in the
context of the two-State solution, in a manner that
protects the peace and security of all in the region.
We must pursue our efforts until we achieve that noble
objective.
Ms. Power (United States of America): In recent
years, no Government has invested more in the effort

S/PV.7354

to achieve Israeli-Palestinian peace than the United
States. Peace, however difficult it may be to forge, is
too important to give up on. As we were reminded this
summer in Gaza, and as we have been reminded too
painfully recently in Jerusalem and the West Bank, the
human consequences of ensuing cycles of violence are
too grave. The United States searches every day for new
ways to take constructive steps to support the parties
in making progress towards achieving a negotiated
settlement.
The draft resolution (S/2014/916) put before us
today is not one of those constructive steps. It would
undermine efforts to get back to an atmosphere that
would make it possible to achieve two States for two
peoples. Regrettably, instead of giving voice to the
aspirations of Palestinians and Israelis alike, the text
addresses the concerns of only one side. It is deeply
imbalanced and contains many elements that are
not conducive to negotiations between the parties,
including unconstructive deadlines that take no account
of Israel’s legitimate security concerns. In addition, the
draft resolution was put to a vote without a discussion
or due consideration among Council members, which
is highly unusual, especially considering the gravity of
the matter at hand. We must proceed responsibly, and
not take actions that would risk creating a downward
spiral.
We voted against the draft resolution not because
we are comfortable with the status quo; we voted
against it because we know what everyone here knows
as well — that peace will come from hard choices and
compromises that must be made at the negotiating table.
Today’s staged confrontation in the Security Council
will not bring the parties closer to achieving a twoState solution. We voted against the draft resolution
not because we are indifferent to the daily hardships
or the security threats endured by Palestinians and
Israelis, but because we know that those hardships
will not cease and those threats will not subside until
the parties reach a comprehensive settlement achieved
through negotiations. The draft resolution sets the stage
for more division, not for compromise. It could well
serve to provoke the very confrontation it purports to
address.
For decades, the United States has worked to try
to help achieve a comprehensive end to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, and we remain committed to
achieving the peace that both the Palestinians and
the Israelis deserve — two States for two peoples,

14-721223/13

S/PV.7354

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

with a sovereign, viable and independent Palestine
living side by side in peace and security with a Jewish
and democratic Israel. The United States does not
just acknowledge the tremendous frustrations and
disappointments on both sides over the years in pursuit
of peace — we share them, and we understand the
immense challenges that the parties need to overcome
to make peace a reality. Yet at the same time, we
firmly believe that the status quo between Israelis and
Palestinians is unsustainable.
The United States recognizes the role that the
Council has played before in advancing a sustainable
end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, including
through resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1515
(2003), which calls for the creation of a Palestinian
State alongside Israel, with both States living “side by
side within secure and recognized borders”. In a May
2011 speech, President Obama elaborated further that
“the United States believes that negotiations should
result in two States with permanent Palestinian
borders with Israel, Jordan, and Egypt, and
permanent Israeli borders with Palestine... based
on the 1967 lines with mutually agreed swaps, so
that secure and recognized borders are established
for both States”.
He made clear that the
“The Palestinian people must have the right to
govern themselves, and reach their full potential,
in a sovereign and contiguous State”.
The United States will continue reaching out to
the parties in an effort to find a way forward, and we
are ready to engage and support them when they are
ready to return to the table. We will continue to oppose
actions by both sides that we view as detrimental to the
cause of peace, whether those actions come in the form
of settlement activity or imbalanced draft resolutions
in the Council. The parties have a responsibility to
negotiate and own the hard choices that will be needed
if they are to bring real and long-overdue change to
their region to benefit their people.
Today’s vote should not be interpreted as a victory
for an unsustainable status quo. Instead, it should serve
as a wake-up call to catalyse all interested parties to
take constructive, responsible steps to achieve a twoState solution, which remains the only way to bring
an end to the ongoing cycle of violence and suffering.
We hope that those who share our vision for peace
between two States — Israel and Palestine, both secure,
4/13

30/12/2014

democratic and prosperous — will join us in redoubling
efforts to find a path forward that can rally international
consensus, advance future negotiations and provide a
horizon of hope for Palestinians and Israelis alike.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
In July of last year, after three years of stagnation,
the United States administration had extracted an
agreement on a resumption of direct negotiations
between Israelis and Palestinians. We all began to hope
again. Nine months later, despite intense negotiations
and the tireless efforts of Secretary of State John Kerry,
the negotiations once again ended in deadlock. In the
summer of 2014, war began again as Gaza was bombed
relentlessly for more than 50 days. The ceasefire
agreement of 26 August ended the fighting, but the
negotiations on lifting the blockade of Gaza are still
stalled. We have witnessed dangerous tensions on the
Temple Mount, the unbridled pursuit of colonization
and cycles of revenge between extremists with a real
risk of a new intifada at the end of it all. The recent
rocket attacks from Gaza illustrated once again the
volatility of a situation without a political horizon.
It is time to create that political horizon. The time
has come take bold, concrete measures designed to
achieve a just and lasting peace. Israel has the right to
live in peace and security. But it is clear to us that the
security of the State of Israel depends on the creation
beside it of a sovereign, democratic, contiguous and
viable State of Palestine, based on the 1967 borders,
with Jerusalem as the capital of the two States. A twoState solution is the only one that can be fair, both
politically and morally. There is no alternative.
By voting today for the draft resolution submitted
by Jordan on behalf of the Arab Group (S/2014/916),
Luxembourg voted for that two-State solution — two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security. We voted for a solution that we
have advocated throughout our term on the Security
Council and one that has consistently been a priority
of our foreign policy. We voted for a peace settlement
that meets the legitimate aspirations of both Israel and
Palestine.
If the two-State solution is to be saved, we must learn
the lessons of the past. Israelis and Palestinians will
be able to reach an agreement only if the international
community commits more positively than it has in the
past and establishes the framework for a settlement with
clear parameters and a specific timetable. That was the
entire purpose of the draft resolution introduced by
14-72122

30/12/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Jordan. Despite the outcome of today’s vote, we remain
convinced that the Security Council can and should
play a constructive role in this matter. If it is to live
up to its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Council must take
on a more active role in supporting and preserving a
two-State solution and ending the occupation.
Our vote today is an expression of belief — the
belief that it is urgent that we act, and act now, and that
we cannot postpone deadlines indefinitely. Salvaging
a two-State solution cannot be extended ad infinitum.
Our vote today is aimed at no one. It is not about
dividing or pointing fingers. On the contrary, it
aspires to be a vote for hope. In voting for a two-State
solution, we appeal to the parties — to Israeli and
Palestinian political officials, as well as to Israeli and
Palestinian citizens — asking them choose the path of
reconciliation and the resumption of negotiations. We
call on the countries of the region and the international
community as a whole to work resolutely beside the
Israelis and Palestinians so that peaceful co-existence
between two States, the State of Israel and the State of
Palestine, can finally become a reality.
We regret that it was not possible today to adopt
the draft resolution submitted by Jordan, but we very
much hope that after the vote it will soon be possible to
resume discussions in good faith and work together for
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace, in the interests
of Israel and Palestine and the whole region. We no
longer have the right to fail. The year 2015 must not be
another year lost for peace in the Middle East.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom understands and shares the deep
frustration with the lack of progress on the Middle
East peace process and the unacceptability and
unsustainability of the status quo. A just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is long
overdue. We will continue to spare no effort to turn our
ambition — the creation of a sovereign, contiguous and
viable Palestinian State, living in peace and security
side by side with Israel — into reality.
We have long believed that direct negotiations
towards a two-State solution should be on the basis of
clear, internationally agreed parameters. I recall that
in February 2011 I set out in this Chamber our view
of what those should be (see S/PV.6484), in a joint
explanation of vote by the United Kingdom, France
and Germany on a draft resolution on settlements

S/PV.7354

(S/2011/24). We therefore welcome the idea of a Security
Council resolution on the Middle East peace process
that sets out those parameters. However, agreeing on
such a resolution requires proper time for consultation
and negotiation of the draft resolution, including on
its timing. We consider President Abbas a man of
peace, and understand the pressure that the Palestinian
leadership has been under to act and its frustration with
the lack of progress, but we are disappointed that the
normal and necessary negotiation did not take place on
this occasion.
The United Kingdom supports much of the content
of the draft resolution (S/2014/916). It was therefore
with deep regret that we abstained on it. The United
Kingdom stands by the parameters I set out here in
2011, which were reiterated by the European Union
Foreign Affairs Council conclusions in July. Our views
on settlements, including in East Jerusalem, are clear.
They are illegal under international law, an obstacle to
peace and seriously damage the prospects for a twoState solution. All settlement activity, including in East
Jerusalem, should cease immediately. We call on all
parties not to take unilateral steps that would make the
search for a peace based on negotiations harder.
Given the fact that today’s draft resolution was not
adopted, the United Kingdom would like to work with
partners to revisit the idea of a parameters resolution
on the Middle East peace process in 2015. We are
convinced that it is possible, with further time and
effort, to secure, for the first time ever, a resolution that
commands full Security Council support.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Since
the peace negotiations ended in April, the situation has
deteriorated and we are dealing with two threats. On the
one hand, the essential two-State solution is on its way
to becoming a mirage. The ongoing illegal settlements
undermine the viability of a Palestinian State on the
ground. In Israel as in Palestine, public opinion has
become radicalized. On the other hand, the cycles of
violence are accelerating from Gaza to the West Bank
viaJerusalem. Conditions are coming together for a
widespread conflagration.
We know the heart of the problem — the absence
of political prospects that respond to the legitimate
demands and needs of both peoples, Israeli and
Palestinian: for the Palestinians, the aspiration to a
sovereign and independent State; for the Israelis, the
guarantee of lasting security. These two legitimate

14-721225/13

S/PV.7354

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

30/12/2014

claims can be resolved only if there is movement towards
the well-known solution of a division of territory that
allows for the emergence of two States for two peoples.

mean that the text is ideal. We have reservations on
some of the terminology, as well as on the way the draft
resolution was submitted.

France believes in the possibility of a definitive and
just settlement for the parties. We must give ourselves
the means to achieve it. Those means are collective.
Each successive failure in negotiations over the past
20 years reminds us that the peace process as we have
practiced it must evolve. The parties cannot, largely
for domestic reasons, take on their own the difficult
decisions required to conclude negotiations. The
United States cannot bear the burden alone for seeking
this difficult peace. After more than 25 years of
negotiations, the international community must share
the burden of those negotiations and assume its portion
of the political and historical responsibility.

We would have preferred and continue to hope
for a consensual approach to unite all members of the
Council around the clear and well-known vision of an
independent, sovereign and democratic Palestinian
State living in peace and security side by side with
Israel, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States. If
the terms of a just solution for Palestinian refugees
and the details of security arrangements, including the
withdrawal of Israeli forces, are part of the agreement
to be concluded between the parties, we can and must
collectively establish the broad parameters of the
negotiations. We also need to set a clear timetable for
their conclusion, because negotiations that never come
to an end can enjoy no credibility. The French proposal
allows just that.

France is determined to promote the emergence of a
method that enables closer support for the negotiations
on the part of the relevant international partners,
complementing and supporting the major role played
by Washington, D.C., including the European Union,
the League of Arab States and permanent members of
the Council. This collective effort must be based on
the unquestionable foundation that only the Security
Council can offer to lend credibility to the negotiations.
It is incumbent upon us to identify the internationally
recognized parameters for the negotiations and the
settlement of the conflict leading to the satisfaction
of the various claims. That is what the Council and its
members were called upon today to do in fully assuming
their responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
It is from that perspective that we have consistently
called upon the Council to act in order to establish a
credible basis for peace. France wanted to offer, in the
form of a draft resolution, a constructive, reasonable
and consensual alternative for the initial Palestinian
text so that the Security Council can become a positive
actor in the conflict and not the theatre of protestations,
theoretical declarations and successive vetoes.
In reponse to this positive and good-faith approach,
unfortunately no credible negotiation has yet been
engaged, despite the fact that the deterioration of the
situation on the ground demands immediate action.
Moved by the urgent need to act, by the profound
necessity of an adjustment in method, and by the
responsibility incumbent on each member of the
Security Council, we therefore voted in favour of the
draft resolution submitted by Jordan. That does not
6/13

France regrets that it was not possible today to
reach a consensus on these points, which should unite
the international community. But our efforts must not
stop there; our responsibility is to try again before it is
too late. France will therefore pursue its action.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation regrets that the
Security Council was unable to adopt draft resolution
S/2014/916, which would have strengthened the
generally recognized international legal basis for the
Middle East peace process, including the resolutions of
the Security Council, the Madrid terms of reference and
the Arab Peace Initiative. Recent events in the Middle
East have illustrated with new force the undeniable truth
that alternatives to a genuinely collective approach to
resolving such a complex problem do not exist, especially
since the almost 70 years of unresolved conflict are one
of the most serious factors in the destabilization of the
whole region. They serve as a very strong argument in
the hands of those who recruit extremists, convincing
them that seeking political solutions is pointless.
We are convinced that in order to step up and
reinvigorate collective efforts in this area, we need
not only a greater profile for the Quartet, with the
involvement with the League of Arab States in its work,
but also a general broader involvement of the Security
Council in the Palestinian-Israeli peace process. That
of course should give the process new impetus and
focus the parties on more responsible steps towards a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace.

14-72122

30/12/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We do not share the objections of those who believe
that the draft resolution would undermine the prospects
for the negotiating process. Unfortunately, the past year
has revealed that the process has wandered into a blind
alley, with its monopolization by the United States and
its pull-back from the Quartet. We believe this to be a
strategic mistake, as is the dismissal of our proposals
to brainstorm in the Council in order to find ways to
reinvigorate the negotiation process, including by
sending a Council mission to the Middle East. Moreover,
the conflict in the Holy Land is deepening; regularly
and with increasing fury, violence erupts on both sides.
The construction of illegal settlements in the occupied
territories continues, including in East Jerusalem,
undermining the chances for the implementation of the
two-State solution.
We are coming to the end of 2014, which
the international community has proclaimed the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People. Have we come any closer to implementing the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians this year?
Are we closer or farther from the two-State solution?
Unfortunately, the answer is obvious. The Security
Council’s inaction on this matter dooms the situation
to a dangerous status quo that we cannot accept. One
chance for hope is not enough.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia remains
committed to a future where Israeli and a Palestinian
State exist side by side in peace and security within
internationally recognized borders. As such, our efforts
must be focused on constructively encouraging the
parties to return to direct negotiations towards that goal.
Regrettably, the draft resolution under consideration
today (S/2014/916) will not help this process, and that
is why we voted against it. It lacks balance and seeks
to impose a solution put forward by one party alone.
Final status issues can be resolved only between the
two sides; a process agreed by both sides is the only
way forward to reach an enduring agreement.
The violence experienced in recent months in the
Palestinian territories and Israel underlines the terrible
human costs of the failure of final status negotiations
and how fragile the situation is in the absence of
genuine progress towards establishing a Palestinian
State, an objective in which Australia believes and to
which we are committed. Australia urges all parties to
refrain from provocative actions and leaders from both
sides to show real courage in returning to the difficult
path of peace negotiations.

S/PV.7354

Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile’s position vis-à-vis the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, has been
expressed by my country in this and other international
forums, and is widely known. We support negotiations
between the parties and a solution that would allow
both States to live in peace and security, within safe
and internationally recognized borders. Two decades
into the peace process that was launched in Oslo, we
believe that the time has come to implement the twoState solution. The Security Council has a role to play
in that matter, and can contribute to the resumption
of dialogue in the context of its responsibility in the
maintenance of peace and security.
Assuming its international responsibility, and
consistent and conscious of its role in this organ, Chile
voted in favour of draft resolution S/2014/916. We are
not pleased with the exercise as it has unfolded, with
scant space for negotiation and dialogue among Council
members and the stakeholders. As we see it, negotiation
is essential to achieving the necessary consensus that
makes the collective action of the Council effective in
its search for viable solutions. However, as we see it,
we have given priority to the urgent need to address
the situation on the ground and to the conviction that it
is possible to achieve a political outcome allowing for
renewed momentum in the negotiations. The conflict
in Gaza in July and August and the events of recent
months in the West Bank and East Jerusalem have
shown that the status quo is unsustainable. After 46
years of occupation, the Palestinian people hold fast to
the hope of full sovereignty and independence. Chile
supports those legitimate aspirations.
We are aware that there are different visions in
the Council, and that some delegations believe that
the time for action is not ripe politically. It is such a
complex matter that it will never be easy to determine
when the right time has come to act. Chile, however,
will continue to contribute to the process because we
are convinced that the solution to the conflict requires
the inclusive and realistic resolve of many actors
who, directly or indirectly, can pave the way towards
dialogue and peace.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Nigeria believes in the
critical role of the Security Council in seeking a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, based on Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles of land for peace, the road map for peace in
the Middle East, and the Arab Peace Initiative. We are

14-721227/13

S/PV.7354

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

30/12/2014

convinced that the collective action of the Council is
critical in advancing and expediting the peace process,
and serves as the most important catalyst in ending the
protracted conflict.

situation by engaging in a unilateral action. Once again,
we urge all parties to respect previous agreements and
return to the negotiating table to work out a viable
agreement with a two-State solution at its core.

Nigeria’s perspectives on the question of Palestine
have been consistently guided by its position regarding
the rule of law and respect for the principles of
international law and justice. We have an abiding respect
for the legitimacy of the aspirations of the Palestinian
people to self-determination, independence and dignity.
That is why we encourage both sides to demonstrate
greater flexibility in their long-term strategic interests.
Indeed, there is no alternative to a two-State solution,
with Israel and Palestine living together side by side
in peace, stability and security. Nigeria remains very
supportive of the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination, independence and dignity. We are also
mindful of the need to guarantee Israel’s security and
existence as a sovereign State. It is for that reason that
we support the comprehensive discussion of all final
status issues.

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
voted in favour of draft resolution S/2014/916 on the
question of Palestine submitted by Jordan on behalf
of the League of Arab States. The draft reflects the
reasonable demands of the Arab States, including the
Palestinian people, and is in accord with the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative, the road map for peace
in the Middle East, and China’s consistent position.
We express deep regret over the failure of the draft
resolution to be adopted. China is highly attentive to
the Palestinian-Israeli question and has always made
constructive efforts to advance the Middle East peace
process.

The ultimate path to lasting peace lies in the
negotiated solution, and the time is ripe for both sides
to return to the peace talks.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): On the issue of
the Middle East peace process, the Republic of Korea
has supported the two-State solution as the only viable
way to build a lasting peace in the region. We fully
understand and empathize with the aspiration of the
Palestinian people to have an independent State of their
own. We believe that such an aspiration is in accordance
with the right of the Palestinian people, as embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations. To that end, we
believe that direct negotiations between the parties are
indispensable for realizing two democratic States, Israel
and Palestine, living side by side in peace with secure
and recognized borders. In that process, any unilateral
action by either party will be counterproductive and
hinder genuine progress, especially as paragraph 10 of
the draft resolution S/2014/916 calls upon both parties
to abstain from any unilateral actions.
That is why the Republic of Korea abstained in
today’s voting. Given the deteriorating situation in the
Middle East, we agree with the Secretary-General’s
repeated warning that time is not on the side of peace.
We share the view that the longer the present state of
insecurity continues, the further the path to genuine
peace will be. However, that is all the more reason
for each side to exercise restraint and not worsen the
8/13

In 2013, President Xi Jinping of China put forward
four proposals on the Palestinian-Israeli question. This
year, Minister for Foreign Affairs Wang Yi of China
proposed five points for resolving the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. China supports the just cause of restoring the
legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people;
establishing a fully sovereign and independent State
of Palestine, based on the 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital; and Palestine’s accession
to membership of the United Nations and other
international organizations.
China hopes that Palestine and Israel will resume
peace talks as soon as possible, end the occupation at
an early date and achieve peaceful coexistence. The
Middle East peace process is now in deep stalemate and
the tensions between Palestine and Israel persist. We
call upon the international community to redouble its
efforts to help Palestine and Israel to end the cycle of
violence and return to the correct track of peace talks.
We call upon the Security Council to effectively assume
responsibility for the Palestinian-Israeli question and to
play its due role.
China is willing to join the relevant stakeholders
within the international community in their common
efforts, and will continue to play a constructive role in
promoting a just and lasting settlement of the question
of Palestine.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): Rwanda takes the
floor to explain its vote on draft resolution S/2014/916
on the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

14-72122

30/12/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We note with appreciation the efforts of Jordan in
drafting and submitting the text on behalf of the Group
of Arab States.
Rwanda’s position on the Israeli–Palestinian
conflict, as reiterated every month in our two-year
membership of the Council, is well known. Our country,
as well as all States members of the African Union,
has always been in favour of a two-State solution. We
regret, however, that despite the efforts of regional and
international actors, including Arab States, the Quartet
and the United States, there is yet to be a breakthrough
in the peace process.
For Rwanda, any final settlement to the conflict
should be achieved through direct and genuine
negotiations, however painful they may be. We fully
believe that only a negotiated settlement between the
parties will result in the emergence of an independent,
sovereign, and viable Palestinian State living side by
side in peace and security with Israel. In this regard,
the Security Council and other stakeholders should
step up their efforts to ensure the resumption of direct
negotiations for a just and lasting solution of the IsraelPalestinian conflict, building on previously agreed
frameworks. The parties, for their part, should make
serious commitments to addressing the underlying
causes of the conflict and refrain from any provocative
action that could undermine the prospects for a durable
peace in the region.
In this context, Rwanda does not believe that any
unilateral action by either side could bring lasting peace
to the region and a final and comprehensive settlement
to this crisis. On the contrary, unilateral initiatives,
well-intentioned as they may be, could jeopardize the
current situation, which is already very fragile. We
believe that a Security Council resolution could help
the parties to speed up the conclusion of negotiations
for the establishment of a Palestinian State, provided
that such a resolution were consensual, as it should be
agreed on by the negotiating parties and supported by
all major stakeholders. Therefore, Rwanda believes that
the proposed draft, which has not garnered consensus
in the region or within the Council, could not help
parties to achieve that goal.
Moreover, it is regrettable that the 15 members of
the Security Council were not given a single opportunity
to discuss, negotiate and improve the draft, which was
drafted, negotiated and amended outside the Council.
All those reasons — the lack of a consensual approach
in the region, the negative impact on the peace process,

S/PV.7354

and a lack of an inclusive and transparent procedure in
New York — explain Rwanda’s abstention in the voting
today. Going forward, we would invite all Council
members, in coordination with the negotiating parties,
the Arab Group and other stakeholders to work together
towards a more consensual draft resolution, which
should give a new impetus to the peace process.
To conclude, we firmly believe that, given the
current and irreversible momentum for peace, the
status quo will no longer be an option. There is a
unique window for the international community and
the negotiating parties to act decisively if we wish to
realize our common vision of two viable States for two
vibrant peoples, living side by side in peace, security
and mutual recognition of each other’s legitimate
rights. The Government of Rwanda will remain fully
committed to this process and contribute, as much as
it can, to a peaceful and lasting solution to this crisis,
which has been going on for too long.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): It is with regret that
Lithuania had to abstain in the voting on draft resolution
S/2014/916 before the Council today. Our vote should
not be understood as an abstention on the solution itself.
On the contrary, most elements of the draft resolution
constitute a good basis for further collective work in
establishing parameters for peace negotiations seeking
an agreed and peaceful settlement of Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.
We would like to make it clear that there is no
substitute for direct talks between the parties, and
we call for an immediate resumption of negotiations.
It is through negotiations that a final, just, fair and
agreed settlement of the conflict can be achieved. It is
through negotiations that a realization of the two-State
solution can become a reality in which Israel and an
independent, democratic, contiguous, sovereign and
viable Palestine live side by side in peace, security and
mutual recognition.
Furthermore, a resumption of negotiations is a
matter of urgency. The unsustainable situation in
Gaza, the recent increase of violence in Jerusalem and
the West Bank, and the deteriorating regional context
underline the need for a comprehensive peace, ending
all claims and fulfilling the legitimate aspirations of
both parties, including those of Israelis to security and
those of Palestinians to statehood. People on both sides,
along with the international community, expect their
leaders to show real leadership by taking responsible,
pragmatic and bold action to guarantee their security

14-721229/13

S/PV.7354

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and prosperous future. Any unilateral action is
detrimental to a resumption of peace negotiations, and
consequently to a final and peaceful settlement of the
conflict.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina believes that an explanation of its affirmative
vote is unnecessary. The history of the Palestinian
people, international law and resolutions of the United
Nations are the deepest justification of the position taken
by my country. We lament that the Security Council
has not today adopted a draft resolution that sought to
express the justice of the Palestinian cause. But members
of the Council must know that no resolution can block
the resolve of a people to be free and independent and,
above all, to maintain their dignity. Each one of us will
have to be responsible for the consequences of what just
happened in this Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Chad.
At the outset, I would like to thank the delegation
of Jordan for having introduced draft resolution
S/2014/916 on the Palestinian question, on behalf of the
Arab States.
In recognition of the right of the Palestinian people
to a viable sovereign State within the pre-1967 borders
and with East Jerusalem as its capital, Chad voted
in favour of the draft resolution, which the Security
Council unfortunately did not adopt. We can only
express our deepest disappointment and staunch regret
at the rejection of this text, the relevant, moderate and
balanced nature of which were such that it should have
garnered the support of all members of the Security
Council.
The text of the resolution would have allowed us
to put an end to the interminable cycle of negotiations
that have served only to perpetuate the Israeli
occupation and undermine all international efforts
seeking to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The text does not go against the principle of direct
negotiations between the two parties but rather
envisions a new framework for negotiations that would
guarantee the active participation of all stakeholders
alongside the two parties concerned. Moreover, the
text clearly defines the parametres of a solution: the
security mechanisms guaranteeing and respecting the
sovereignty of a Palestinian State with the gradual
and complete withdrawal of the Israeli security forces
from the occupied territories, and the fair and equitable

10/13

30/12/2014

settlement of the issue of Palestinian refugees as well as
inherent final status issues.
In rejecting the draft resolution, the Security
Council has again squandered an historical opportunity
and disappointed all of those who have been outraged
for many years by the absence of any prospect of a
political solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The rejection of the draft resolution also sends a very
negative message encouraging the continuation of
the occupation, injustice, oppression and destruction,
thereby promoting the entrenchment of the most extreme
positions on both sides. Furthermore, the Council had
the opportunity to strengthen the advocates of peace
in the region and to give the Palestinians a glimmer
of hope after the failure of direct negotiations that had
gained next to nothing.
Today, the international public has seen the sad
reality of the Palestinian people being deprived once
again of their legitimate right to live in an independent,
sovereign State. In view of the unrest in the Middle
East and the spread of violence and terrorism, it is
in the interests of all parties, including the Security
Council, to urgently find a durable solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Chad remains persuaded
that the only solution is two independent, democratic
States, living side by side, in peace and security within
mutually and internationally recognized borders.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I come before the
Security Council on behalf of the leadership of the
State of Palestine and the Palestinian people — a longsuffering, yet proud and dignified people who remain
steadfast and fully committed to the achievement of
their inalienable rights, justice and their legitimate
national aspirations, including to self-determination,
freedom and independence, and who remain committed
to the pursuit of political, diplomatic, peaceful and
non-violent means for the achievement of those
objectives, for which there is overwhelming and longstanding global support.
We have endured the passage of yet another year
that has inflicted on the Palestinian people more
loss and tragedy and seen the deterioration of the
situation on all fronts due to the illegal, destructive and
oppressive actions of Israel, the occupying Power. It
14-72122

30/12/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

has been a year that has witnessed the breakdown of yet
another political process, despite the genuine efforts of
the United States, with the full support of the League
of Arab States and all other major stakeholders and the
good faith efforts and cooperation of Palestine, and the
deepening of another political impasse due to brazen
Israeli intransigence, creating a totally unsustainable
situation, as roundly acknowledged by all.
Despite all of that, the Security Council has once
again failed to uphold its Charter duties to address
those crises and to meaningfully contribute to a
peaceful and lasting solution in accordance with its
own resolutions. As the Security Council has looked
on this year, our people under Israeli occupation have
endured the further theft and colonization of their land,
the demolition of their homes, daily military raids, the
arrest and detention of thousands of civilians, including
children, rampant settler terrorism, constant affronts to
their human dignity, repeated incursions at our holiest
sites in occupied East Jerusalem, in particular, and
extreme provocations and incitement, raising tensions
to an all-time high and threatening to ignite a religious
war and completely destabilize the situation on the
ground.
The brutalization of the Palestinian people
reached a new apex of savagery with the Israeli
military aggression waged against the besieged and
blockaded Gaza Strip in July and August. The Israeli
occupying forces launched tens of thousands of
missiles, bombs, artillery shells and live ammunition
against the defenseless Palestinian civilian population
in an inhumane, barbaric and criminal onslaught that
killed more than 2,200 Palestinians, the majority of
whom were civilians, including children and women;
injured and maimed more than 11,000 people; displaced
hundreds of thousands; terrorized the entire population;
and caused the vast destruction of homes, vital civilian
infrastructure and hospitals and schools, including
more than 100 United Nations facilities, the majority of
which were United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East schools, as well
as mosques and churches, agricultural properties and
industries.
All of this was perpetrated wantonly and
willfully by Israel, creating widespread devastation,
human trauma and a massive humanitarian disaster.
Gross human rights violations and grave breaches of
international humanitarian law — war crimes — were
undoubtedly committed by Israel, the occupying Power.

S/PV.7354

And in the diaspora, the millions of Palestine refugees
who remain exiled from their homeland continue
to endure instability and vulnerability due to crises
and conflicts in the region that have inflicted further
displacement and loss on them, with the tragedy in
Syria, in particular, engulfing the lives and futures of
so many Palestinians.
This was the year that has brought us to this day — a
year that has deepened the decades-long suffering and
injustice borne by the Palestinian people and that has
taken us farther and farther away from the realization
of the just, lasting and comprehensive peace we have
long sought on the basis of international law and the
relevant United Nations resolutions.
It was in that grave context that the Palestinian
Government, under the leadership of President Mahmoud
Abbas, undertook in early September the initiative that
has now been brought before the Council. The initiative
was meant to mobilize the Security Council to act to
defuse the volatile situation and reaffirm the basis for
justly resolving the conflict, redressing that historic
injustice and providing a forward political horizon that
could restore hope to our people that the 47-year Israeli
military occupation of their land and their oppression
would soon be ended by the delineation of a time frame
to that purpose, and that justice, freedom and peace
were within reach.
We sincerely thank all of the countries that took a
principled stand and voted in favour of draft resolution
S/2014/916. We thank Argentina, Chad, Chile,
China, France, Jordan, Luxembourg and the Russian
Federation, as well as all of the friendly countries that
supported us throughout the long process. We express
special gratitude to the States members of the Arab
Group for all of their support, and thank Jordan for its
efforts on behalf of the Group, in its capacity as the
Arab representative on the Security Council, including
its submission and sponsorship of the draft resolution
and its call for the vote. We also thank France for its
serious efforts and responsible engagement throughout
the process and for its support. I also wish to thank His
Excellency Mr. Jean Asselborn, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg, for his
presence at today’s meeting and his country’s support.
We deeply regret, however, that the Council was
unable to adopt the draft resolution, despite four months
of efforts, patience and flexibility and our serious
attempts to engage, and despite the fact that the draft
reflected the long-standing international consensus

14-7212211/13

S/PV.7354

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

on a solution for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In
clear terms, firmly rooted in the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, this draft
resolution reaffirmed the well-known parameters for a
just and lasting solution and set forth a clear timeline
for negotiating a final peace agreement, with strong
support by major stakeholders, including the concept
of an international conference, as well as a timeline
for bringing the illegitimate Israeli occupation to a
complete end and for achieving the independence of the
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
on the basis of the pre-1967 borders, living side by side
with Israel in peace and security, and just solutions for
all core issues, including the plight of the Palestine
refugees.
Yet the result of today’s voting shows that the
Security Council as a whole is clearly not ready and
willing to shoulder its responsibilities in a way that
would allow for the adoption of a comprehensive
resolution and allow us to open the doors for peace and
for a just and lasting solution based on international
law. It also shows that the Security Council is out of
step with the overwhelming global consensus and the
calls for an end to the Israeli occupation, an end to this
prolonged conflict, and the achievement of the longoverdue the independence of the Palestinian people in
their own State.
In contrast to the result of today’s voting, it is clear
that both inside and outside of the Security Council
there is a global consensus on the two-State solution on
the pre-1967 borders and on the fact that the annexation
of East Jerusalem is illegal and not accepted by any
single country. There is also a global consensus on
the illegality of Israeli settlement activities in all their
manifestations and the illegality of the Israeli blockade
of the Gaza Strip and the need for their immediate
end. And there is clearly a global consensus on the
legitimacy of the national aspirations and rights of
the Palestinian people and the responsibility of the
international community in helping to bring them to
fulfilment.
So we must ask the Council: why is it so difficult
for the Security Council to act on this global consensus
and demand an end to illegal Israeli actions and an end
to the Israeli occupation — which the Council has called
for repeatedly, from resolution 242 (1967) on — and the
implementation of the two-State solution in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative? Why

12/13

30/12/2014

have the efforts of the Arab Group, with the full support
of the Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and all other friends worldwide, to
legislate this consensus through the Security Council
as a contribution towards putting an end to this conflict
through peaceful, political, diplomatic, civilized and
non-violent means, been repeatedly blocked? Why
are we facing another Security Council failure as the
situation unravels and international peace and security
are further threatened?
Considering the unsustainable and precarious
situation that now prevails and the need to act responsibly
on behalf of our people to address their needs and
national aspirations, the Palestinian leadership must
now consider its next steps. They will meet tomorrow
and decide on those next steps.
We are grateful for the support of all brotherly
and friendly countries in support of the just cause of
Palestine and in support of this continuing journey to
fulfil the inalienable human rights of our people and
make peace a reality, despite the many challenges and
obstacles.
Accordingly, we reiterate in this Council Chamber
the absolute imperative to hold Israel, the occupying
Power, accountable for its violations of international
law, including humanitarian and human rights law,
and its violations of United Nations resolutions. Such
contempt must not continue to be excused or tolerated.
There can be no excuse for denial of the right to selfdetermination of another people, as loudly reaffirmed
in the General Assembly this month with the vote on
the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
receiving the overwhelming support of 181 States
members of the Assembly.
The message is clear worldwide: it is high time to
end this abhorrent Israeli occupation and the impunity
that has brought our people so much suffering and
caused so many crises, sown so much instability and
anger throughout our region, and that continues to
seriously undermine regional and global peace and
security. This message has been strongly conveyed in
the numerous resolutions adopted once again this year
by the General Assembly on all aspects of the question
of Palestine. It has also been strongly reaffirmed at
the recent Conference of High Contracting Parties
to the Fourth Geneva Convention convened by the
depositary, Switzerland. And it has been and continues
to be reaffirmed in the motions by numerous European
parliaments calling for recognition of the State of
14-72122

30/12/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestine and in the fact that 135 countries already
recognize our State, with the most recent recognition
affirmed by Sweden, which we salute from this
Chamber. This message continues to be conveyed
loudly by civil society the world over, with massive
displays of support for the just cause of Palestine and
the rights of the Palestinian people and the calls for a
just and lasting solution.
It is thus most regrettable that the Security Council
remains paralysed and unable to act to uphold its
own responsibilities in this regard, with all of the
implications this has for peace and security in the
Middle East and beyond. It must be understood that
the repeated requests for us to wait, and wait, and
wait while our people are suffering, while our people
are besieged, while our land is being colonized, and
while the two-State solution is being destroyed and
the prospects for peace are evaporating, are not viable
under these circumstances and unsustainable.
Those eager to save the two-State solution must
act and cannot continue to make excuses for Israel
and to permit, and thus be complicit in, its immoral
and illegal behaviour. The Security Council must act.
We will therefore continue to call on the Council to
uphold its Charter duties and will spare no effort in this
regard in the coming year. The time has come for the
international community to act collectively and firmly
to end the occupation that began in 1967 and to allow
for the independence of the State of Palestine, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, and a just solution
for the plight of the Palestine refugees on the basis of
resolution 194 (III), and for the ultimate realization of
justice, freedom and peace. The Palestinian people and

S/PV.7354

the world can no longer wait. That message, despite the
regrettable outcome today, is especially clear.
In closing, I wish to thank you personally,
Mr. President, and the friendly delegation of Chad
for your speedy response to the call to convene
this meeting and vote, and to reiterate our deepest
gratitude to all Council members who righteously and
honourably supported the draft resolution. We also
take this opportunity to express our appreciation to the
non-permanent members of the Security Council that
will end their tenure tomorrow — Argentina, Australia,
Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and Rwanda — and
congratulate them on their efforts and service on the
Council over the past two years.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Nitzan (Israel): The Palestinians have found
every possible opportunity to avoid direct negotiations
with Israel. They have engaged in a never-ending string
of political games, and now they are parading into
the Council Chamber with a preposterous unilateral
proposal.
I have news for the Palestinians: you cannot agitate
and provoke your way to a State. I urge the Council
to stop indulging the Palestinians and to put an end to
their march of folly.
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

14-7212213/13
