S/2020/528

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 June 2020
Original: English and French

Letter dated 11 June 2020 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Secretary-General and the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Ambassador Sven Jürgenson, Permanent Representative of Estonia, in his capacity
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, in connection with the video-teleconference
on the reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan, convened
on Tuesday, 9 June 2020. A statement was also delivered by the representative of
the Sudan.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of
the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council
members dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
President of the Security Council

20-07779 (E) 190620 060720

*2007779*

S/2020/528

Annex I
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the
Sudan, Sven Jürgenson
In accordance with paragraph 3 (a) (iv) of resolution 1591 (2005), I have the
honour of briefing the Security Council on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, covering the period from
26 March to 8 June 2020.
Following the appointment of the five experts to serve on the Panel of Experts
on the Sudan until 12 March 2021, the Secretariat organized a virtual induction
for the Panel that took place between 8 and 14 April 2020. The induction sessions
included planning the work for the new mandate and holding virtual bilateral
meetings with Member States, including the Sudan and United Nations agencies.
Following the induction, in a letter dated 21 May addressed to me in my capacity as
Chair of the Committee, the Panel outlined its priorities within its mandate, outlined
in the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 2508 (2020), the Panel
submitted its first quarterly report, covering the period 13 March to 1 June 2020,
to the Committee. Due to the restrictions warranted by the coronavirus-disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, the Panel was unable to travel. Instead, it collected and
verified information remotely.
For the benefit of the Council, so that it can provide the best support to the
Sudan in relation to the most recent developments on the ground, I would like to
highlight the following important elements from the Panel’s reporting, without
prejudice to the national positions of individual Committee members on these issues.
The Panel reported that, despite many hampering factors, including
COVID-19, the peace talks in Juba continued, with 20 June 2020 set as the last
date of negotiations. The clashes between the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid
faction (SLA/AW) and the Government of the Sudan forces in Jebel Marra have
lessened since late 2019, owing to the reciprocal ceasefire. However, the SLA/AW
continued to recruit and train new fighters thanks to its exploitation of the Torroye
gold mine in south-eastern Jebel Marra. Further destabilizing events concerned a
sanctioned individual, Musa Hilal, and Arab communities. The Panel stated that the
supporters of Musa Hilal have been mobilizing to obtain his release from prison.
In addition, the Panel reported on the possible formation of a new armed group by
communities that fear that they may lose the land that they seized during the Darfur
conflict. In terms of regional context, almost all Darfurian armed groups maintained
a presence in Libya, which remains an important source of financing.
With regard to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Panel expressed its concern
that certain factors, such as having more than 1.8 million people in internally
displaced persons (IDP) camps and porous borders with neighbouring countries,
may have a serious impact on the spread of the disease. Common social-distancing
measures against COVID-19 have been difficult to implement in IDP camps owing
to the difficult living conditions there, in particular overpopulation and the scarcity
of water.
Finally, I would like to reiterate that all the aforementioned elements were
brought to the attention of Council members for the purpose of pointing out areas
where challenges may arise, so that the Council is aware as it deliberates on how to
best support the Sudan during its transition. I would also like to take this opportunity
to emphasize that the sanctions regime was established for the sole purpose of
2/4

20-07779

S/2020/528

helping to bring peace to Darfur. It is not intended to punish the Sudan, but to
support the achievement of sustainable peace. The Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) is committed to working together with the Sudan and all
relevant stakeholders to make this a reality.

20-077793/4

S/2020/528

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the
United Nations, Omer Mohamed Ahmed Siddig
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, for assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of June. We also extend our
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of Estonia for steering the Council’s
agenda in the month of May. We also thank him in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the
Sudan, for presenting the 90-day report of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan (see
S/2020/36), of which we have taken note.
A couple of weeks ago, the Sudan celebrated the first anniversary of the
overthrow of the Al-Bashir regime at the hands of the Sudanese people, who had
maintained an impressive peaceful uprising for several months until the regime gave
in to the pressure and stepped down. The Sudanese people continue to march steadily
towards building a prosperous, democratic and stable country that is at peace with
itself and with its neighbours.
The Security Council has a role to play in supporting the Sudanese people
in the fulfilment of their aspirations and in the realization of their hopes, as well
as in recognizing the sacrifices made by the Sudanese people since the start of the
revolution. This is so both because the Council can make a difference and because
it has an obvious intrinsic interest in preserving peace and security in the country.
The situation in the Sudan has drastically changed over the past year, and the
country expects no less than a positive reaction to these developments from the
Security Council.
More than 15 years ago, the Security Council adopted resolution 1591 (2005),
by which sanctions were imposed. However, the sanctions have remained statically
in place, despite the positive developments in the country. This is quite disturbing,
as it sends a discouraging signal to the people and the Government of the Sudan that,
whatever the right steps taken, sanctions will not be lifted. Lifting the sanctions would
be a significant step towards improving the economic, social, and cultural conditions
in the country during the transitional period. Furthermore, it would enhance the
positive gains that have been achieved in the Sudan over the last few months.
It is noteworthy that when resolution 2508 (2020), which extended the
mandate of the Panel of Experts, was adopted last February, the Council expressed
its intention to establish through the resolution
“clear, well identified, and measurable key benchmarks that could serve in
guiding the Security Council to review measures on the Government of [the]
Sudan” (resolution 2508 (2020), para. 4).
We call on the Council to establish these benchmarks and outline specific areas
to which these benchmarks may relate, with the ultimate objective of ending the
sanctions regime.

4/4

20-07779
