S/2010/507

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 July 2010
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
1.
In efforts to enhance the efficiency and transparency of the Council’s work, as
well as interaction and dialogue with non-Council members, the members of the
Security Council are committed to implementing the measures described in the
annex to the present note.
2.
The annex is intended to be a concise and user-friendly list of the recent
practices and newly agreed measures, which will serve as guidance for the Council’s
work. In this regard, some existing measures are recollected herein for the
convenience of users.
3.
The present note incorporates and further develops the notes by the President
of the Security Council of 19 July 2006 (S/2006/507), 19 December 2007
(S/2007/749) and 31 December 2008 (S/2008/847), by superseding those notes.
4.
For issues not mentioned in the present note, working methods regarding
sanctions committees will continue to be governed by the working methods as
adopted by individual sanctions committees and the notes and statements by the
President of the Security Council listed in the note by the President of the Security
Council of 7 February 2006 (S/2006/78). For issues not mentioned in the present
note, working methods regarding interaction with troop- and police-contributing
countries will continue to be governed by Security Council resolution 1353 (2001).
5.
The members of the Council will continue their consideration of the Council’s
documentation and other procedural questions in the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions and other subsidiary bodies of the
Council. The present note covers only the work done by the above-mentioned
Working Group.

10-46416 (E) 290710

*1046416*

S/2010/507

Annex

Contents
Page

2

I.

Agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

II.

Briefings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

III.

Documentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

IV.

Informal consultations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

V.

Meetings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

VI.

Programme of work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

VII.

Resolutions and presidential statements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

VIII.

Subsidiary bodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

IX.

Matters of which the Council is seized . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

X.

Communication with the Secretariat and outside . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

XI.

Security Council missions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

XII.

Annual report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

XIII.

Newly elected members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15

10-46416

S/2010/507

I. Agenda
1.
The provisional agenda for formal meetings of the Council should be included
in the Journal of the United Nations provided that it has been approved in informal
consultations.
2.
The members of the Council recall the desirability, whenever possible, of
using descriptive formulations of agenda items at the time of their initial adoption to
avoid having a number of separate agenda items on the same subject. When such a
descriptive formulation exists, consideration may be given to subsuming earlier
agenda items on the same subject under the descriptive formulation.

II. Briefings
3.
The members of the Security Council agree that the President of the Council or
his or her designate should provide substantive and detailed briefings to Member
States in a timely manner. Such briefings should take place shortly after informal
consultations of the whole. The members of the Security Council encourage the
President of the Council to provide the attending Member States with copies of
statements that he or she makes to the media following the informal consultations, if
appropriate.
4.
The members of the Security Council encourage the President of the Council
to hold an informal briefing on the programme of work open to all Member States,
after its adoption by the Council.
5.
The members of the Security Council invite Chairs of the subsidiary bodies of
the Security Council or their designates to give, on a regular basis, informal
briefings, when appropriate, on their activities to interested Member States. The
members of the Security Council agree that the time and place of such briefings
should be published in the Journal of the United Nations.
6.
The members of the Security Council intend to continue to consider requesting
the Secretariat to give an ad hoc briefing at Security Council meetings in cases in
which an emergent situation which justifies a briefing arises.
7.
The members of the Security Council intend to request the Secretariat to give
ad hoc briefings at informal consultations on a daily basis, if necessary, when a
situation justifies such briefings.
8.
The members of the Security Council invite the Secretariat to continue its
practice of circulating the briefing texts at “briefings”.
9.
The members of the Security Council invite the Secretariat, as a general rule,
to provide a printed fact sheet, presentation materials and/or any other relevant
reference materials, whenever possible, to Council members on the day prior to the
consultations, when briefings in the Security Council consultations room are not
given on the basis of a written report.

10-46416

3

S/2010/507

III. Documentation
10. The members of the Security Council intend to intensify their efforts to
publicize decisions and other relevant information of the Council and its subsidiary
bodies to the Member States and other organizations through correspondence,
websites, outreach activities and other means, when appropriate. The members of
the Security Council intend to continue to examine ways to enhance its activities in
this regard. The members of the Security Council encourage subsidiary bodies of the
Council to continue to review periodically policies concerning access to their
documents, as appropriate.
11. The members of the Security Council agree that reports of the SecretaryGeneral should be circulated to Council members and made available in all official
languages of the United Nations at least four working days before the Council is
scheduled to consider them. The members of the Security Council also agree that the
same rule should apply to making such reports available to relevant participants in
Council meetings at which those reports are discussed, including the distribution of
the reports on peacekeeping missions to all participants in meetings of troop- and
police-contributing countries.
12. The members of the Security Council agree to consider setting a six-month
interval as the standard reporting period, unless the situation provides reason for
shorter or longer intervals. The members of the Security Council also agree to
define reporting intervals as clearly as possible when adopting resolutions. The
members of the Security Council further agree to request oral reporting, which does
not require submission of a written report, if the members of the Council consider
that it would serve the purpose satisfactorily, and to indicate that request as clearly
as possible.
13. The members of the Security Council encourage the Secretary-General to
include a section in his reports where all recommendations are listed, when presenting
recommendations to the Council regarding the mandate of a United Nations mission.
14. The members of the Security Council encourage the Secretary-General to
make reports as concise as possible and give an ample cut-off time in order for the
reports to be issued in a timely manner. The Secretariat is encouraged to supplement
and update information contained in reports of the Secretary-General by including
information about the most recent developments during briefings.
15. The members of the Security Council intend to request the Secretary-General to
include policy recommendations on long-term strategy in his reports, if appropriate.
16. Reports of the Secretary-General will specify the date on which the document
is physically and electronically distributed in addition to the date of signature by the
Secretary-General.
17. The Security Council agrees to cooperate with other organs of the United
Nations in synchronizing reporting obligations of the Secretariat on the same
subject, if appropriate, while giving priority to the effective work of the Council.
18. The members of the Security Council request the Secretariat to update the
Council towards the end of each month on the progress in the preparation of the
reports of the Secretary-General to be issued the following month. The members of
the Security Council also request the Secretariat to communicate with the Council

4

10-46416

S/2010/507

immediately if it expects reports to be delayed beyond their deadlines or if reports
that have not been requested by the Council are expected to be issued.
19. The members of the Security Council encourage the Secretariat to ensure that
all information provided to Council members is transmitted electronically, including
by fax.

IV. Informal consultations
20. The members of the Security Council encourage the President of the Council
to suggest, through consultations with interested members and/or the Secretariat, as
appropriate, a few areas for Council members and the Secretariat to focus on at the
Council’s next informal consultations, without the intention of prescribing the scope
of discussion, at least one day before the consultations are to be held.
21. The members of the Security Council agree that when briefings are being
provided to the Council members by senior Secretariat officials, the number of staff
members accompanying those officials in the consultations should be kept to a strict
minimum. Unless otherwise decided, the Secretariat staff from offices other than
those of the designated briefer or from United Nations agencies will normally not be
invited to attend consultations. Unless otherwise decided, the Security Council
Affairs Division of the Department of Political Affairs will be responsible for
keeping the Office of the Spokesperson for the Secretary-General informed of
matters which may require its action.
22. As a general rule, the purpose of initial remarks or ad hoc briefings delivered
by members of the Secretariat is to supplement and update written reports of the
Secretary-General or to provide members of the Council with more specific on-theground information on the most recent developments, which may not be covered in
the written report. The members of the Security Council encourage members of the
Secretariat to focus on key issues and to provide the latest information, as necessary,
without repeating the content of written reports already available to members of the
Council.
23. The members of the Security Council intend, where they agree with a previous
speaker, in part or in whole, to express that agreement without repeating the same
content.
24. The members of the Security Council agree that, as a general rule, the President
of the Council should adhere to the prescribed speakers’ list. The members of the
Security Council encourage the President to facilitate interaction by inviting any
participant in the consultations to speak at any time, irrespective of the order of the
prescribed speakers’ list, when the discussion requires it.
25. The members of the Security Council encourage speakers to direct their
questions not only to the Secretariat, but also to other members.
26. The members of the Security Council do not discourage each other from taking
the floor more than once, in the interest of making consultations more interactive.
27. The members of the Security Council invite the Secretariat to continue its
practice of circulating all press statements issued by the Secretary-General or by the
Secretary-General’s spokesperson in connection with matters of concern to the
Security Council.

10-46416

5

S/2010/507

V. Meetings
Conduct of meetings
28. In order to increase the transparency of its work, the Security Council
reaffirms its commitment to increase recourse to open meetings, particularly at the
early stage in its consideration of a matter.
29. The Security Council encourages, as a general rule, all participants, both
members and non-members of the Council, in Council meetings to deliver their
statements in five minutes or less. The Security Council also encourages each briefer
to limit initial remarks to 15 minutes, unless otherwise decided by the Council.
30. The Security Council encourages participants in Council meetings to express
agreement without repeating the same content, if they agree, in part or in whole,
with the content of a previous statement.
31. The Security Council agrees that, when non-members are invited to speak to
the Council, those who have a direct interest in the outcome of the matter under
consideration may speak prior to Council members, if appropriate.
32. In line with paragraph 170 (a) of the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General
Assembly resolution 60/1) and Security Council resolution 1631 (2005), the members
of the Security Council agree to continue to expand consultation and cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations, including by inviting relevant organizations
to participate in the Council’s public and private meetings, when appropriate.
33. In order to further encourage substantive discussions with troop- and policecontributing countries, in accordance with Security Council resolution 1353 (2001),
the members of the Security Council encourage the attendance of appropriate
military and political officers from each participating mission at meetings with
troop-contributing countries. The members of the Security Council emphasize the
importance of consulting with troop- and police-contributing countries, including
holding meetings, preferably, one week before the Security Council considers
mandate renewals or modifications. The members of the Security Council encourage
the President of the Council to provide sufficient time for the meetings and to
provide to the other members of the Council a summary of the meetings with troopand police-contributing countries that are held before the Council discusses mandate
renewals or modifications.
34. When non-members of the Security Council are invited to speak at its
meetings, they will be seated at the Council table on alternate sides of the President,
the first speaker being seated on the President’s right.
Notification
35. The members of the Security Council invite the Secretariat to notify Member
States of unscheduled or emergency meetings not only by e-mail but also through
the Council website and by telephone as necessary.
Format
36. In an effort further to advance the resolution of a matter under consideration,
the members of the Security Council agree to use a range of meeting options from
which they can select the one best suited to facilitate specific discussions.

6

10-46416

S/2010/507

Recognizing that the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council and their
own practice provide them with considerable flexibility in choosing how best to
structure their meetings, members of the Council agree that meetings of the Council
could be structured according to, but not limited to, the following formats:
(a)

Public meetings

(i)

Functions
To take action and/or hold, inter alia, briefings and debates.

(ii)

Presence and participation
The presence and participation of non-Council members in public meetings
should be in accordance with the provisional rules of procedure. The Council’s
practice, as described below, is understood as being in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure, although it should not under any circumstances be
understood as replacing or substituting for the provisional rules of procedure.
a.
Any Member of the United Nations that is not a member of the Security
Council may be present at its delegation’s designated seats in the Council Chamber;
b.
On a case-by-case basis, any Member of the United Nations that is not a
member of the Security Council, members of the Secretariat and other persons may be
invited to participate in the discussion, including for the purpose of giving briefings to
the Council, in accordance with rule 37 or 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.

(iii)

Descriptions in the provisional monthly programme of work
The members of the Security Council intend to continue to include the
following formats for public meetings in the provisional monthly programme of
work (calendar) when they plan to adopt, in general, the corresponding procedures:
a.
“Open debate”: briefings may or may not be conducted, and Council
members may deliver statements; non-Council members may also be invited to
participate in the discussion upon their request;
b.
“Debate”: briefings may be conducted, and Council members may
deliver statements; non-Council members that are directly concerned or affected or
have a special interest in the matter under consideration may be invited to
participate in the discussion upon their request;
c.
“Briefing”: briefings are conducted, and only Council members may
deliver statements following briefings;
d.
“Adoption”: Council members may or may not deliver statements before
and/or after adopting, inter alia, resolutions and presidential statements; non-Council
members may or may not be invited to participate in the discussion upon their request.

(b)

Private meetings

(i)

Functions
To conduct discussion and/or take actions, for example, recommendation
regarding the appointment of the Secretary-General, without the attendance of the
public or the press.

10-46416

7

S/2010/507

(ii)

Presence and participation
The presence and participation of non-Council members in private meetings
should be in accordance with the provisional rules of procedure. The Council’s
practice, as described below, is understood as being in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure, although it should not under any circumstances be
understood as replacing or substituting for the provisional rules of procedure:
On a case-by-case basis, any Member of the United Nations which is not a
member of the Security Council, members of the Secretariat and other persons may
be invited to be present or to participate in the discussion, including for the purpose
of giving briefings to the Council, in accordance with rule 37 or 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

(iii)

Descriptions in the provisional monthly programme of work
The members of the Security Council intend to continue to include the
following formats for private meetings in the provisional monthly programme of
work (calendar) when they plan to adopt, in general, the corresponding procedures:
a.
“Private meeting”: briefings or debates may be conducted, and Council
members may deliver statements; any Member of the United Nations which is not a
member of the Security Council, members of the Secretariat and other persons may
be invited to be present or to participate in the discussion, upon their request, in
accordance with rule 37 or 39 of the provisional rules of procedure;
b.
“TCC meeting”: briefings may be conducted, and Council members may
deliver statements; parties described in resolution 1353 (2001) are invited to
participate in the discussion, in accordance with the resolution.
Distribution of statements
37. Texts of statements made at the meetings of the Security Council will, at the
request of the delegation making the statement, be distributed by the Secretariat inside
the Council Chamber to Council members and other Member States and permanent
observers to the United Nations present at the meeting. A delegation requesting the
distribution of its statement is encouraged to provide a sufficient number of copies
(200) to the Secretariat in advance of the statement. When a delegation does not
provide to the Secretariat a sufficient number of copies of its statement, those copies
will be placed outside the Council Chamber at the end of the meeting. Delegations
are requested not to make statements otherwise available during the meeting.

VI. Programme of work
38. The members of the Security Council encourage the President of the Council
to publish a streamlined tentative monthly forecast of the programme of work on the
Council website as soon as it has been distributed to Council members.
39. The forecast should be made available in all official languages “for information
only/not an official document”, and there should be a cover note which reads:
This tentative forecast of the programme of work of the Security Council
has been prepared by the Secretariat for the President of the Council. The
forecast covers in particular those matters that may be taken up during the

8

10-46416

S/2010/507

month pursuant to earlier decisions of the Council. The fact that a matter is or
is not included in the forecast carries no implication that it will or will not be
taken up during the month: the actual programme of work will be determined
by developments and the views of members of the Council.
40. The members of the Council have agreed that the following reminder should
be placed in the Journal of the United Nations each month:
The monthly tentative forecast has been made available at the website of
the Security Council, in accordance with the note by the President of the
Security Council dated 26 July 2010 (S/2010/507). Copies of the tentative
forecast have also been placed in the delegations’ boxes and may be collected
at the delegations’ pick-up areas as of [date].
41. The members of the Security Council agree that the President of the Council
should update the provisional monthly programme of work (calendar) and make it
available to the public through the Council website each time it is revised and
distributed to Council members, with appropriate indication of the revised items.

VII. Resolutions and presidential statements
42. The members of the Security Council reaffirm that all members of the Security
Council should be allowed to participate fully in the preparation of, inter alia, the
resolutions, presidential statements and press statements of the Council. The members
of the Security Council also reaffirm that the drafting of all documents such as
resolutions and presidential statements as well as press statements should be carried
out in a manner that will allow adequate participation of all members of the Council.
43. The members of the Security Council intend to continue to informally consult
with the broader United Nations membership, in particular interested Member
States, including countries directly involved or specifically affected, neighbouring
States and countries with particular contributions to make, as well as with regional
organizations and Groups of Friends, when drafting, inter alia, resolutions,
presidential statements and press statements, as appropriate.
44. The members of the Security Council agree to consider making draft
resolutions and presidential statements as well as other draft documents available as
appropriate to non-members of the Council as soon as such documents are
introduced within informal consultations of the whole, or earlier, if so authorized by
the authors of the draft document.
45. The President of the Security Council should, when so requested by the
Council members, and without prejudice to his or her responsibilities as President,
draw the attention of the representative(s) of the Member State(s), regional
organizations and arrangements concerned to relevant statements to the press made
by the President on behalf of Council members or decisions of the Council. The
Secretariat should also continue to bring to the knowledge of those concerned,
including non-State actors, through the relevant Special Representatives,
Representatives and Envoys of the Secretary-General and United Nations Resident
Coordinators, resolutions and presidential statements of the Security Council as well
as statements to the press made by the President of the Council on behalf of the
Council members, and ensure their promptest communication and widest possible
dissemination. The Secretariat should further issue, as United Nations press

10-46416

9

S/2010/507

releases, all written statements to the press made by the President of the Security
Council on behalf of Council members, upon clearance by the President.

VIII. Subsidiary bodies
46. The members of the Security Council encourage the Chairs of all subsidiary
bodies to continue to report to the Council on any outstanding issues, when
necessary and in any event on a regular basis, in order to receive strategic guidance
from the Council.
47. The members of the Security Council encourage subsidiary bodies of the
Council to seek the views of Member States with strong interest in their areas of
work. The members of the Security Council in particular encourage sanctions
committees to seek the views of Member States that are particularly affected by the
sanctions.
48. The members of the Security Council encourage the Secretariat to provide
administrative and substantive support to the subsidiary bodies of the Council.
49. The members of the Security Council encourage Chairs of the subsidiary
bodies of the Council to make the schedules of meetings of subsidiary bodies
available to the public, when appropriate, through their websites and the Journal of
the United Nations.
50. The members of the Security Council welcome the participation in the
meetings of the Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations of the
Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries and other major stakeholders,
and encourage this practice in order to foster closer cooperation between the
Council and those actors.

IX. Matters of which the Council is seized
51. Rule 11 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council provides
that the Secretary-General shall communicate each week to the representatives on
the Security Council a summary statement of matters of which the Security Council
is seized and of the stage reached in their consideration.
52. The practice of including an agenda item in the summary statement once it has
been adopted at a formal meeting of the Security Council will remain unchanged.
53. At the beginning of each year, the Security Council will review the summary
statement in order to determine if the Council has concluded its consideration of any
of the listed items, in particular those items that were considered for the first time
during the preceding year, and whether, consequently, such items should be deleted
from the statement. Further, except as herein provided, any item which has not been
considered by the Security Council during the preceding three calendar years will
also be deleted.
54. The preliminary annual summary statement issued in January of each year by
the Secretary-General on matters of which the Council is seized will identify the
items to be deleted from the list. The first summary statement issued in March of
each year will reflect the deletion of those items, unless a State Member of the

10

10-46416

S/2010/507

United Nations notifies the President of the Security Council by the end of February
of that year that it requests an item to remain on the summary statement, in which
case such item will remain on the statement for one year, unless the Security
Council decides otherwise.
55. The deletion of an item does not imply that such an item cannot be taken up by
the Security Council as and when it deems necessary in the future.
56. The summary statement will be presented in the format of two sections, as
follows: one section comprising items which have been considered by the Security
Council at a meeting during the preceding three-year period, and another section
comprising items which have not been considered at a meeting during the preceding
three-year period but which the Security Council has decided to retain at the request
of a Member State.
57. The Security Council reconfirms that the first summary statement of each month
will contain a full, updated list of items of which the Security Council is seized. For
intervening weeks, a weekly addendum to the summary statement will be issued
listing only those items on which further action has been taken by the Council during
the previous week or indicating that there has been no change during that period.
58. The Security Council reconfirms that references given for each item listed in
the summary statement will be the dates when the item was first taken up by the
Council at a formal meeting and the most recent formal meeting of the Council held
on that item.

X. Communication with the Secretariat and outside
59. The members of the Security Council intend to seek the views of Member
States that are parties to a conflict and/or other interested and affected parties. For
that purpose, the Security Council may, inter alia, utilize private meetings when
public meetings are not appropriate, in which case invitations are also to be
extended in accordance with rules 37 and 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure. The Security Council, when it deems appropriate, may also utilize
informal dialogues.
60. The members of the Security Council intend to continue to maintain regular
communication with the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council
for better coordination among the principal organs of the United Nations. To that
end, the members of the Security Council encourage the President of the Council to
continue holding meetings with the Presidents of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council on a regular basis.
61. The members of the Security Council also intend to maintain regular
communication with the Peacebuilding Commission. As appropriate, the members
of the Council intend to invite the Chairs of country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission to participate in formal Security Council meetings at
which the situation concerning the country in question is considered, or on a caseby-case basis, for an exchange of views in an informal dialogue.
62. The members of the Security Council are encouraged to prepare a monthly
assessment of their presidency in a timely manner, which can be utilized by the
member of the Council preparing the annual report.

10-46416

11

S/2010/507

63. The members of the Security Council intend to make the best use of all
mechanisms available, as appropriate, to convey policy guidance to the SecretaryGeneral, including dialogue, letters from the President, adoption of resolutions or
presidential statements, or any other means deemed appropriate.
64. The members of the Security Council, through the Secretary-General, invite new
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General to engage in dialogue with members
of the Council before assuming their duties under new mandates, including in the
field, in order to obtain Council members’ views on the objectives and the mandates.
65. The members of the Security Council intend to utilize “Arria-formula”
meetings as a flexible and informal forum for enhancing their deliberations. To that
end, members of the Security Council may invite on an informal basis any Member
State, relevant organization or individual to participate in “Arria-formula” informal
meetings. The members of the Security Council agree to consider using such meetings
to enhance their contact with civil society and non-governmental organizations,
including local non-governmental organizations suggested by United Nations field
offices. The members of the Security Council encourage the introduction of such
measures as lengthening lead times, defining topics that participants might address
and permitting their participation by video teleconference.

XI. Security Council missions
66. The members of the Security Council underline the value of Security Council
missions for understanding and assessing particular conflicts or situations on the
agenda of the Council. Security Council missions should be planned as early as
practicable with the members of the Security Council that will be participating in
the mission. Members of the Security Council will designate a member or members
to coordinate a particular Security Council mission.
67. The designated member or members will draft terms of reference for the
mission as early as possible in consultation with Security Council members and the
Secretariat. The terms of reference should outline the dates of the mission, its
purpose, the proposed agenda and the composition of the mission. The terms of
reference should be issued as a Security Council document.
68. The members of the Security Council encourage Security Council missions to
continue to avoid restricting their meetings to those with governmental interlocutors
and interlocutors of conflict parties and to hold, as appropriate, meetings with local
civil society leaders, non-governmental organizations and other interested parties.
69. Upon the return of the mission, the designated member or members should
brief the Security Council on the mission orally and/or with a written report which
should be issued as a document of the Security Council.

XII. Annual report
70. The Security Council will take the necessary action to ensure the timely
submission of its report to the General Assembly. For that purpose:

12

10-46416

S/2010/507

(a) The Security Council will continue with the existing practice whereby the
annual report is submitted to the General Assembly in a single volume. The period of
coverage for the reports shall be from 1 August of one year to 31 July of the next;
(b) The Secretariat should continue to submit the draft report to the members
of the Council no later than 30 September, immediately following the period
covered by the report, so that it may be discussed and thereafter adopted by the
Council in time for consideration by the General Assembly during the main part of
the regular session of the General Assembly.
71. The report shall contain an introduction, to be prepared in accordance with the
following guidelines:
(a) The draft introduction to the report should continue to be prepared under
the leadership and responsibility of the President of the Council for the month of
July of each calendar year and should continue to be approved by all current
members of the Council and the immediate past elected members who served on the
Council during the reporting period covered;
(b) While drafting the introduction to the report, the President for the month
of July may, when necessary, seek advice from other members of the Council;
(c) The introduction to the report should contain concise information about
the nature of all decisions taken by the Council during the period covered, in
particular all resolutions and presidential statements;
(d) The member of the Council preparing the introduction is encouraged to
consult for reference the monthly assessments described in paragraph 62 above.
72. The remainder of the report shall be prepared by the Secretariat and shall be
approved by all current members of the Council and the immediate past elected
members who served on the Council during the reporting period covered, and shall
contain the following parts:
(a) Part I shall contain a brief statistical description of the key activities
relating to all questions considered by the Security Council under its responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security during the period covered by
the report, including a list of each of the following, with document symbols, as
appropriate:
(i) All decisions, resolutions, presidential
communiqués adopted by the Security Council;

statements

and

official

(ii) Meetings of the Security Council, including with troop- and policecontributing countries;
(iii) Meetings of subsidiary bodies, including counter-terrorism committees,
sanctions committees and working groups;
(iv) Reports of panels and monitoring mechanisms;
(v)

Reports of Security Council missions undertaken;

(vi) Peacekeeping operations established, functioning or terminated;
(vii) Assistance missions and offices established, functioning or terminated;
(viii) Reports of the Secretary-General submitted to the Security Council;

10-46416

13

S/2010/507

(ix) References to the summary statements by the Secretary-General on matters
of which the Security Council was seized for the period covered by the report;
(x) Notes by the President of the Security Council and other documents issued
by the Security Council for the further improvement of the work of the Council;
(xi) Assessment reports issued by the individual monthly presidencies of the
Council on its work;
(b) Part II shall contain information relating to each question considered by
the Security Council during the reporting period, in at least one formal meeting,
under its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security:
(i)

Factual data on the number of meetings and informal consultations;

(ii) A notice of all decisions, resolutions, presidential statements, and draft
resolutions considered by the Council at its meetings but not adopted;
(iii) A list of the peacekeeping operations and assistance missions and offices
established, functioning or terminated, as appropriate;
(iv) A list of the relevant panels and monitoring mechanisms and their
reports, as appropriate;
(v) A list of the reports of the Secretary-General submitted to the Security
Council;
(vi) A list of the Security Council missions undertaken and their reports, as
appropriate;
(vii) All communications issued by the Council or transmitted to the Council
in connection with each agenda item considered;
(c) Part III shall contain an account of the other matters considered by the
Security Council;
(d) Part IV shall contain an account of the work of the Military Staff
Committee;
(e) Part V shall cover matters that were brought to the attention of the Council
but not discussed at the meetings of the Council during the reporting period;
(f) The members of the Security Council acknowledge that the work of the
Security Council subsidiary bodies is an inseparable part of the Council’s work. Part
VI of the report shall therefore contain concise information about the work of
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council, including counter-terrorism committees,
sanctions committees, working groups, and international tribunals established by the
Security Council, as appropriate.
73. The Secretariat should post the current annual report of the Security Council
on the United Nations website. The relevant web page should be updated to provide
the information as necessitated under future notes issued by the President of the
Security Council with respect to the annual report.
74. The report will continue to be adopted at a public meeting of the Security
Council where members of the Council who wish to do so may comment on the
work of the Council for the period covered by the report. The President of the
Council for the month in which the report is submitted to the General Assembly will

14

10-46416

S/2010/507

also make reference to the verbatim record of the Council’s discussion prior to its
adoption of the annual report.
75. If appropriate, the President of the Security Council will continue the practice
of not scheduling meetings or informal consultations of the Council on the first day
of the debate on the report in the General Assembly.

XIII. Newly elected members
76. The Security Council invites the newly elected members of the Council to
attend all meetings of the Council and its subsidiary bodies and the informal
consultations of the whole, for a period of six weeks immediately preceding their
term of membership or as soon as they have been elected, if the election is held less
than six weeks prior to the beginning of their terms. The Security Council also
invites the Secretariat to provide all relevant communications of the Council to the
newly elected members during the above-mentioned period.
77. The members of the Security Council also agree that, if an incoming member
will be assuming the presidency of the Council in the first two months of its term on
the Council, it will be invited to attend the informal consultations of the whole for
the period of two months immediately preceding its term of membership (that is,
with effect from 1 November).
78. The Security Council invites the Secretariat to continue to take appropriate
measures to familiarize the newly elected members with the work of the Council
and its subsidiary bodies, including by providing briefing materials and holding
seminars before they begin to attend Council meetings.

10-46416

15
