A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/53
29 January 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 146
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/50/643)]
50/53.

Measures to eliminate international
terrorism

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 49/60 of 9 December 1994, by which it adopted
the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism,
Recalling also that, in the statement issued on 31 January 1992 by the
President of the Security Council on the occasion of the meeting of the
Security Council at the level of heads of State and Government, 1/ the members
of the Council expressed their deep concern over acts of international
terrorism, and emphasized the need for the international community to deal
effectively with all such acts,
Recalling further the Declaration on the Occasion of the Fiftieth
Anniversary of the United Nations, 2/
Deeply disturbed by the persistence of terrorist acts, which have taken
place worldwide,
Stressing the need further to strengthen international cooperation
between States and between international organizations and agencies, regional

1/

S/23500.

2/

Resolution 50/6.

96-76243

/...

A/RES/50/53
Page 2

organizations and arrangements and the United Nations in order to prevent,
combat and eliminate terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General of
24 August 1995, 3/
1.
Strongly condemns all acts, methods and practices of terrorism as
criminal and unjustifiable;
2.
Reiterates that criminal acts intended or calculated to provoke a
state of terror in the general public, a group of persons or particular
persons for political purposes are in any circumstance unjustifiable, whatever
the considerations of a political, philosophical, ideological, racial, ethnic,
religious or any other nature that may be invoked to justify them; 4/
3.
Reaffirms the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International
Terrorism annexed to resolution 49/60;
4.
Urges all States to promote and implement effectively and in good
faith the provisions of the Declaration in all its aspects;
5.
Also urges all States to strengthen cooperation with one another
to ensure that those who participate in terrorist activities, whatever the
nature of their participation, find no safe haven anywhere;
6.
Calls upon all States to take the necessary steps to implement
their obligations under existing international conventions, to observe fully
the principles of international law and to contribute to the further
development of international law on this matter;
7.
Recalls the role of the Security Council in combating
international terrorism whenever it poses a threat to international peace and
security;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to follow up closely the
implementation of the Declaration and to submit an annual report on the
implementation of paragraph 10 of the Declaration, taking into account the
modalities set out in his report 3/ and the views expressed by States in the
debate of the Sixth Committee during the fiftieth session of the General
Assembly; 5/
9.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-first
session the item entitled "Measures to eliminate international terrorism".
87th plenary meeting
11 December 1995

3/

A/50/372 and Add.1.

4/
Paragraph 3 of the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate
International Terrorism, contained in the annex to resolution 49/60.
5/

See A/C.6/50/SR.6 to 10 and 46.
