S/2018/777

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 August 2018
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016),
2393 (2017) and 2401 (2018)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the fifty-fourth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), paragraph 6 of resolution 2393 (2017) and
paragraph 12 of resolution 2401 (2018), in which the Council requested the SecretaryGeneral to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions by all
parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to agencies of the
United Nations system and from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and
other relevant sources. Data from agencies of the United Nations system on their
humanitarian deliveries have been reported for July 2018.

II. Major developments
Box 1
Key points: July 2018
1.
Continued significant military escalation in the south-western Syrian Arab
Republic resulted in the displacement of up to 325,000 people by early July. By the
end of the month, 180,000 people, including some 100,000 in Qunaytirah Governorate ,
were estimated to remain newly displaced in affected areas. The United Nations
humanitarian response drew on supplies pre-positioned through cross-border deliveries
from Jordan, which remained suspended throughout the reporting period, and assistance
delivered from inside the country. Nevertheless, those newly displaced in Qunaytirah
remained largely cut off from that assistance.
2.
Military operations in the south-west involved aerial bombardment and artillery
shelling, resulting in civilian deaths and destruction of and damage to civilian
infrastructure, including schools and hospitals. Large numbers of humanitarian workers
and service providers were reportedly caught up in the fighting, with many forced to
flee alongside other civilians. By the end of July, government forces had reportedly
taken control of the vast majority of the south-west.

18-13693 (E)

230818

*1813693*

S/2018/777

3.
The humanitarian situation in the north-west continued to deteriorate, with the
total number of people in need of humanitarian assistance in Aleppo and Idlib
Governorates having increased by more than 570,000 since the beginning of 2018, to
a total of 4.2 million. Thousands of evacuees fro m the south-west were transported to
Idlib, following a pattern seen earlier in the year with the arrival of close to 130,000
internally displaced persons in Idlib between March and May. In northern Aleppo
Governorate, insecurity in Afrin and the areas for merly covered by Operation
Euphrates Shield continued to have an impact on civilians.
4.
On 16 July, an agreement was reached providing for the evacuation of the entire
population of Fu‘ah and Kafraya, which had been besieged by non-State armed
opposition groups since March 2015. On 19 July, the population was transported on
buses to the Mahalij shelter in Aleppo Governorate. The United Nations was not a
party to the agreement, nor did it have access to the evacuees, but it contributed
assistance in coordination with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and other local
organizations. With the evacuation of the two villages, the United Nations no longer
categorized any areas or communities in the country as besieged as at the end of the
reporting period.
5.
Some 147,000 civilians have returned to the city of Raqqah since the end of
hostilities in October 2017, the high level of explosive hazard contamination
notwithstanding.
6.
United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to reach millions
of people in need. Humanitarian assistance provided from withi n the country by
United Nations agencies reached more than 3.3 million people with food assistance.
Four inter-agency humanitarian convoys carrying life-saving relief, food and medical
supplies were deployed in July to the hard-to-reach locations of Duma in Rif Dimashq,
Hulah in northern rural Homs, Harbinafsih in southern rural Hama and Bayt Jinn,
Baytima, Bayt Sabir and Kafr Hawar in Rif Dimashq, reaching 133,500 people in
need. In July, the United Nations delivered life-saving food assistance to close to
550,000 people through cross-border deliveries.

3.
Since 24 February, when the Security Council adopted resolution 2401 (2018),
demanding a cessation of hostilities, military conflict has continued in many parts of
the Syrian Arab Republic. Throughout July, air strikes, artillery shelling and sniper
fire were reported in the Governorates of Aleppo, Idlib, Ladhiqiyah, Dayr al -Zawr,
Homs, Hama, Suwayda’, Dar‘a and Qunaytirah, as military operations continued
between the Government and allied pro-government forces and non-State armed
opposition groups. Infighting among non-State armed opposition groups was reported
in Aleppo and Idlib Governorates. Sporadic clashes occurred between government
forces and the Syrian Democratic Forces in Dayr al-Zawr Governorate.
4.
In the south-western Syrian Arab Republic, continued significant military
escalation, including air strikes and artillery shelling accompanied by a ground
offensive by the Government, supported by allied forces, resulted in deaths, injuries
and the displacement of civilians, including many women and children. By the end of
July, 180,000 people, including some 100,000 in Qunaytirah Governorate, were estimated
to remain newly displaced in affected areas. The United Nations humanitarian
response drew on supplies pre-positioned through cross-border deliveries from
Jordan, which remained suspended throughout the reporting period, a nd assistance
delivered from inside the country. Nevertheless, those newly displaced in Qunaytirah
remained largely cut off from that assistance and exposed to harsh desert conditions.
Numerous humanitarian workers and basic service providers were reported ly caught
up in the fighting, with many forced to flee alongside other civilians.

2/15

18-13693

S/2018/777

5.
By late July, government forces had reportedly taken control of the vast majority
of the south-west, although active hostilities, including air strikes, continued in the
Yarmouk basin area, focused on areas under the control of the Khalid ibn al -Walid
Army, a group affiliated with Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Serious
concerns persisted regarding the exposure of up to 55,000 civilians to the hostilities,
as well as reports that the group was restricting the movement of civilians seeking to
leave the area. Moreover, ISIL launched suicide attacks on 25 July in Suwayda ’
Governorate that reportedly killed more than 300 people. The group also reportedly
kidnapped women and children. By the end of the reporting period, close to 9,500
civilians, including many women and children, had reportedly been evacuated from
the south-west to northern governorates.
6.
The humanitarian situation in the north-west continued to deteriorate, with the
total number of people in need of humanitarian assistance in Aleppo and Idlib
Governorates having increased by more than 570,000 since the beginning of 2018, to
a total of 4.2 million. Thousands of evacuees from the south-west were transported to
Idlib, following a pattern seen earlier in the year with the arrival of close to 130,000
internally displaced persons in Idlib between March and May. In northern Aleppo
Governorate, insecurity in Afrin and the areas formerly covered by Operatio n
Euphrates Shield continued to have an impact on civilians.
7.
On 16 July, an agreement was reached providing for the evacuation of the entire
population of Fu‘ah and Kafraya, which had been besieged by non-State armed
opposition groups since March 2015. On 19 July, the population was transported on
buses to the Mahalij shelter in Aleppo Governorate. The United Nations was not a
party to the agreement, nor did it have access to the evacuees, but it contributed
assistance in coordination with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and other local
organizations. With the evacuation of the two villages, the United Nations no longer
categorized any areas or communities in the country as besieged as at the end of the
reporting period.
8.
The Syrian authorities reported that 9,762 people from eastern Ghutah remained
in displacement sites in Rif Dimashq. United Nations personnel were unable to reach
those sites for several weeks, but continued to receive reports that men and boys
between 15 and 55 years of age accounted for the majority of those remaining. On
1 July, the United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent delivered multisectoral
assistance to Duma for 25,000 people, completing the convoy of 10 June for 60,000
people in need. On 26 July, United Nations agencies joined a Syrian Arab Red
Crescent convoy to Duma, delivering humanitarian aid, including medicines and
shelter materials, which had been provided by France and transported into the country
with the support of the Russian Federation. United Nations personnel also assessed
health needs while in Duma. The resumption of commercial activities and basic
services continued to be reported in eastern Ghutah, although access for United
Nations personnel remained restricted.
9.
Some 147,000 civilians have returned to the city of Raqqah since the end of
hostilities in October 2017, the high level of explosive hazard contamination
notwithstanding. The United Nations and its partners continued to provide assistance
in the city and the broader governorate, reaching more than 530,000 people per
month. In Dayr al-Zawr, there continued to be serious concern regarding an
unconfirmed number of civilians trapped in ISIL-controlled areas and thus caught up
in the military operations in the eastern part of the governorate. Unconfir med reports
were received of many civilian casualties in air strikes in Susah and Baghuz Fawqani
on 12 July. On 30 July, it was reported that 40 critical medical cases had been
evacuated from the area and that commercial trucks carrying food supplies had
entered.

18-13693

3/15

S/2018/777

10. In northern Aleppo Governorate, insecurity in Afrin and the areas formerly
covered by Operation Euphrates Shield continued to affect civilians. There were
reports of protection concerns for the local population and violations of international
humanitarian law by armed actors.
11. My Special Envoy for Syria continued his consultations focused on realizing
further progress on the implementation of the final statement of the Congress of the
Syrian National Dialogue, held in Sochi, Russian Federat ion, in January 2018, and
the establishment of a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned constitutional committee,
facilitated by the United Nations, within the framework of the Geneva process and in
accordance with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). He chaired informal
consultations with senior representatives of Iran (Islamic Republic of), the Russian
Federation and Turkey during the Astana-format meeting held in Sochi on 30 and
31 July and looks forward to further discussions early in September in Geneva
regarding the committee. He also met representatives of the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic in Sochi to discuss the political process, together with other
interlocutors, including representatives of the armed opposition. The delegation of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Sochi
underlined its firm commitment to Syrian refugees and internally displaced persons,
in particular to helping them to exercise their right to return voluntarily and in safety
and dignity. There is a collective responsibility to ensure that returns are in line with
agreed-upon international standards.
12. In their joint statement at the conclusion of the Astana -format meeting in Sochi,
the Astana guarantors renewed their commitment to undertaking joint efforts aimed
at creating the conditions to facilitate the beginning of the constitutional committee ’s
work in Geneva and to building confidence between the parties to the conflict. The
statement also reflected the launch of discussions about the conditions necessary for
the safe and voluntary return of internally displaced persons and refugees.
Protection
13. Air and ground-based strikes continued to kill and injure civilians and damage
and destroy civilian infrastructure. Explosive weapons continued to be fired into
populated areas, killing and injuring civilians and destroying and damaging vital
infrastructure. Explosive hazards in populated areas killed and injured civilians and
impeded humanitarian access. The use of improvised explosive devices in some areas
added to the complexity of the explosive hazard threat. The many civilian casualties
and the scale of the destruction of civilian infrastructure remained a strong indication
that violations were continuing of the fundamental rules of distinction, proportionality
and precaution and, in particular, of the prohibition on the launching of indiscriminate
attacks.
14. Fighting continued to have an impact on civilian infrastructure, including
medical facilities, schools, markets and places of worship. According to information
received by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR), civilian casualties occurred in various governorates, possibly in violation
of international humanitarian law (see annex). OHCHR has documented alleged
violations committed by parties to the conflict, including government forces and their
allies, non-State armed opposition groups and their allies, and Security Council designated terrorist groups.
15. Notwithstanding the call upon the Syrian authorities by the Human Rights
Council, in its resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22, to cooperate with OHCHR, including
through the establishment of a field presence with the mandate to protect and promote
human rights, OHCHR reporting remained limited, given that the Government had
not granted it access to the country.
4/15

18-13693

S/2018/777

16. OHCHR continued to receive reports of civilians being detained by non -State
armed opposition groups. In an incident on 16 July, a civilian was taken by non -State
armed opposition fighters from his office in Afrin in western rural Aleppo
Governorate, reportedly for not officially registering his work with the de facto
authorities in control of the city.
17. In an incident on 13 July, members of the Syrian Democratic Forces in Raqqah
held 25 women who were protesting against the detention of their husbands in one of
the prisons run by the group in the city. The women were held for 24 hours before
being released after the intervention of tribal and community leaders. They were also
accused of having ties to ISIL.
18. The reporting period was also marked by numerous incidents of the killing of
civilians and of fighters who had reportedly surrendered. On 25 July, while ISIL
launched coordinated suicide attacks on the city of Suwayda ’ that killed hundreds of
people, scores of ISIL militants attacked civilians inside their homes in the eastern
and north-eastern parts of the governorate. Civilians were gunned down in front of
their families in at least eight villages, while at least 27 women and children were
abducted from Shubayki, a village in the eastern part of the governorate. Reports
indicate that the people were being used as hostages to compel the government forces
and their allies to halt their offensive against ISIL in the Yarmouk basin in western
Dar‘a Governorate. ISIL fighters reportedly took women from a handful of houses in
the village and forced them to knock on their neighbours’ doors, then killing and
abducting more civilians in their homes. Photographs of some of the abductees were
later tweeted by ISIL, with threats to burn them alive if the Govern ment did not cease
its operations in western Dar‘a Governorate and release ISIL prisoners. Many other
civilians remained missing at the time of writing.
19. Reportedly, on 30 and 31 July, ISIL fighters who had surrendered and accepted
a reconciliation agreement with the government forces and their allies in the Yarmouk
basin were killed by pro-government forces and their allies in Dar‘a. Some civilians
allegedly affiliated with ISIL were also reportedly killed as the government forces
and their allies advanced. The killings reportedly took place in the Yarmouk basin,
including in Ma’ariyah and Kuwayyah. OHCHR received several pleas from family
members in Ma’ariyah alleging that the men had been killed in front of their family
members.
20. The United Nations and its health partners verified two attacks that affected
health-care facilities and personnel and left a health worker dead. On 5 July, a high explosive homemade rocket reportedly struck the Dar‘a Directorate of Health
building, causing material damage. On 17 July, the national hospital in Nawa was
reportedly damaged as a result of the military campaign in the south -west. The
hospital was separately operated by both the Directorate of Health and non -State
armed groups. Its director was reportedly killed, but no casualties were reported
among Directorate staff. The hospital was partially damaged and remained out of
service as at the end of the reporting period.
21. Educational facilities also continued to be affected by the fighting. On 18 July,
an improvised explosive device reportedly exploded near a school in Salqin, in north eastern rural Idlib Governorate. No casualties were reported.

18-13693

5/15

S/2018/777

Humanitarian access
Box 2
Key points
1.
United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to reach millions
of people in need. Humanitarian assistance provided from within the Syrian Arab
Republic by United Nations agencies based in the country to regularly accessible
locations in government-controlled areas reached more than 3.3 million people with
food assistance through 2,270 deliveries.
2.
Four inter-agency humanitarian convoys carrying life-saving relief, food and
medical supplies were deployed in July to the hard-to-reach locations of Duma in
Rif Dimashq, Hulah in northern rural Homs, Harbinafsih in southern rural Hama and
Bayt Jinn, Baytima, Bayt Sabir and Kafr Hawar in Rif Dimashq, reaching 133,500
people in need.
3.
Cross-border assistance, authorized under Security Council resolutions 2165
(2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2393 (2017), remained a vital part of the
humanitarian response. In July, 403 trucks (18 consignments) delivered life -saving
assistance to more than 680,000 people through cross-border deliveries. Nevertheless,
United Nations humanitarian cross-border operations through Jordan remained
suspended during the reporting period.
4.
Continued significant military escalation in the south-western Syrian Arab
Republic resulted in the displacement of up to 325,000 persons by early July. By the
end of the month, 180,000 people, including some 100,000 in Qunaytirah Governorate,
were estimated to remain newly displaced in affected areas. The United Nations
humanitarian response drew on supplies pre-positioned through cross-border deliveries
from Jordan, which remained suspended throughout the reporting period, and
assistance delivered from inside the country. Nevertheless, those newly displaced in
Qunaytirah remained largely cut off from that assistance.

22. The United Nations estimates that, as at the end of the reporting period, some
1.48 million people were living in hard-to-reach locations in the Syrian Arab Republic.
An area is considered by the United Nations to be hard to reach when it is not regularly
accessible to humanitarian actors for the purposes of sustained humanitarian
programming as a result of denial of access, including the need to negotiate access on
an ad hoc basis, or owing to restrictions such as active conflict, multiple security
checkpoints or the failure of the authorities to provide timely approval.
23. Under the United Nations inter-agency convoy plan for July and August, access
was requested to 25 hard-to-reach areas, with the objective of reaching 939,300
people. In July, four inter-agency convoys were authorized to deploy to the hard -toreach locations of Duma in Rif Dimashq, Hulah in northern rural Homs, Harbinafsih
in southern rural Hama and Bayt Jinn, Baytima, Bayt Sabir and Kafr Hawar in
Rif Dimashq, providing multisectoral assistance to 133,500 people (see table 1 and
figure I).

6/15

18-13693

S/2018/777

Table 1
Inter-agency cross-line humanitarian convoys, July 2018
Requested target
(number of
beneficiaries)

Number of
beneficiaries
reached

Type of
assistance

Date

Location

1 July

Duma

25 000

25 000

Multisectoral

15 July

Hulah

71 000

71 000

Multisectoral

15 July

Harbinafsih

18 000

18 000

Multisectoral

19 July

Bayt Jinn, Baytima, Bayt Sabir and
Kafr Hawar

19 500

19 500

Multisectoral

Figure I
Inter-agency humanitarian operations, July 2018

People reached in hard-to-reach areas

Inter-agency convoys

133,500

4

9%

Number of people in hard-to-reach areas

Proportion of people reached in hard-to-reach areas

1.48 million

Humanitarian response
24. United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners reached millions of people
in need, including women and children, through all available access routes, including:
(a) humanitarian operations from within the Syrian Arab Republic, whereby
humanitarian deliveries reach those in need without crossing conflict lines; (b) cross line convoys, whereby assistance from within the country i s delivered across conflict
lines; and (c) cross-border deliveries, whereby assistance is provided to those in need
from neighbouring countries (see tables 2 and 3). In addition to the United Nations
and its partners, the Government and non-governmental organizations continued to
deliver life-saving assistance to people in need. The local authorities in many areas
controlled by non-State armed opposition groups also continued to provide services
where possible.
25. Individual agencies continued to submit requests for single-agency deliveries.
Such deliveries are undertaken by United Nations agencies based in Damascus to
regularly accessible areas. In July, all 2,270 official requests submitted by the World
Food Programme to the Syrian authorities to obtain facilitation letters for the transport
of food assistance were approved. UNHCR submitted 43 requests for facilitation
letters for the movement of core relief items and livelihood kits, all of which were
approved. More than 1.4 million people were reached with multisectoral support,
including 188,000 children and mothers receiving primary health -care and
immunization services. In addition, an estimated 193,000 children and pregnant and
lactating women were provided with nutritional supplements and services. S ome
130,000 children benefited from essential learning materials and remedial education,
and 209,000 children from protection and psychosocial support services.
Approximately 3.3 million people received food assistance and more than 1 million
people benefited from water, sanitation and hygiene services and supplies.

18-13693

7/15

S/2018/777

Table 2
People reached by the United Nations and other organizations through all
modalities, July 2018
Organization

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
International Organization for Migration

Number of
people reached

30 000
92 000

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

2 840 000

United Nations Children’s Fund

1 400 000

United Nations Development Programme

840 000

United Nations Population Fund

300 000

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

132 000

World Food Programme

3 300 000

World Health Organization

760 000

26. In eastern Ghutah, the Syrian authorities reported that 9,762 people remained in
displacement sites in Rif Dimashq. United Nations personnel were unable to reach
those sites for several weeks, but continued to receive reports that men and boys
between 15 and 55 years of age accounted for the majority of those remaining.
Moreover, humanitarian access to civilians in need in eastern Ghutah remained
challenging. Nevertheless, on 1 July, the United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent delivered multisectoral assistance to Duma for 25,000 people, completing
the convoy of 10 June for 60,000 people in need. On 26 July, United Nations agencies
were authorized to join a Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoy to Duma, delivering
humanitarian aid, including medicines and shelter materials, which had been provided
by France and transported into the country with the support of the Russian Federation.
United Nations personnel also assessed health needs while in Duma.
27. An estimated 138,800 persons remained displaced from Afrin district in the
Tall Rif‘at, Nubl, Zahra’ and Fafin areas of Aleppo Governorate. Those displaced to
Tall Rif‘at and other areas have largely been accessible to humanitarian organizations
operating from Aleppo. Humanitarian access to the city of Afrin from within the
Syrian Arab Republic has not yet received the necessary approvals from the Syrian
authorities. While the Turkish authorities provide the majority of the response in those
areas, the United Nations, through its cross-border humanitarian partners, is also
contributing to life-saving services and activities in the district. Particular efforts have
been made in the health and food security sectors. Nevertheless, needs are considered
to remain high, with most health facilities in rural areas closed, many service
providers having fled the area and a large proportion of schools, markets and bakeries
not yet functional, owing to explosive remnants of war and the continued absence of
staff, workers and tradespeople. In particular, reports indicate that people in the a rea
have high rates of renal problems; dedicated renal treatment has been ramped up.
28. In Raqqah Governorate, an estimated 147,000 people have returned to the city
of Raqqah since the end of hostilities in October 2017. Most have settled in areas with
comparatively less infrastructure damage and explosive hazard contamination.
Scaling up the humanitarian response and capacity has been challenging because of
the high level of contamination from mines and unexploded ordnance, which pose
significant threats to returnees and humanitarian workers.
29. Cross-border deliveries continued under the terms of resolutions 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016) and 2393 (2017) (see figure II and table 3).
In line with those resolutions, the United Nations notified the Syrian authorities in
8/15

18-13693

S/2018/777

advance of each shipment, including its contents, its destination and the number of
beneficiaries expected to be reached.
30. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations as authorized under resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014),
2258 (2015) and 2393 (2017). The Mechanism monitored the delivery of 18
consignments by seven United Nations agencies, consisting of 403 trucks, from three
border crossings: 9 from Bab al-Hawa (341 trucks), 8 from Bab al-Salam (57 trucks)
and 1 from Ya‘rubiyah (5 trucks). There were no concerns or questions about the
humanitarian nature of the consignments. The United Nations provided 48 -hour
notice to the Government regarding all shipments. Once in the country, United
Nations partners ensured that the shipments arrived at the designated warehouses.
Independent third-party companies contracted by the United Nations ensured
independent verification of the assistance arriving at the warehouses and monitored
the distribution and/or service provision. The Mechanism continued to benefit from
the excellent cooperation of the Governments of Iraq, Jordan and Turkey.
31. Since cross-border operations began in July 2014, following the adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014), the United Nations has conducted more than 849 cross-border
consignments, with more than 21,396 trucks (14,544 through Bab al -Hawa and 2,210
through Bab al-Salam from Turkey; 4,605 through Ramtha from Jordan; and 37
through Ya‘rubiyah from Iraq). Those operations complement and support the aid
provided by international and Syrian non-governmental organizations that provide
services to millions more from neighbouring countries.
32. Humanitarian cross-border operations through Jordan remained suspended.
Nevertheless, the World Food Programme and its implementing partners delivered
food assistance to more than 540,000 people from the two authorized cross -border
entry points with Turkey. The World Health Organization also conducted health and
medical deliveries, providing some 179,000 treatments through the cross -border
mechanism. In the northern Syrian Arab Republic, the United Nations Children ’s
Fund delivered winter kits, child protection assistance, nutrition, education, health
and water, sanitation and hygiene supplies through cross-border shipments. More than
99,400 people benefited from improved access to clean water through the operation
and maintenance of water and sanitation systems. Primary health-care services were
provided to 86,000 people through mobile and fixed health services. Some 25,821
children under 5 years of age were reached with micronutrient supplies. Some 34,355
children under 5 years of age, in addition to pregnant and lactating mothers, were
screened for acute malnutrition, and 160 of them, found to be severely malnourished,
received the appropriate treatment. The United Nations also pre -positioned nutrition
supplies sufficient for 150,000 beneficiaries in Idlib and rural Aleppo and is planning
another round of pre-positioning there.
33. In the southern Syrian Arab Republic, United Nations humanitarian cross -border
operations have been suspended since late June. Humanitarian needs continue to
grow, however, with the continued significant military escalation resulting in the
displacement of up to 325,000 people by early July. By the end of the month, 180,000
people, including some 100,000 in Qunaytirah Governorate, were estimated to remain
newly displaced in affected areas. The United Nations humanitarian response drew
on pre-positioned supplies and assistance delivered from inside the country.
Nevertheless, those newly displaced in Qunaytirah remained largely cut off from that
assistance, given that cross-border deliveries from Jordan remained suspended and
access to Qunaytirah from within the country was not authorized.
34. UNHCR and its partners continued to enhance the response to the protection
needs of internally displaced persons, returnees and other crisis-affected populations.
By the end of July, 23,272 protection interventions had been conducted, reaching
18-13693

9/15

S/2018/777

607,258 individuals, including 293,075 benefiting from general protection activities,
6,509 benefiting from child protection activities and 89,890 reached through more
than 3,754 awareness-raising campaigns across 12 governorates on the prevention of
and response to sexual and gender-based violence. As at July, the total number of
functioning UNHCR-funded community centres and mobile units stood at 96
community centres, 17 satellite centres and 81 mobile units, supported by 2,272
outreach volunteers. That network provided protection-related services, including
community mobilization, child protection, legal aid, the prevention of and respo nse
to sexual and gender-based violence, livelihood services and services for persons with
specific needs, to benefit some 2.6 million internally displaced persons, returnees,
host communities and other crisis-affected people across 12 governorates. In July,
142,072 internally displaced persons in Damascus, Rif Dimashq, Suwayda ’, Dar‘a,
Qunaytirah, Tartus, Ladhiqiyah, Homs, Hama, Aleppo and Hasakah were direct
beneficiaries of the UNHCR legal assistance programme, including counselling;
awareness sessions on legal topics, including civil documentation and women’s
rights; and lawyers’ direct interventions before courts and administrative bodies.
35. Moreover, the United Nations Population Fund reached some 300,000 people,
carrying out activities relating to reproductive health and the prevention of and
response to sexual and gender-based violence and youth-related violence. In addition,
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) distributed food parcels to some 112,000 Palestine refugees, and 8,468
Palestine refugees displaced from Yarmouk received ready-to-eat food baskets in July.
A total of 22,164 individuals received cash assistance through the regular cash
distribution round, and 134 Palestine refugees displaced from Yarmouk and eastern
Ghutah benefited from a one-time payment of $70 per family. Moreover, according
to UNRWA estimates, some 25,000 to 28,000 Palestine refugees are located in the
southern Syrian Arab Republic, mainly in the city of Dar ‘a, Muzayrib and Jilin.
UNRWA distributed ready-to-eat food baskets, hygiene kits and non-food items to
some 2,300 displaced Palestine refugees in the southern Syrian Arab Republic.
Figure II
Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners by
cluster through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, July 2018
(Thousands)

680
254
0

Education

10/15

0

Nutrition

32

58

Non-food
Non-food
Water,
items/
items/Shelter
sanitation
shelter
and hygiene

Health

Food

18-13693

S/2018/777

Table 3
Number of beneficiaries targeted through cross-border deliveries by sector and by district,
July 2018

Nutrition

Water,
sanitation
and hygiene

Education

Food

Health

Non-food
items/shelter

Bab

–

–

2 080

4 300

–

2 500

Aleppo

I‘zaz

–

83 770

212 160

2 500

–

46 250

Aleppo

Jabal Sim‘an

–

42 930

–

7 695

–

–

Aleppo

Jarabulus

–

–

2 080

–

–

–

Hama

Muhradah

–

–

–

–

–

–

Hasakah

Qamishli

–

–

26 400

–

–

–

Idlib

Ariha

–

46 750

–

–

–

–

Idlib

Harim

–

338 500

5 000

–

–

3 750

Idlib

Idlib

–

49 000

6 000

17 300

–

5 000

Idlib

Jisr al-Shughur

–

480

–

–

–

–

Idlib

Ma‘arrah

–

118 375

–

–

–

–

Governorate

District

Aleppo

36. The Russian Federation sent informational bulletins to the United Nations from
the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic, in which
it outlined the provision of bilateral relief assistance. Other Member States also
continued to provide bilateral and other forms of humanitarian assistance.
Visas and registrations
37. A total of 60 new United Nations visa requests were submitted to the
Government in July. Of those, 33 were approved, 26 remained pending and 1 was
cancelled by the United Nations. Of the new visa applications submitted in June, 22
were approved in July, while 5 remained pending. A total of 67 United Nations visa
renewal requests were submitted in July, of which 35 were approved, 31 remained
pending and 1 was rejected. An additional 48 requests for visa renewals submitted in
June were approved in July. For some United Nations entities in the Syrian Arab
Republic, a significant number of staff are not yet in place or cannot be replaced
owing to the non-issuance of visas for months, formal requests notwithstanding.
38. A total of 24 international non-governmental organizations are registered with
the Government to operate in the country.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
39. Agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system continued to
implement programmes in areas affected by frequent clashes among parties to the
conflict, air strikes, the regular exchange of indirect artillery fire and asymmetrical
attacks. As a result of activities relating to the armed conflict, significant populated
areas became highly contaminated with unexploded ordnance, explosive remnants of
war and landmines, which pose an elevated risk to the implementation of United
Nations activities in those areas.
40. Since the beginning of the conflict, dozens of humanitarian workers have been
killed, including 22 staff members of the United Nations and organizations of the
United Nations system, 18 of whom were staff members of UNRWA; 66 staff
members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; and 8 staff members and

18-13693

11/15

S/2018/777

volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. Many staff members of international
and national non-governmental organizations have also reportedly been killed.
41. A total of 28 staff members of agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system (1 staff member of the United Nations Development Programme, 1 staff member
of the Department of Safety and Security and 26 UNRWA staff members) were detained
or missing as at the end of the reporting period.

III. Observations
42. Intense military activity remained a worrying trend du ring the reporting period
and I am gravely concerned about further military escalation, in particular in the
north-western Syrian Arab Republic — a de-escalation area — where some 3 million
Syrians continue to reside. Increased military escalation there, similar to that seen
elsewhere in the country, would not only trigger further massive population
movements but also have catastrophic consequences for civilians in terms of
protection and access to humanitarian assistance and basic services. I urge all part ies
to abide by the de-escalation agreement and I remind all parties to the conflict of their
obligations under international humanitarian law to protect civilians and civilian
objects; not to make civilian objects the target of attack and to take special care in
military operations to avoid damage to buildings dedicated to education, including
schools; and to respect and protect medical personnel and not to direct attacks against
hospitals and other medical facilities. Civilians wishing to flee the fighting should be
allowed to do so without hindrance and in full dignity and safety, while those wishing
to stay must also be protected. Parties to the conflict may not order the displacement
of civilians for reasons relating to the conflict unless the security of the civilians
involved or imperative military reasons demand it.
43. Ensuring safe, sustained, timely and unimpeded access for people in need
throughout the country remains essential to avoiding a further deteriorat ion in the
humanitarian situation. However, United Nations access to areas across conflict lines
and areas the control of which has recently changed remains severely limited. In areas
the control of which has recently changed, access restrictions have been further
challenged by the lack of basic services, as service providers have been displaced as
part of local agreements reached between the Syrian authorities and non -State armed
opposition groups. I remind all parties to the conflict of their obligation u nder
international humanitarian law to respect and protect medical and humanitarian
personnel and facilities. The teachers and doctors who provided essential basic
services before changes in control must be protected and those whom they supported
must continue to receive the essential basic services that they need. I further remind
parties that the rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief for civilians in
need that is impartial in character and conducted without any adverse distinction must
be allowed and facilitated without delay.
44. I condemn in the strongest terms the callous attacks directly targeting civilians
and threats against civilians, including women and children, perpetrated by ISIL in
Suwayda’. Such blatant disregard for human life and dignity, contrary to the
obligations of all parties engaged in armed conflict under international law, cannot be
tolerated. I equally condemn reports of extrajudicial killings by pro -government
forces of fighters who had laid down their arms. I remind al l parties that international
humanitarian law prohibits violence to the lives of persons and the taking hostage of
civilians and fighters who have laid down their arms, as well as the passing of
sentences and the carrying out of executions without previous judgment pronounced
by a regularly constituted court, affording all the judicial guarantees that are
recognized as indispensable by civilized peoples. Such acts constitute serious

12/15

18-13693

S/2018/777

violations of common article 3 of the Geneva Conventions and are considered war
crimes and gross violations of international human rights law.
45. I reiterate that the perpetrators of serious violations of international humanitarian
law must be held accountable. Such a step is central to achieving sustainable peace in
the Syrian Arab Republic. I also reiterate my call for the situation in the country to be
referred to the International Criminal Court.
46. I also call upon all parties to the conflict, all States, civil society and the United
Nations system to cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, in particular by providing information and documentation.
47. The UNHCR protection thresholds and parameters for refugee return remain the
normative framework that must guide efforts towards Syrians returning to their
homes. I will continue to draw attention to UNHCR expertise and experience
stemming from more than 60 years of global operational engagement in responding
to massive refugee crises. In any case, the United Nations system stands ready to
assist refugees and internally displaced persons who voluntarily return to thei r place
of origin.
48. I continue to support my Special Envoy as he pursues his careful consultations,
in an accelerated manner, on the composition of the constitutional committee and the
full range of issues needed to launch its proceedings. I continue to call upon Iran
(Islamic Republic of), the Russian Federation and Turkey, as the co -conveners of the
meeting in Sochi in January 2018, and other key members of the international
community to support his efforts. I also call upon the Government of the Syria n Arab
Republic and the opposition to fully support those efforts as part of reaching a
political solution in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). There can be only one
agenda for us all: to end the suffering of the Syrian people and to find a sustainable
solution to the conflict in the country through an inclusive and Syrian -led political
process that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012.

18-13693

13/15

S/2018/777

Annex
Reported incidents affecting civilians, recorded by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
July 2018 *
Aleppo Governorate
• On 4 July, at least 1 civilian was killed and 17 others were injured when an
improvised explosive device detonated close to a crowd of civilians in the town
of Hayyah, in the Manbij area of eastern rural Aleppo.
• On 5 July, at least three civilians were injured when a roadside improvised
explosive device detonated in the Manbij area.
• On 6 July, an improvised explosive device detonated in the vicinity of a health
clinic and close to the office of the Northern Brigade, a non -State armed
opposition group, in Jarabulus, north-eastern rural Aleppo. The explosion
injured six civilians, including three women and a child.
• On 8 July, three civilians, including a child, were killed and six others injured
when an improvised explosive device allegedly attached to a motorbike
detonated in a marketplace in the town of Qabbasin, in Bab district, northern
Aleppo.
• On 23 July, at around 11 a.m., an attack allegedly employing a vehicle-borne
improvised explosive device occurred in the vicinity of the local council
building in the town of Akhtarin, northern rural Aleppo. Two civilians were
killed and at least 11 others injured.
• On 30 July, two civilians were killed and seven others injured when what were
alleged to be ground-based strikes hit the Hamdaniyah neighbourhood of the
government-held city of Aleppo.
Hasakah Governorate
• On 4 July, at least six civilians from the same family, including two women and
a child, were killed when what was allegedly an air strike hit a residential area
in Tarraf, a village held by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in the Tall
al-Shayir area of southern rural Hasakah.
Qunaytirah Governorate
• On 17 July, at around 10.15 a.m., at least 13 civilians, including 3 women and
10 children from two families, were killed and a woman was seriously injured
when what was allegedly an air strike hit a school in the town of Ayn al -Tinah.
The victims were reportedly internally displaced persons who had fled from
Harah, Dar‘a Governorate.

* In line with Security Council resolution 2258 (2015), the present description of incidents that
are reported to have occurred during the month relates to compliance with Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) by all parties in the Syrian Arab Republic. The
information is provided without prejudice to the work of the Task Force on the Ceasefire of the
International Syria Support Group. The reporting is not a comprehensive listing of all violations
of international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of international human rights law
that took place in the Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting period.
14/15

18-13693

S/2018/777

Suwayda’ Governorate
• On 25 July, at around dawn, coordinated assaults, including with suicide attacks,
hit civilian and military targets in the government-held governorate. The attacks
hit a marketplace and in the vicinity of the Najmah and Mashnaqah roundabouts
in the city of Suwayda’. Other areas in eastern and north-eastern rural parts of
the governorate were also hit. ISIL claimed responsibility. Reports indicated that
at least 220 people (both military personnel and civilians) were killed or injured,
but the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
could not substantiate how many were civilians and how many military personnel.
Dar‘a Governorate
• On 8 July, three civilians, including a woman and a child, were killed and four
injured when what was allegedly an air strike hit the town of Om Mayadin,
eastern Dar‘a.
• On 17 July, four civilians, including a woman, were killed when what were
alleged to be air strikes hit a residential area in the town of Aliyah, western
Dar‘a.
• Also on 17 July, two sibling children were killed when what were alleged to be
air strikes hit the town of Tasil, in the ISIL-held Yarmouk basin area of western
Dar‘a.
• On 20 July, four civilians, including a woman and two children, were killed in
what were alleged to be air strikes on a residential area in Tasil.
• On 31 July, at least 12 civilians were killed and 27 others injured when what
were alleged to be air and ground-based strikes hit the town of Shajarah and the
Kuwayyah area in the ISIL-held Yarmouk basin.
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On the afternoon of 6 July, four civilians, including a woman and a child, were
killed and five injured when a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device
allegedly hit the office of the Syrian Democratic Forces in the town of Busayrah
in eastern Dayr al-Zawr, held by the Kurdish-dominated Syrian Democratic
Forces.
• On the evening of 12 July, an ice factory was hit by what were alleged to be air
strikes in the vicinity of the Muzan intersection between the ISIL -held town of
Susah and Baghuz Fawqani in the eastern rural part of the governorate. At least
28 civilians were killed.
Idlib Governorate
• On 10 July, civilians were injured in western rural Idlib in what were alleged to
be air strikes in the vicinity of the Jisr al-Shughur area. A woman and two
children were injured in Bashiriyah Muhambal and a civilian was injured in the
village of Mishmishan, in rural Jisr al-Shughur.
• On 12 July, at around 4 p.m., a residential area in the village of Kanisat Bani
Izz, in the Sahl al-Ruj area located near Jisr al-Shughur, was hit by what were
alleged to be air strikes, leaving three civilians, including a woman and two
children, dead and eight civilians, including five women, injured.

18-13693

15/15
