VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

mental freedoms, human solidarity and dedication to the
objectives of progress and development,
Convinced of the imperative need to harness the ener­
gies, enthusiasms and creative abilities of youth to the
tasks of nation-building, the struggle for self-determina­
tion and national independence, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, against foreign domination
and occupation, and for the economic, social and cultural
advancement of peoples, the implementation of the new
international economic order, the preservation of world
peace and the promotion of international co-operation and
understanding,
Bearing in mind that 1985 is the fortieth anniversary of
the United Nations,
Emphasizing again that the United Nations should pay
more attention to the role of young people in the world of
today and to their demands for the world of tomorrow,
Convinced that the preparation for and observance in
1985 of the International Youth Year with the motto
"Participation, Development, Peace" will offer a useful
and significant opportunity for drawing attention to the
situation and specific needs and aspirations of youth, for
increasing co-operation at all levels in dealing with youth
issues, for undertaking concerted action programmes in
favour of youth and for involving young people in the
study and resolution of major national, regional and inter­
national problems,
Aware that, for the International Youth Year to be suc­
cessful and to maximize its impact and practical efficiency,
adequate preparation and the widespread support of Gov­
ernments, all specialized agencies, international intergov­
ernmental and non-governmental organizations and the
public will be required,
Recalling that the activities of the International Youth
Year at the international level should be primarily sup­
portive of activities undertaken relative to regional,
national and local youth issues,
Recognizing the important role of United Nations
bodies, the specialized agencies and the regional commis­
sions in promoting international co-operation in the field
of youth and the necessity of strengthening their role in the
effective implementation of the Specific Programme of
Measures and Activities to be undertaken prior to and
during the International Youth Year: Participation, Devel­
opment, Peace,42
Aware of the contribution which the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization is
making to the promotion of international co-operation in
the field of youth,
Noting with satisfaction the progress made in the imple­
mentation of the Specific Programme of Measures and
Activities to be undertaken prior to and during the Inter­
national Youth Year,
Also noting with satisfaction that many Governments
have established national committees or other mecha­
nisms to facilitate the planning, implementation and co­
ordination of the activities related to the preparation for
and observance of the International Youth Year.
I. Endorses the recommendations made by the Advi­
sory Committee for the International Youth Year con­
tained in the report on its third session; 43
2. Decides to devote an appropriate number of plenary
meetings at its fortieth session, in 1985, to policies and
programmes relating to youth and to designate these meet­
ings as the United Nations World Conference for the
42A/36/215, annex. sect. IV, decision I (I).

193

International Youth Year which should take place in keep­
ing with the procedures and practices of the General
Assembly;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take all measures
recommended by the Advisory Committee for the Interna­
tional Youth Year with a view to ensuring an appropriate
observance of the International Youth Year within the
United Nations system;
4. Recommends to all Member States that they should
include youth representatives in their delegations to the
fortieth session of the General Assembly;
5. Decides that the fourth session of the Advisory
Committee for the International Youth Year shall be con­
vened, within existing resources, at Vienna. from 25
March to 3 April 1985 with a view to working out, on the
basis of a draft prepared by the Secretary-General, guide­
lines for further planning and suitable follow-up in the
field of youth which will be transmitted for approval to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session;
6. Stresses again the importance of active and direct
participation of youth organizations in the activities
organized at the local, national, regional and international
levels for the preparation for and observance of the Inter­
national Youth Year;
7. Invites all international governmental and non-gov­
ernmental organizations that have planned specific activ­
ities devoted to the International Youth Year, as well as
the organizers of international youth conferences and festi­
vals in 1985, to be inspired, in the process of preparing
and implementing those activities, by the motto of the
International Youth Year: "Participation, Development.
Peace" and by the provisions of the Specific Programme of
Measures and Activities to be undertaken prior to and
during the International Youth Year endorsed by the
General Assembly;
8. Also invites the organizers of international youth
conferences and festivals in 1985 to inform the General
Assembly at its fortieth session, through the Secretary­
General, of the results of those activities and the docu­
ments adopted;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "International Youth
Year: Participation, Development, Peace" and to grant it
high priority.
7 I st plenary meetmg

23 November 1984

39/23. Efforts and measures for securing the imple­
mentation and the enjoyment by youth of
human rights, particularly the right to educa­
tion and to work
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/29 of 13 November 1981,
37/49 of 3 December 1982 and 38/23 of 22 November
1983, in which it, inter alia, recognized the need to adopt
appropriate measures for securing the implementation and
the enjoyment by youth of human rights, particularly the
right to education and to work,
Recalling also its resolution 34/ I 51 of l 7 December
1979, by which it decided to designate 1985 as Interna­
tional Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace.
Convinced that it is necessary to ensure full enjoyment
by youth of the rights stipulated in the Universal Declara43 A/391262, annex

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session
194
----------------------=---

tion of Human Rights,44 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights45 and the Interna­
tional Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,45 with spe­
cial regard for the right to education and to work,
Aware of the fact that insufficient education and the
unemployment of young people limit their ability to parti­
cipate in the development process, and, in this regard,
emphasizing the importance of secondary and higher edu­
cation for young people, as well as access for them to
appropriate technical and vocational guidance and training
programmes,
Expressing its serious interest in the success of the forth­
coming International Youth Year which should, inter alia,
promote increasing participation of young people in the
socio-economic life of their country,
1. Calls upon all States, all governmental and non-gov­
ernmental organizations and the interested bodies of the
United Nations and specialized agencies to pay continuous
attention to the implementation of General Assembly res­
olutions 36/29, 37/49 and 38/23 relating to efforts and
measures aimed at the promotion of human rights and
their enjoyment by youth, particularly the right to educa­
tion and vocational training and to work, with a view to
resolving the problem of unemployment among youth;
2. Requests the Advisory Committee for the Interna­
tional Youth Year to pay, in its activities, full attention to
resolutions 36/29, 37/49 and 38/23 and to all relevant
international human rights instruments, particularly in
elaborating guidelines for further planning and suitable
follow-up in the field of youth;
3. Invites national co-ordinating committees or other
organs of co-ordination for the International Youth Year:
Participation, Development, Peace to give appropriate pri­
ority in the activities to be undertaken during the Year to
the implementation and the enjoyment by youth of human
rights, particularly the right to education and to work;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to pay adequate
attention, in his report surveying the implementation of
the Specific Programme of Measures and Activities to be
undertaken prior to and during the International Youth
Year, 46 to the enjoyment by youth of human rights, partic­
ularly to the right to education and to work.
71st plenary meeting
23 November I 984

39/24. Channels of communication between the
United Nations and youth and youth
organizations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/135 of 16 December 1977
and 36/17 of 9 November 1981, in which it adopted
guidelines for the improvement of the channels of commu­
nication between the United Nations and youth and youth
organizations, and also recalling its resolution 38/26 of 22
November 1983,
Bearing in mind the importance of the existence of effec­
tive channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations for the proper
information of young people and their effective participa­
tion in the work of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies at the national, regional and international levels.
44 Resolution 21 7 A (lll).
45 See resolution 2200 A (XXI). annex.
46 N36/2 I 5, annex, sect. IV. dension I (I)

raking note of the report of the Secretary-General
relating to youth.4 •
Also taking note of the report of the Expert Group meet­
ing on channels of communication. held at Vienna from 9
to 13 January 1984,
Further taking note of the report of the Advisory Com­
mittee for the International Youth Year on its third ses­
sion,43 specifically of the paragraphs dealing with the chan­
nels of communication,
Taking note of resolution 22 on youth adopted on
25 November 1983 by the General Conference of the
United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural
Organization, 48
Convinced that effective and proper functioning of chan­
nels of communication between the United Nations and
youth and youth organizations forms a basic prerequisite
for active involvement of young people in the work of the
l lnited Nations,
Equally convin.:ed that the effective participation of
youth representatives from the Member States in interna­
tional congresses dealing with youth issues will enhance
and strengthen the current and future channels of commu­
nication and will help in understanding the problems
facing youth in our contemporary world,
I. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
detailed. structured and evaluative report on the imple­
mentation of the guidelines and additional guidelines for
the improvement of the channels of communication,
which would serve as a background paper at the fourth ses­
sion of the Advisory Committee for the International
Youth Year, and to submit that report to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session;
2. Calls upon Member States, United Nations bodies,
specialized agencies and other intergovernmental organi­
zations to implement fully the guidelines relating to the
channels of communication not only in their general
terms. but also in concrete projects dealing with issues of
importance to young people:
3. Calls upon the national co-ordinating committees of
the International Youth Year and other similar structures
to assist national youth organizations, upon their request,
in carrying out their role as channels of communication
between the United Nations and youth and youth
organizations:
4. Stresses the necessity of making use, within the
framework of the channels of communication, of mecha­
nisms which have been set up by youth and youth organi­
zations themselves at the national, regional and interna­
tional levels:
5. Decides to take up at its fortieth session the question
of the channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations on the basis of
the next report of the Advisory Committee for the Interna­
tional Youth Year
71st plenary meeting
23 November I 984

39125. Question of aging
The General Assembly.
Reaffirming its resolution 38/27 of 22 November 1983.
rn which it called upon Governments to make efforts to
implement the principles and recommendations contained
47E;I984i40 and Corr.I
48 United Nattons Fducat,onal. Sornt1fic and Cultural Organization.
R,n1rds o(the (iencra (',inf(·n-nn'. Tw,,nti·-sccond S(•ssion. vol I. R,,so/u
,',',)/'Vi, p

100
