S/PV.7760

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7760th meeting

Thursday, 25 August 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ibrahim. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulwafa
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Seck
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison
Mrs. Nuñez
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2016/666)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-26911 (E)
*1626911*

S/PV.7760

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2016/666)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Tanin,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Pristina.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Vlora
Çitaku to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/666, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tanin.
Mr. Tanin: I am pleased to update the Security
Council on recent key developments in Kosovo since
the Secretary-General’s previous report (S/2016/407)
and offer some observations.
The situation in Kosovo over the past three months
has been more stable than it had been during preceding
reporting period. Nonetheless, security threats and
political tensions remained beneath the surface.
Following a period of relative calm, after months of
unruly stand-offs in the Kosovo Assembly, a single
2/25

25/08/2016

issue gave way to new controversy: the ratification
of the agreement on Kosovo’s territorial delineation
with the Republic of Montenegro. Political arguments
and accusations followed, often straying far from
the underlying facts. That irritated public sentiment,
obstructed the functioning of the Assembly and delayed
work on more pressing issues. Although the agreement
had been arrived at with informed international support,
the consideration of its ratification by the Assembly
was postponed. No doubt, consensus-building efforts
ought to have been made much earlier, well before the
issue became a lightning rod for rancour and partisan
debate. Regardless, new efforts have been undertaken
by political leaders in order to ensure all additional
questions are answered.
Meanwhile, the opposition parties continue
working from the wings to try to generate, exploit
and, if possible, prolong such moment in the supposed
crisis. Whatever success they may ultimately achieve
in strengthening an alternate pole of influence, the
opposition appears to be more aware that the use of
violence is counterproductive to that objective. In
addition, acts of political violence, including three
incidents involving explosives in August that targeted
the Assembly, the home of a Kosovo official and the
headquarters of a public broadcaster, are absolutely
unacceptable. That is a problem that should continue
to be managed responsibly by the authorities. From
my recent talks with top leaders in Kosovo, I have
the impression that they understand the need to place
realism and practicality higher on their political
agenda. Many have their eyes upon emerging wider
trends, and the opportunity those trends offer to seize
levers of opportunity and remove old obstacles in order
to achieve faster progress.
I have gained the same impression about local
leadership during my visits to municipalities and
communities throughout Kosovo. In Gjakovë/
Đakovica, the Mayor indicated that authority came with
responsibility, not just privilege. In North Mitrovica,
the main concerns were access to employment,
reliable public services, and confidence in governing
institutions. In Obilić/Kastriot, the impact of nearby
outdated energy facilities, over which the municipality
has had little or no say, endangers public health and
safety and reduces social cohesion and local economic
growth. In Vushtrri/Vučitrn, I learned that the different
communities are able to work together towards a
common future, and that inclusive governance is one
16-26911

25/08/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

of the key elements needed for that work. I heard the
desire for improved relations and more confidence
among the ethnic communities. Behind all of that, it
is apparent that economic, educational and healthcare issues, as well as the rule of law and combating
corruption, are the dominant concerns of people at the
local level, not inter-ethnic politics. Recently, a young
man in the Prizren region approached me to say that
corruption was the biggest problem for his generation
and for all people in Kosovo, a message I have heard on
many occasions.
Throughout all of the former Yugoslavia, the
immediate post-conflict generation has now reached
voting age, and many are now graduating from tertiary
education. Many young adults have known little of
public life besides divisive post-conflict rhetoric. If
stability and prosperity are to be achieved, the postconflict generation is in need of clearer direction and
better opportunities as inhabitants of modern Europe
and as world citizens. A lack of promising trades
and professions, public corruption and extremes of
economic inequality all fracture the communities far
more than ethnic or religious nationalism. Therefore,
an impetus for reconciliation emerges from below, but
in my view it needs to be strengthened from above as
well by leaders. I already hear that clearly from some
leaders. But I have also heard it from other segments
of society as well, where individuals recognize the
centrality of putting the past behind if there is to be
meaningful movement forward.
Having returned from Belgrade just yesterday, I was
also struck during my conversations with top leaders by
the emphasis given to regional cooperation and better
understanding of the positions of other sides when
working to overcome the obstacles to trust and progress.
As in the case of Pristina, they also specifically stressed
the need for the European Union-led dialogue to be
successful. Prime Minister Vučić in particular stressed
to me that too much time was being lost and that what
was needed was more serious and much more sustained
commitment and work on dialogue — not only from
leaders and negotiators but from the European Union
and from all of us in the international community
as well.
The European Union-led high level dialogue
remains a cornerstone in the road towards reconciliation.
It is the European Union perspective in the region that
continues to be a main driver of reform, particularly in
the vital areas of governance, the rule of law and human

S/PV.7760

rights. Progress continued to be made in some areas
during the reporting period, including the start of the
refurbishment of the Mitrovica Main Bridge, as well as
the narrowing of differences on the telecommunications
issue. With regard to other agreements, in particular
the agreement on the association/community of Serb
majority municipalities in Kosovo, more focused
work is clearly necessary. It is natural for delays in
implementation to lead to second-guessing of the
process itself by observers and participants alike.
Leadership from both sides is at least as important
as pragmatism and commitment, in order not only to
reinvigorate but possibly also to deepen the process
going forward.
Few of those displaced by the conflict have
returned to their homes, and of those who returned,
many have not stayed. Approximately 16,000 persons
remain displaced within Kosovo, with many more
outside. With the passage of time, many have by now
built new lives in their places of displacement. Yet
the voluntary, safe and dignified return of displaced
persons is a fundamental right, and that issue should, I
believe, be brought back into focus by all, including by
the international community.
In order to achieve returns, constructive engagement
is needed with returnees and receiving communities,
which must be matched by political commitment, but,
even more important, by the commitment of resources.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, some 9,400 displaced
persons are now registered to return. For that to take
place, clear and realistic commitments need to be
present, together with the allocation of the requisite
resources and efforts in order to ensure that the proper
conditions are in place.
Kosovo possesses a rich and diverse cultural
heritage that includes religious, linguistic, artistic and
social diversity. The Kosovo system has comprehensive
legislation protecting the freedoms of language use,
association and worship. It is the full implementation
and enforcement of those strong legislative frameworks
that remains an essential objective.
Over the past three months, there have been
no large-scale inter-ethnic disturbances, nor any
significant attacks against cultural sites. However,
vulnerable groups, in particular among non-majority
communities, have been subject to higher rates of
intimidation. Statistics in that area must always be

16-269113/25

S/PV.7760

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

25/08/2016

treated with enormous caution, but those available at
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) suggest that there are, on average,
around 25 potentially ethnically motivated crimes
recorded in Kosovo every month. All communities are
affected, and the primary motives behind the crimes are
frequently found not to have been political. But it bears
emphasizing that the victims of intimidation always
have a different perspective from those who have not
experienced it. More sensitivity to that essential truth
is needed by the authorities on all sides, as well as on
our part.

In recent days, we have been able to significantly
strengthen constructive engagement with Kosovo
leaders, which was reflected, among other things, in
substantive meetings with President Thaçi, Prime
Minister Mustafa and Foreign Minister Hoxhaj. My
constructive engagement with Belgrade leaders,
including my discussions this week with President
Nikolić, Prime Minister Vučić and Foreign Minister
Dačić, remain essential for maintaining our balanced
and objective role within the framework of regional
interaction and towards the full realization of our
mandate.

With respect to reconciliation, I wish to commend
the courageous initiatives taken by President Thaçi.
On 21 July, he visited and paid respects at a memorial
commemorating 14 Kosovo Serb civilians from Staro
Gradsko who had been murdered in that village shortly
after the end of hostilities. A few days later, he visited
another memorial to an unsolved crime against Kosovo
Serbs in the village of Goraždevac where, in 2003,
teenagers swimming in a river were murdered. Those
visits remind us also of the fact that all leaders share
a solemn responsibility to do more to help resolve the
missing persons cases, which date back from the time
of the conflict.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight that, during
the past few months, we have thoroughly reviewed the
activities of the Mission and developed a focused vision
not only for recalibrating and optimizing our work, but
also for creating an atmosphere with all stakeholders
that allows the Mission to engage more efficiently and
effectively on both existing issues and emerging issues,
such as the global problem of violent extremism and the
development of workable frameworks for reconciliation.
In short, we will be implementing the objectives that
the Security Council has entrusted to us in a more upto-date manner.

Seventeen years after the end of the conflict, the
fate of over 1,600 persons remains undetermined. All
communities are affected by the loss. The issue of the
missing should not be allowed to slip from the political
agenda, but the missing will be found, and their fates
determined, only if there is fundamental and sustained
commitment by all, including our Mission.
The phenomenon of violent extremism is a swiftly
evolving global challenge. The presence of radical
Islamist elements and organizers in Kosovo is known.
Local authorities have taken numerous strong measures
to mitigate the threat, but the presence of elements that
have participated in recent foreign wars gives us all
reasons to be vigilant and aware. The Kosovo authorities
have implemented a strong law enforcement approach
with respect to those who advocate violence and those
who facilitate volunteer fighters. As the authorities
have acknowledged, that can work only when it
goes hand in hand with a development approach that
effectively targets the specific socioeconomic drivers
of extremism in Kosovo. There is also an important role
to be played by the international community through
well-coordinated assistance, including from the United
Nations.
4/25

I thank the Council for its continuing support for
UNMIK.
The President: I thank Mr. Tanin for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Dačić.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English text
provided by the delegation): At the outset, I would like
to express my gratitude to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for presenting
the report (S/2016/666) of the Secretary-General and to
congratulate the President of the Security Council for
his successful stewardship of the affairs of the Council
during the month of August. I also extend my greetings
to all the members of the Security Council.
The members of the Security Council deal with
issues that pose security threats as they strive to fulfil
the principal task entrusted to them by the Charter of the
United Nations, namely, safeguarding of international
peace. In doing so, they often encounter problems
whose causes date back decades, even centuries.
Presumably, members of the Council are not familiar,
nor can they be, with all of the details, especially the
minute ones, and all the facts relating to each and every
problem that they are called upon to resolve. That puts
16-26911

25/08/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

an even greater obligation on those who come before the
Council to present only true facts — facts that they have
checked. Serbia’s representatives have always made
every effort to address the Council in a constructive
manner, as they wish to contribute to the process of
reconciliation and to the stability of the region, as well
as to the dialogue conducted in Brussels. Priština’s
representatives, however, continue to overload the
Council with falsehoods and lies, and lately they have
even engaged in outright propaganda.
At the previous meeting (see S/PV.7693) of the
Security Council on the situation in Kosovo and
Metohija, on 16 May, in addition to other fabrications,
we heard that Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija were
denied the right to play and that Albanian youngsters
had been beaten and arrested by the Serbian police just
because they were playing football. An uninformed
listener might have thought that what was being
described was a scene in a territory controlled by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. The next image he
could have conjured up was that of a public execution
of players on the sports field.
As in most countries in the world, football is the
most popular sport in Serbia. Surely, the most widely
known club from the southern Serbian province is the
Priština Football Club; its golden era was the mid-1980s
when it competed in Yugoslavia’s Federal League
I. Priština’s best player ever was Fadil Vokrri, the
current President of the so-called Football Association
of Kosovo. That very same Fadil Vokrri decided in
1986, when he finished his season with Priština, to
join no other club but the Partizan of Belgrade. Not
the Partizani of Tirana, but the Partizan of Belgrade,
where he played for three full years, while, incidentally,
Slobodan Milošević was in power. During that period,
Fadil Vokrri won caps 12 times while playing for
Yugoslavia, and in a match with Flamurtari of Albania,
he scored a goal and was voted the best player of the
match. He says today that he still supports Belgrade’s
Partizan team. In addition to Vokrri, other Kosovo and
Metohija Albanian footballers have played for Partizan,
some of whom are legends in that club.
Does it sound believable that a player, allegedly
abused, beaten and discriminated against simply
because he was a member of a national minority,
would play for the national team and a major club from
the capital of that country for years? Some Council
members are, I suppose, surprised, if not astonished,
to hear such facts, considering what was heard at the

S/PV.7760

previous Council meeting. Nothing can surprise me
now, and I am expecting to hear, in a few minutes, new
falsehoods, new lies, new propaganda outbursts.
One of the mantras always repeated by all
representatives of Priština is that Kosovo and Metohija
Albanians were loyal and good citizens of Yugoslavia
before Slobodan Milošević took over the reins of
power. That contention is simply another historically
unfounded fabrication propagated throughout the
international community in order to win support for
the separatism and ethnic cleansing systematically
conducted in Kosovo and Metohija over the past 100
years.
It is clear that systematic nationalism and separatism
are at work in Kosovo and Metohija, the ideological
backbone of which has, for years, been the League of
Prizren, founded in 1878, which had the single goal
of unifying all territories in the Balkans populated by
Albanians into one State, bringing into question the
territorial integrity not only of Serbia, but also of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Greece and other countries in the region. Unfortunately,
it is patently obvious that some individuals, countries
and international organizations have played a role in that
regard, as revealed by the example of William Walker,
former Head of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe’s Kosovo Verification Mission.
On the basis of his hastily cobbled together assessments
about Radek, a decision was taken to bomb Serbia and
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Today, 17 years
later, William Walker is considered an honorary citizen
of Albania, a hero of Kosovo, on whom Priština has
awarded multiple decorations. William Walker is one
of the few people who openly oppose the establishment
of an expert court to try the crimes committed by the
Kosovo Liberation Army, the establishment of which
has been supported by the Security Council. He
recently stated on Albanian television’s top channel
that he supports the idea of a greater Albania, that is,
the unification of Albania and Kosovo.
Ms. Çitaku will presumably again speak about
genocide and ethnic cleansing; however, that is simply
the propaganda that she typically indulges in at Council
meetings. I would like to warn the Council in advance
to expect propaganda and lies. The basic definition of
genocide, war crimes and ethnic cleansing is that of
the destruction or expulsion of a population. Serbia’s
representatives are on record as stating, millions of
times, that each and every crime should be punished.

16-269115/25

S/PV.7760

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

However, history has failed to record a genocide after
which those people who allegedly committed genocide
have dwindled to 10 times fewer than before, while
the number of people against whom that genocide was
allegedly committed has grown substantially higher
than before.
I would like the Council to remember that out of
427 localities, the Serbs have been expelled from 311.
That is indeed ethnic cleansing of Serbs, however. The
statistics make for disturbing and painful reading. The
data I shall present are not from Serbian sources; they
are drawn from the 1981 census at the time of Tito,
before Milošević, and from the census taken in Kosovo
by the Priština authorities in 2011.
Priština, as the Council is aware, is the seat of the
Priština authorities and the largest city in Kosovo. In
1981, just 35 years ago, there were 43,875 Serbs living
in Priština, and according to the 2011 census there
remained just 430 — only 430. Therefore, 35 years
ago there were 43,875, and now the number is 430. If
one can count and deal with numbers, that is 100 times
fewer people. In 1981, 140,043 Albanians lived in that
city, and in the year 2011 the number of Albanians grew
to 194,953. What kind of genocide or ethnic cleansing
of Albanians can be demonstrated here?

25/08/2016

I want the Council to realize that what I have shown is a
realistic picture of the Serbs living in Kosovo. After all
those events and centuries of problems in Kosovo and
Metojiha, the situation today is that the ethnic cleansing
of the Serbs has practically occurred. We are not even
comparing statistics for the last one or two hundred
years. We are comparing the results of the 1981 census
that counted more than 40,000 Serbs living in Pristina.
Let me now turn to the report (S/2016/666) of the
Secretary-General. The current and every future report
of the Secretary-General on the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) should be also viewed in that broader
historical context, which attests to the complexity of the
situation in Kosovo and Metohija, and may contribute
to a better understanding of the genesis of this question.

In Uroševac in the year 1981 there were 18,285
Serbs, and in the year 2011 — listen carefully — there
were just 32. That is 600 times fewer people. In 1981,
17,791 Serbs and Montenegrins lived in Peć, and in the
year 2011 just 332 Serbs lived there. The town of Peć
is where the Serbian Orthodox Church was established
in the thirteenth century, and the Patriarchate of
Peć, which is included in the UNESCO list of World
Heritage Sites, is also located there. In the year 1981,
1,898 Serbs lived in Đakovica; today just 17 Serbs live
there. In Podujevo they numbered 2,242; today there
are 12, almost 200 times fewer. In the town where I was
born, Prizren, the fourteenth century throne of Serbia,
there were 11,651 Serbs living there in 1981, and by 2011
just 27 of them remained, according to United Nations
statistics. Remember, the latter figures are drawn from
United Nations statistical data, published in United
Nations documents. Today there are only 27 persons,
which is 400 times fewer.

The report before us has been structured
somewhat differently from previous ones. It introduces
new sections — on the normalization of relations
between Belgrade and Pristina and on partnership
and cooperation, for instance. In the part related to
the normalization of relations, the importance of the
association/community of Serb majority municipalities
is presented inadequately. It appears to be reduced to
an administrative item; and it is fleetingly referred to
in paragraphs 18 and 19 of the report. As is known, the
association/community has not yet been established.
Let me recall also on this occasion that the quest for an
agreement in Brussels was motivated by the urge to find
a way to protect, systematically and institutionally, the
Serbian community in Kosovo and Metohija because of
the non-existence of proper institutional mechanisms
to effectively protect its interests. Under the Brussels
Agreement, it is precisely the association/community
of Serb majority municipalities that is charged with
that task, which substantively builds on Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). Instead of being the
central issue to be implemented as soon as possible,
its establishment has been the subject of political
blackmail. After all, the United States Vice-President
Biden also said during his recent visit to Belgrade
and Pristina that it was necessary to establish the
association/community of Serb majority municipalities
expeditiously as a condition for the process of regional
stability and reconciliation.

What else can I say? Any comment seems to be
vacuous in the face of this truth, these statistics and
these facts. But we will let the representative of Priština
engage in her propaganda; no doubt she will. However,

I have to note that this report makes no mention
of the situation of the Serbian and other communities
south of the Ibar River either, where the majority of
the Serbs of Kosovo and Metohija live. In doing so, I

6/25

16-26911

25/08/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

would like to emphasize that not all problems are, nor
can they be, related exclusively to the area north of
the Ibar River. Disregard for the human rights and the
problems encountered by the Serbs and the members of
other communities, especially the Goranci, south of the
Ibar River serves to amplify their feeling of isolation,
neglect and hopelessness. The manner in which the
concept document of the Kosovo authorities relating to
returns is mentioned in the report creates a fictitious
picture that Pristina is doing something serious in that
regard. However, past experience gives us cause to
believe otherwise. The absence of credible census data
is invoked as a reason, or an excuse, for a whole range
of concrete problems, from returns to the failure to
adopt budgets in the four municipalities in the northern
part of the province. All along, however, the following
fact is glossed over, namely, that a census engineered
by Pristina, one politically motivated, is unacceptable
for a number of reasons. Such a census could hardly be
used to improve the situation of the Serbs. After all,
the situation could be improved even without a census
if goodwill alone existed. And the incorporation of the
sections on the rule of law and human rights under one
heading glosses over the issue of the human rights of
members of the minority communities.
To note simply that the level of returns is
unacceptably low is not good enough; concrete reasons
are needed to explain why the situation is so worrisome.
Let me mention just some of them, including the
administrative, institutional and legal obstacles to
returns and the lack of security for the internally
displaced persons to integrate locally in central Serbia
—which is not the result of a conscious choice, but
of the absence of any other alternative. The question
of returns is inseparably linked to the protection
and realization of the property rights of the Serbian
population, including internally displaced persons.
The self-defeating fact is that sustainable returns
have been realized only by some 4,000 persons, or
1.9 per cent. A tedious regurgitation of partial statistics
related to the assaults on the life, security and the
property of the Serbs and other non-Albanians is
tantamount to casting a shadow of relativity on their
civilization —persecution on an ethnic or religious
basis that is unacceptable. The numerous cases of
desecration, destruction and attacks on Serbian cultural
and religious sites and the spreading of falsehoods,
such as the one that mass graves are located next to
the Church of Christ the Saviour in Pristina, are also

S/PV.7760

unacceptable. Those fabrications have been spread for
years now. The Director of the Institute of Forensic
Medicine in Pristina said on 14 June that a witness had
come forward who testified that excavations had been
carried out 12 and 13 June 1999 and that there is reason
to believe that the bodies of Kosovo and Metohija
Albanians were buried at that location.
At Belgrade’s request, excavations were undertaken
on two occasions, on 13-14 and 27 July this year. The
excavations were attended by Kosovo representatives
alongside officials from the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and representatives from
Belgrade. It was established that there were no human
remains or graves at the location. The spreading of
the misinformation primarily served the purpose of
seizing space in downtown Pristina where the Church
of Christ the Saviour and the land are located, but also
to discredit the Serbian Orthodox Church. And just
to recall: the Church has never been completed; the
Pristina authorities turned it into a public lavatory and
a podium to shoot music videos featuring scantily clad
singers, which is telltale evidence of Pristina’s attitude
towards the Serbian cultural and religious heritage.
The returns realized thus far attest to the fact that
all the actors involved have failed the return process. It
behooves all of us to change that and create conditions
in which displaced persons will be given the choice of
return or local integration, not only in words but also
in deeds. To do so, however, elementary conditions
in places of return regarding personal and property
security, infrastructure and access to public services
must be fulfilled. In that sense, I salute the call made in
the report to the leaders of all sides to refocus on safe
and sustainable returns of internally displaced persons.
What all the reports of the Secretary-General,
including this one, have in common is the failure to
characterize the incidents in Kosovo and Metohija as
ethnically motivated. The report says, in one short
sentence alone, that 86 incidents affecting members of
minority communities were reported during the period
under review; most of the victims were reported to be
Kosovo Serbs. Not a single other word appears at all. An
account of the reaction by relevant police, prosecutorial
and judicial authorities is missing. Short of that, all
attacks and other criminal offences against Serbs are
depersonalized and reduced to statistics. The ultimate
and most dangerous consequence of such an approach
is gradual acceptance by all, including the international
community, of virtual impunity for criminal offences

16-269117/25

S/PV.7760

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

committed against the Serbs and other non-Albanians,
including murder. Pristina’s ban on the import of Serbian
language textbooks into Kosovo and Metohija shows
the extent to which Pristina is prepared to go to deny
the Serbian community their rights. That practice also
existed before, albeit sporadically, but the confiscation
of all books in the Serbian language became a regular
practice at the beginning of June when the St. Vitus
Day Book Fair, scheduled to take place at Gračanica
from 15 June to 1 July, had to be cancelled.
Security in Kosovo and Metohija has always been
unstable. The radicalization of the political climate and
the worsening of the security situation because of the rise
of political and religious extremism only increased the
instability. The report in front of us contains references
to fighters from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
who come from Kosovo and Metohija. With respect
to the size of population, the Kosovo and Metohija
Albanians account for the largest percentage of those
fighting in the ranks of that terrorist organization. It is
unnecessary to speak about the troubling consequences
of that situation.
In the interests of regional stability and ever-better
Serbian-Albanian relations, the Republic of Serbia will
continue the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
We shall continue the policy of the peaceful settlement
of conflicts by addressing
the normalization of
relations responsibly and implementing the agreements
reached in Brussels fully. The question of Kosovo and
Metohija transcends the issues of territorial integrity
and national identity. It is the tipping point that will
define, long-term, the Serbian-Albanian relations,
on which the stability and economic prospects of the
entire region depend. Irrespective of the frequent
lack of constructiveness on the other side, we shall
continue to work arduously on strengthening relations,
building confidence and promoting European values
and perspectives for both peoples. We do not want the
situation in Kosovo and Metohija to be a latent threat
to the stability and progress of Serbia and the region.
We shall work in good faith on resolving disputes
peacefully, well aware that a long process lies ahead
and that — to make things worse — we often lack an
interlocutor to share with us a vision of a prosperous
and politically forward-looking region.
I therefore call on the countries that have not
recognized the unilateral declaration of independence of
Kosovo to persevere, despite the pressures that many of
ythem are exposed to, as part of their consistent respect
8/25

25/08/2016

for international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the supreme authority of the Security Council in
maintaining international peace and security, including
resolution 1244 (1999), which upholds the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Serbia. Bear
in mind that support by the international community
is of key importance for success in the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, one of few successful
examples of the peaceful settlement of disputes in the
world. Change in the position of States that have not
recognized the unilateral declaration of independence
of Kosovo would affect negatively the continuation of
the constructive attitude of the parties in the dialogue
and the implementation of the agreements reached so
far. That is what we ask for: an opportunity for dialogue
and agreement in full accordance with international
law, instead of unilateral acts and disrespect for the
norms of the international legal order. Let me recall
that international law is universal and that it applies
to all, which is true also of its violation. What Serbia
has experienced since 1998-19999 may befall any other
country in the world.
At the same time, I call on the countries that use
their statements in this organ to call for the violation
of its legally binding resolutions not to do so. Let
me repeat: under resolution 1244 (1999), adopted in
accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, Kosovo and Metohija is part of the
Republic of Serbia, under interim administration by
a United Nations mission. The resolution continues to
be the valid legal basis of the administrative regime
in Kosovo and Metohija, which can be changed only
by the adoption of a new Security Council resolution,
which has not happened thus far. I take this opportunity
to call also on the countries that have recognized the
unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo to
reconsider their decision against the background of allimportant facts.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Çitaku.
Ms. Çitaku: It is always a great honour for me to
be able to come here and speak before the Security
Council on behalf of my country. It is not only an
honour. It is also an emotional experience, because at
times when we were voiceless, when our most basic
human rights were being targeted in the most brutal
way by the Serbian military and paramilitary forces,
all in the Council spoke up. They became our voice and
our hope. They restored our faith in humanity. They
restored our belief that, no matter whether one is big
16-26911

25/08/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

or small, powerful or powerless, if you fight for a just
cause, you are never alone.
Since 1993 this organ has adopted seven resolutions
related to Kosovo — resolutions calling for peace and
putting an end to the war. For that we will be forever
grateful. Dozens of presidential statements have
also been issued, including presidential statement
S/PRST/2005/51, on 24 October 2005, wherein the
Council called for the start of a political process to
determine Kosovo’s future status.
In honouring the will of the people of Kosovo, and
under the mediation of the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, Kosovo has a final status. Kosovo is a
free, independent and a sovereign State. And yet again,
at Serbia’s request, the International Court of Justice
ruled unambiguously that Kosovo was within its rights
when it declared independence and that it did not
violate any international law, resolution 1244 (1999) or
the constitutional framework. Kosovo today is a young
republic. It faces challenges of course, but not the kind
of challenges that would require us to meet every three
months and take up the Councill’s valuable time, which
is in heavy demand for issues of much greater need
and importance.
Once we were a nation of refugees; today we are
not. But there are 20 million refugees in the world
today, the largest number since the Second World War.
There are millions of women who are subjected to
sexual violence in areas of conflict, just like our women
were during the war in Kosovo. There are children who
are in desperate need of food, medicine and shelter,
just like our children once were. The millions that are
spent annually to maintain the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) could be put to
much better use. To justify my point, I am going to
quote the report of the Secretary-General:
“a fight erupted between a Kosovo Serb and
a Kosovo Albanian over a parking space.”
(S/2016/666, para. 12)
On a serious note, if the Council decides to hold a
meeting every time people fight about parking spaces
in New York, or any other place in the world for
that matter, it would not have any time to talk about
anything else.
Another example from the report:
“funds were stolen from the Orthodox Monastery
of St. Jovan.” (ibid., para. 27)

S/PV.7760

Actually, it was tips that were stolen. Most of the
incidents detailed in the UNMIK report are of that
nature, and they have nothing to do with inter-ethnic
violence. That is not to say that we live in paradise.
Kosovo today is still not the Kosovo we dreamed and
fought for. A lot needs to be done to strengthen the rule
of law and to fight corruption and organized crime, just
like in any young country.
Although, together with our international
partners, tremendous work has been accomplished in
that regard, we recognize that there is still more to
be done. Our citizens deserve equal opportunities to
prosper regardless of their ethnic, religious or political
backgrounds. We owe it to them, as they, every day,
more and more, are giving us reasons to be proud with
their hard work, selfless dedication and sacrifice. We do
not have to look far to be inspired by the extraordinary
stories of our people. Take the story of Fahrije Hoti
from the village of Krusha. Her husband, along with
241 civilians, was massacred by Serbian forces in
March 1999. In that small village, 139 women became
widows overnight, 500 children fatherless.
But, because of Fahrije and other women like
her, Kruša is no longer known only for its tragic past.
After the war, they came back to find their houses in
ashes. However, they did not despair; they did not lose
themselves to hatred or revenge. They rebuilt their
homes and they started working on their farms. They
opened small businesses and shops, with very little or
no institutional support. Because of Fahrije and other
widows of Kruša, today there is smoke coming out of
every chimney; there is life in that village. Despite
Fahrije’s tragic past, although she was never offered an
apology, she talks about forgiveness:
“I will never be able to forget what happened. But
to forgive is human. A person cannot live if she
or he does not forgive. That would be too heavy a
burden to carry.”
Fahrije is still waiting for the remains of her husband.
He is still classified as missing.
Kosovo is ready to move on, but Serbia needs to be
ready to let go. Serbia needs to reflect on its past and
learn from it. We in Kosovo do not want to leave our
children with any burden from the past. Last month,
Kosovo President Hashim Thaçi visited and paid his
respects at two memorials honouring Serbian civilians
killed after the 1999 war in Kosovo. Two of them were
children. Although we never managed to shed light on

16-269119/25

S/PV.7760

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

those events, and bring the perpetrators of these crimes
to justice, nonetheless we will never condone violence
by anyone, and we will continue to ask for justice to
be made. I would note that those acts happened at a
time when our police and justice system was run by
UNMIK. We will also continue to fight for justice for
the 1,262 children that were killed in Kosovo during the
war by Serbian military and paramilitary forces — for
most of whom no one ever went to trial, despite clear
evidence on who the perpetrators were.
While Kosovo goes to great lengths and undertakes
unprecedented measures to contribute to peace and
stability in the region, I must ask what Serbia doing.
They want to erect a statue of Slobodan Milošević. What
is the message that Serbia wants to send to victims from
Vukovar, Srebrenica and Kosovo? Is that how Serbia
views reconciliation? Rehabilitating the most notorious
war criminal in Europe since the Second World War?
And, more important, what message is Serbia sending
to its own people? After all, Milošević and his regime
were responsible for Serbian lives lost as well.
As was revealed by Serbian officials, six
youngsters were killed in Peć in 1998, the so-called
Panda Bar case. Back then, the Kosovo Liberation
Army was blamed. But the truth was, as stated by
Serbian officials two years ago, Serbian paramilitary
forces were the perpetrators of that terrible act. But
no matter how Serbia acts, we will not allow Serbia to
drag us into a discourse of hatred and impunity. We
will move forward, and we hope that Serbia will join
us and the rest of the region on this journey. After all,
we are neighbours. We are committed to the dialogue
in Brussels, but we also believe that the process needs
to become more dynamic, and especially more resultsoriented. Dialogue is important, but implementation
and good faith are everything.
On behalf of the Government of the Republic
of Kosovo, I want to reiterate that, in line with our
Constitution, we will implement every single agreement
reached in Brussels. But our job is made difficult
when Serbia continues to finance parallel institutions
throughout Kosovo and tries to build colonies in
northern Kosovo, violating not only our Constitution,
but also resolution 1244 (1999). The current situation
is rather paradoxical. While Serbia takes part in the
Brussels dialogue for the normalization of relations with
Kosovo, it continues to meddle in our internal affairs
by supporting the operations of its parallel structures in
10/25

25/08/2016

Kosovo, in breach of the Brussels Agreement reached
on the 19 April 2013.
That dualism of partially implementing Brussels
agreements on one hand, while maintaining parallel
structures on the other hand, allows Serbia to report at
the European Union about progress in implementation
and maintain its interference in Kosovo intact. In
some ways, the implementation becomes a cover for
interference and parallelism by Serbia. On the surface
it looks as if the agreements are being implemented, but
in reality the situation remains contradictory and far
from what we agreed in Brussels.
Kosovo institutions show their commitment
through acts. Since 2013, in addition to the annual
budget, northern Serbian-majority municipalities
received an additional €10 million from the special
fund established to improve the quality of life of its
citizens and to integrate northern municipalities. The
European Union alone invested over €54 million in
different projects in that part of Kosovo in the last three
years. We will not stop there. We will do everything
we can to demonstrate, through action, that any citizen
of Kosovo, regardless of their ethnicity or religion, can
feel at home and live without fear.
Kosovo will continue to be an active member of
the coalition of nations fighting terrorism. Attacks in
the streets of Nice, Turkey, Afghanistan and many other
recent tragic incidents remind us that we are fighting
a borderless war. While we express our deepest
condolences for all the lives lost, let me reassure the
Council that we will do everything we can to fight that
evil, which strives to implant fear and demolish our
way of life.
We in Kosovo are a multireligious and multicultural
society. In Kosovo there are cities where mosques
and Catholic and Orthodox churches share the same
courtyard. We have always coexisted peacefully. Today,
Kosovo is a secular republic. No matter how one prays,
whether one believes in God, in nature or in evolution,
as long as he or she is a law-abiding citizen, he or she
will live in peace.
Those are values that we hold dear, and we will
fight to defend them. For that reason, we have taken
very serious measures to fight the phenomena of foreign
fighters and radicalization. Kosovo was one of the first
countries in Europe to adopt appropriate legislation and
strategies to counter violent extremism. But we have
gone far beyond words. Some 19 non-governmental
16-26911

25/08/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

organizations that fuelled radicalization and that
were financed with suspicious funds have been shut
down. The Kosovo Police has initiated investigations
against 199 people, and 102 people have been arrested.
Seventy were indicted, and 34 people have already been
convicted.
Today, around 50 Kosovars are in Syria and Iraq.
However, because of the measures taken by our lawenforcement mechanisms, the number of Kosovars who
have joined the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
over the past 12 months is zero. I would like to quote
United States Vice-President Biden, who, during his
recent visit to the region, not only praised Kosovo’s
actions in countering violent extremism but also clearly
said, “Kosovo is an example to follow”.
During the reporting period, our international
status was strengthened by the recognition of our
independence by Suriname, by our becoming part
of the Apostolic Convention and by our joining the
International Exhibitions Bureau as its one hundred
and seventieth member. In addition, Kosovo established
diplomatic relations with three other countries, thereby
expanding and strengthening our ties with the free
world.
While the overall political discourse in Kosovo
remains fierce, and while political parties are
expressing their disagreements on some very sensitive
and important issues, including the border demarcation
with Montenegro, all of those parties were unanimous
in condemning violence, including, specifically, the
three attacks that occurred in the past few weeks in the
Parliament building, at a public broadcasting company
and in a private home. Police and other Kosovar
and international law-enforcement mechanisms are
working hard to bring the perpetrators to justice. There
is no room for violence in our new republic, as we are
struggling every day to build dialogue among ourselves
and with our neighbours. That is the only way forward.
Although the sky might sometimes seem grey,
I know that there is hope for Kosovo. I know that
because our people, our young people, are giving us
shining examples every day. Doruntina Sylejmani,
a teenager from Kosovo, brought home a medal from
the International Mathematical Olympiad. In a tough
and rigorous competition, with the best and brightest
from all around the globe, Doruntina won. Although
she comes from a country that still needs to do a lot
to improve the quality of education, she won, thereby

S/PV.7760

inspiring thousands of young Kosovar children to
dedicate themselves to science.
Then there is our golden pride, Majlinda Kelmendi,
who brought us our first Olympic medal ever. Majlinda
was offered millions to compete for other countries
while Kosovo was still struggling to become a member
of the International Olympic Committee. She declined
those offers and waited for her chance to represent her
country. She gave us all a lesson, especially those of us
working in the public sector, that not everything is for
sale and that there are things that money cannot buy.
She became a hero to her people and an inspiration
worldwide, as her story was showcased across the globe.
Women like Fahrije, Doruntina and Majlinda are
the new heroes of Kosovo. They push our limits and
make us become a better version of ourselves. They
teach us that there is no excuse for failure, that no
dream is too big and no hope is too high if we work
hard and put our hearts into it.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and share
his considerations and views.
We would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir
Tanin, for his briefing on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). Mr. Tanin’s statement confirms that the
situation in the province is far from being normal. In
a great many respects the trend is of course towards a
deterioration. Naturally, there was no objectivity in the
statement of Ms. Çitaku, as is often the case.
The situation in the province remains unstable. We
are again forced to note the continuing poor level of
security for Serbs in Kosovo. The consequences of that
are unceasing attacks on them by Kosovars, including
with the use of Molotov cocktails. Towards the end of
June, similar incidents took place during the celebration
of a historical event of great importance for Serbs, the
Battle of Kosovo. Manifestations of aggression are
regularly experienced not only by tourists and pilgrims
but also by journalists and those refugees and internally
displaced persons who dare to return to their homes. All
of that is almost completely ignored by the authorities.

16-2691111/25

S/PV.7760

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

There is concern regarding the fate of Serb
religious and historico-cultural facilities and heritage
sites in Kosovo. The transfer of responsibility for their
protection from the relevant international presences to
the Kosovo Police has not resolved the issue of their
security and safety. More robust guarantees, including
legal ones, are needed, and they should be enshrined in
Priština’s list of obligations.
The situation around the unfinished Christ the
Saviour Church in Priština, which could serve as a
symbol of religious tolerance, persists. Instead of
rapidly resolving that long-lasting problem, the Kosovo
authorities have launched excavations within its
perimeter to find hidden, buried remains of Albanians
repressed by Serbs, which, by the way, as was expected,
never turned up. The unfinished structure has been
repeatedly desecrated by vandals during that process.
The dialogue between Belgrade and Priština is
in a deep freeze. The Kosovo authorities brazenly
demonstrate their unwillingness to fulfil key
agreements providing for the creation of a community
of Serb municipalities in Kosovo. Priština is attempting
to justify its unconstructive approach by putting its
own, less significant conditions, mostly economic in
nature, ones that require considerably more time for
comprehensive analysis and assessment. Those who
end up falling hostage to such shady and dubious
manipulations are the ordinary people, who continue to
suffer from all possible types of discrimination on the
part of the Priština institutions.
By way of illustration, allow me to recall the
campaign launched in Serbian-speaking municipalities
aimed at replacing Serbian forms of identification
documents with Kosovar ones. Those refusing to do
so have experienced difficulties in accessing services
that require proof of identity, as well as in crossing
administrative borders and lines. Such initiatives are
not provided for under resolution 1244 (1999) and
represent a dangerous “improptu” on the part of the
Kosovo authorities.
Also of concern is the direction of discussions
in Kosovo with regard to the so-called agreement on
territorial delineation with Montenegro. Increasingly,
nationalist calls are heard in favour of unifying all
Albanian lands, including those in Serbia, Macedonia,
Greece and Montenegro, and the creation of a “greater
Albania”. The core of such a pseudo-Albanian State,
based on the words of high-level politicians in Priština
12/25

25/08/2016

and Tirana, will be formed by a comprehensive
integration between Kosovo and Albania. We urge
restraint from such rhetoric, fraught as it is with a
further exacerbation of ethnic confrontations, not just
in Kosovo but in the region as a whole.
We consider unacceptable recent statements in
Priština claiming that the United Nations Mission
in Kosovo is allegedly an instrument for Russian
influence. We view such statements as attacks not
only on the Mission, but also on the United Nations as
a whole. We have noted the attempts by Kosovars to
delay as long as possible the process of extending the
mandate of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX), despite the seemingly good relations
between Brussels and Priština. The ratification of the
relevant law did not occur until three days after the
expiration of the previous mandate. Despite a significant
narrowing of EULEX functions in Kosovo, Priština
continues relentlessly to try to deprive that entity of
its remaining executive authority and transfer it to the
Kosovo authority. Such actions can only cause concern,
inter alia in the light of the current prosecutions for
serious crimes carried out by the Kosovo Liberation
Army.
With regard to the special international tribunal
created for that purpose, its initial work continues to be
unjustifiably delayed, allowing the potential suspects
and the accused to gain time so that they can identify
and neutralize any witnesses to their actions. We expect
that the new structure will learn from the mistakes of
the past and operate decisively and effectively, holding
to account all those guilty, regardless of their position
in the political hierarchy.
We would again like to draw attention to the fact
that, as a result of the weakness of the law-enforcement
structures and the security system as a whole, the
province constitutes to be a grey zone at the very
heart of Europe, used as a safe harbour and transit
corridor, not only by organized criminals, but also
by radical Islamists. It also facilitates the use of the
province’s territory by extremist groups to recruit and
train fighters. Kosovo is among the top three European
sources of individuals fighting for Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). If any measures have
been undertaken to end that situation, they are clearly
insufficient.
We would also like to draw the Council’s attention
to the following. Within the framework of visits to
16-26911

25/08/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Priština by the Russian Ambassador to Belgrade, our
colleagues requested, through the United Nations
Mission in the province, the organization of contacts
with the commanders of the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
for an exchange of views regarding a settlement of
the Kosovo problem. After stating that such a meeting
required authorization from NATO Headquarters in
Brussels, the KFOR command structure ended up not
being able to find any time to meet with the Russian
party. We deeply regret that the KFOR leadership has
drifted away from dialogue with Russia regarding
Kosovo. We would like to underscore that NATO
forces are present in the province in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999) and are operating under a
Security Council-approved mandate. Ignoring Russia,
which is a permanent member of the Security Council,
is simply unacceptable. We also demand that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
include that episode in his quarterly report.
In conclusion, we would like to underscore that,
given the unstable internal political and security
situation and the ongoing inter-ethnic conflicts
and given the deadlock in the dialogue between
Belgrade and Priština and the problems regarding the
implementation of agreements reached between the
parties, we are convinced of the need to maintain a
strong United Nations presence in the province and to
adequately finance the operation. Regular consideration
of the situation of Kosovo by the Council also remains
very important. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully
in force and remains the mandatory international legal
basis for a settlement of the situation in the province.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Tanin for his briefing. I also welcome
Ambassador Çitaku and Deputy Prime Minister Dačić
back to the Council again.
I want to begin by congratulating the representatives
from Serbia and from Kosovo on their success in the
recent Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro. The athletes
did incredibly well, securing gold medals and no
doubt making the countries and the region very proud
in the process. As the Ambassador has said, Rio was
quite special for Kosovo. For the first time, athletes
competed under the Kosovo flag at the Olympic
Games. Thanks to judoka Majilinda Kelmendi,
Kosovo brought home its first-ever medal, and a gold
one at that. That shows that Kosovo is not only a real
contender on the international sporting stage, but also
that it is increasingly and irreversibly integrating into

S/PV.7760

the international community. Kosovo’s membership in
the Union of European Football Associations and the
Fédération Internationale de Football Association only
serve to reinforce that point. We should all welcome
their progress.
I begin with that point because I want to contrast
that positive, hopeful vision of Kosovo with the negative
assessments that are so often shared in the Council
every three months. We often hear in the Chamber
about the numbers of people protesting in the streets of
Priština, but we should also hear about the thousands
who came out to celebrate Majilinda’s return — the
thousands who filled the streets in the hope for a better
future for their country. Steps have been taken in this
reporting cycle to help seize that future.
First, we welcome the progress made on the
Specialist Chambers. Coming to terms with the past is
a vital part of building a future for all in Kosovo. So
we are pleased that a Registrar for the court has been
appointed and that a Chief Prosecutor will be appointed
soon.
Secondly, we welcome the return of the opposition
to the Assembly. That is an important step, one that
must be met with a sustained commitment to dialogue
rather than a return to tear gas and protests.
Thirdly, we welcome the downsizing of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and the increasing transfer of responsibility
to Kosovo for its own rule of law. It will be important to
get the transition period right and to continue to build
the capacity of the Kosovo authorities through focused
monitoring, mentoring and advice.
Challenges remain, of course. We are concerned
that the dialogue has stalled. It needs new energy so
that the benefits of the normalization of the relations
between Kosovo and Serbia can be realized for all. I
hope both sides can draw some hope from the literal
bridge-building that is ongoing in Mitrovica. But for all
the challenges, we also need to gain some perspective.
This week, the Council has discussed the horrifying
situation in Aleppo, the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and yet another missile launch by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Yet we find
ourselves again in the Chamber debating an issue that
has no need to be on the Council’s agenda.
Ambassador Çitaku has already given the example
of the fight that took place over a car parking space.

16-2691113/25

S/PV.7760

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

That clearly is not a threat to international peace and
security. It is not the only odd inclusion. Is a peaceful
protest by taxi drivers or stone-throwing really worth
reporting to the Council? While the United Kingdom
has the utmost respect for UNMIK and the Special
Representative, the inclusion of such low-level incidents
detracts from the important reporting that UNMIK
is carrying out. Therefore the United Kingdom once
again calls again for a reduction both in the number of
these meetings and of the reports. Not only will that
allow UNMIK to provide better substantive reporting
from UNMIK, but the Council can focus on other more
pressing issues.
As I have said on previous occasions, we have to
accept that discussions in this Chamber exist in a bygone
era where Kosovo’s independence, its sovereignty and
its very existence are still questioned. We need only
look to the Olympics to see that that era is over. Instead,
ordinary Kosovars now look to Majlinda Kelmendi to
begin a new golden era. Let us all help Kosovo seize
that future rather than drag it back to the past here in
New York.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his briefing. China welcomes the presence and
statement of Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia. China listened carefully to the
statement of Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and understands Serbia’s legitimate
concerns on the question of Kosovo. Resolution 1244
(1999) constitutes an important legal basis for a
solution to the question of Kosovo. A proper solution,
acceptable to the parties concerned, must be reached
through dialogue and negotiations, pursuant to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and within the framework of relevant Security
Council resolutions.
China appreciates the rigorous efforts undertaken
by the Government of Serbia in seeking a political
solution to the Kosovo question. We hope that both sides
will continue with their high-level political dialogue,
seek a lasting solution to the question of Kosovo and
strive to maintain peace and security in the Balkans
and the entire European region.
14/25

25/08/2016

The current security situation in Kosovo is generally
stable, but it faces a number of complex and uncertain
factors. The parties concerned must effectively protect
the legitimate rights of all ethnic communities of
Kosovo, promote ethnic reconciliation, persevere
in efforts to solve differences through dialogue and
avoid taking any action that may further complicate
the situation.
China appreciates the work undertaken by UNMIK
under the leadership of Special Representative Tanin.
We support UNMIK’s continued implementation of
Security Council mandates. We hope that UNMIK,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
and the Kosovo Force will enhance their coordination
and play an active and constructive role for a proper
solution to the Kosovo question.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I thank Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, for his comprehensive briefing. I
also welcome Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and Ambassador Vlora Çitaku to
the Security Council.
I will also start with the Rio Olympics. The gold
medal in the women’s 52 kilogramme judo division,
won by Kosovar athlete Majlinda Kelmendi, was
also one of the most emotional episodes in Japan, not
because Ms. Kelmendi defeated the Japanese contestant
in the semi-finals and the Japanese contestant won the
bronze medal, but because all the Japanese people
were moved by her achievement under such adverse
conditions. And we all congratulated her for her gold
medal wholeheartedly. I believe that gold medal made
history at Kosovo’s first Olympics, and Ms. Kelmendi’s
victory has sent a strong message of hope to the people
of Kosovo.
The latest report (S/2016/666) of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo gave me the impression that Kosovo
has not yet qualified for a medal in its challenge of
institution building. There were dozens of security
incidents alleged during the reporting period. We do
not see as much significant progress as expected in
Serbia- Kosovo relations. The report of the SecretaryGeneral, like previous ones, tells us that political
tension remains.
16-26911

25/08/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

We all know well that much more effort is needed
to resolve a conflict once it erupts than to prevent a
situation from turning into a conflict. Kosovo has
performed well in its endeavours following the conflict,
and is deemed to be a good example and precedent to
follow. I am talking in general terms. In the aftermath
of conflict, the society and community are mostly
devastated — violence is all around, criminality is high,
social justice is not assured, corruption is everywhere,
access to public services is problematic and scarce
and internally displaced persons are unable to return
home. Even though political leaders tell the people that
they are doing their utmost to assure democracy, good
governance, the rule of law, human rights and safety
and security, the people do not trust the Government.
What is the remedy?
At the open debate of the Council in July on the issue
of peacebuilding in Africa (see S/PV.7750), our Foreign
Minister Mr. Fumio Kishida, encouraged us to focus on
the significant role played by institution-building. That
message can be also applied to Kosovo. For example, in
order to eradicate violence and terror, the police forces
in communities need to be trained. For enhanced rule of
law and human rights, promoting capacity-building for
legal institutions, courts and other judicial structures
is crucial. As described in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, we see efforts by the Kosovo authorities in the
area of counter-terrorism.
Then comes the question of how to finance and
sustain the institution-building. We know that Kosovo
remains one of the poorest countries in Europe, largely
reflecting its legacies of conflict. However, I would like
to underline that Kosovo is a country rich in resources.
Kosovo has natural resources. There is a coal mine
and a zinc mine, and zinc appears to be the most
promising sector for export. Agriculture is rich. It not
only provides jobs for approximately 40 per cent of the
population, but also remains a main creator of wealth
through the farming of potatoes. Kosovo potatoes are
of a very good quality. And Kosovo has now started
exporting fruit, including berries, to Europe. It may not
be common knowledge that Kosovo wines are good.
The Kosovo wine industry faced a catastrophic decline
in the 1990s, of course, but it is recovering now.
Again, institution-building matters. Measures such
as taxation, revenue reform and fair welfare distribution
are crucial to economic growth in conflict-affected
countries like Kosovo. Effective tax collection ensures
a sustainable budget and the allocation of national

S/PV.7760

income to deal with the provision of public services.
In a nutshell, the key to peace and security in Kosovo
is the establishment of robust, functional institutions.
In paragraph 47 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, UNMIK
“has provided operational assistance ... to law
enforcement and judicial entities in Kosovo.”
In my view, that sort of assistance is crucial.
I encourage UNMIK to further its efforts in
providing assistance to the Kosovo authorities in
institution-building. It is my hope that Kosovo will be
awarded a gold medal in the area of institution-building
and be capable of standing on its own two feet.
In conclusion, I would like to express my strong
expectation that the Kosovar people, who are wellqualified and well-equipped, will fulfil that challenge
and thereby shape their own future.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I thank Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing and again assure him of our full support. I also
thank Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku for
their statements.
My delegation has taken note of the conclusions
and observations of the most recent report (S/2016/666)
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and
today’s briefing on developments in the political and
security situation in the territory of Kosovo.
Ukraine welcomes the reported improvements in
the political conditions in Kosovo,
“accompanied by a significant decrease in
the pattern of protests, aggressive actions and
disruptive tactics by various parties” (S/2016/666,
para. 3).
At the same time, we regret that the practical
implementation of agreements reached under the
European Union-facilitated dialogue process between
Belgrade and Pristina has not moved forward as
significantly as we could have expected. Ukraine
actively supports the pursuit of political dialogue
between the two sides under the auspices of the
European Union (EU).
In our view, there is no alternative to cooperation
within the Brussels process. We hope that the

16-2691115/25

S/PV.7760

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

implementation of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement between Kosovo and the European Union
will be a factor in further stabilizing the situation and
promoting a better atmosphere in the talks between
Belgrade and Pristina. In that regard, we fully support
the Secretary-General’s call on both sides not only
to resume their engagement, but to show renewed
creativity and flexibility for compromise in order to
decisively anchor Kosovo and the broader region on a
path towards stability and development.
We also call on Belgrade and Pristina to put aside
existing differences and to concentrate on issues such
as the implementation of the agreement on energy and
telecommunications, the opening of the Mitrovica
bridge and the establishment of the association of Serb
majority municipalities, among other things. Those
particular issues could serve as an impetus towards
further constructive dialogue. Ukraine believes it is
now the precise moment to redouble efforts in fulfilling
the provisions of the agreements of 19 April 2013 and
25 August 2015.
Ukraine maintains that another issue to which
the parties should pay special attention is the safe and
sustainable return of refugees and internally displaced
persons. As the Council knows, the problem is very
much applicable to Ukraine as well. Due to external
aggression, we already have over 1.8 million internally
displaced persons. My country is making every possible
effort to resolve the issue and, in that light, we fully
support the overall approach of the Secretary-General,
such that the rights of those who wish to return to
their places of origin should be met. We believe that
is an important precondition for durable reconciliation
between Belgrade and Pristina.
Special attention should also be paid to the
continuing assaults on the cultural and religious
heritage of non-majority communities, which can
further complicate tensions. Ukraine is convinced that
the resolution of those problems will promote further
political stability in Kosovo.
Ukraine strongly supports the important work
carried out by UNMIK and the other international
missions operating in Kosovo in promoting
reconciliation, transitional justice and human rights
and in supporting the normalization process between
Belgrade and Pristina. In that regard, we welcome
the extension of the mandate of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo for another two
16/25

25/08/2016

years. The decision taken by the EU Council in June
is essential in furthering the effective work of the
international mechanism for political stabilization and
inter-communal reconciliation.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We join other members of the
Security Council in thanking Special Representative
Zahir Tanin for presenting the report (S/2016/666) of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
welcome the participation in today’s meeting of
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
We equally welcome Ambassador Vlora Çitaku.
The report of the Secretary-General highlights
positive developments. We remain encouraged that
the overall security situation in Kosovo remains stable
and that political conditions have improved, with a
significant decrease in the pattern of protests, aggressive
actions and disruptive tactics by some parties.
We underline the fundamental role played by
the United Nations, through UNMIK, in promoting
security, stability, respect for human rights and
institution-building, as well as its cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo, and its engagement with Pristina and Belgrade.
A number of sensitive issues remain outstanding
in the territory, and political tensions between the
Government and opposition parties continue to
undermine the normal functioning of Kosovo’s
institutions. The border demarcation agreement with
Montenegro is the most contentious issue currently
dominating the political debate in Kosovo. Equally,
the agreement for the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities in northern
Kosovo, signed almost one year ago, continues to
be challenged by the opposition’s rejection, with its
implementation stalled.
On a positive note, we acknowledge that efforts to
tackle organized crime and corruption in Kosovo have
yielded positive results and that, since September 2015,
no Kosovo citizen has been reported as having joined
the conflicts in the Middle East. We also welcome the
agreement reached by the Joint Working Group on
Missing Persons with a view to increasing information
exchange and organizing more frequent ad hoc
informational meetings. We remain confident that the
political leaders of Belgrade and Pristina will be able to
16-26911

25/08/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

S/PV.7760

fulfil their commitments and implement the agreements
reached under the European Union-facilitated dialogue.
We hope that dialogue will proceed in good faith, in a
results-oriented manner aimed at a better future with
economic and social development for all of the people
of the Balkans.

Kosovo on its journey to becoming a prosperous and
peaceful multi-ethnic democracy, fully integrated
into the international community. We believe that,
when Kosovo succeeds, the entire region succeeds. A
democratic, stable and independent Kosovo is a force
for regional stability.

Finally, we underscore that resolution 1244 (1999)
remains the applicable legal framework in achieving a
comprehensive solution for Kosovo through dialogue
and negotiation based on the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and within the
framework of the relevant Security Council resolutions.

In that vein, we welcome Kosovo’s and Serbia’s
efforts to pursue the normalization of relations through
the European Union-facilitated dialogue talks. We
continue to welcome European Union (EU) High
Representative Mogherini’s facilitation of the dialogue
and commend leaders in both Belgrade and Pristina
for taking the difficult decisions necessary to make
progress in the talks.

Ms. Sison (United States of America): We welcome
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Dačić and
Ambassador Çitaku back to the Security Council for
this quarterly briefing.
First of all, I would like to start by taking a moment
to congratulate the athletes from both of their countries
for the excellent display of sportsmanship in Rio de
Janeiro. We would like to welcome Kosovo to the
international athletic community, it having participated
in the Olympic Games for the first time under its own
flag and bringing home, as we have heard, a gold
medal in judo. We are sure that years of training and
practice went into that winning moment. We also salute
Majlinda for making her country proud.
As the Council, we have also put years of effort
into examining the situation in Kosovo. Over the years,
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) has assisted Kosovo in the
development of multi-ethnic democratic institutions
that uphold the rule of law and respect human rights. It
is clear that UNMIK has largely fulfilled its mandate
and should be further consolidated. We all receive
weekly briefing notes from the field, and I draw the
Council’s attention to UNMIK’s submissions as well.
There is some excellent political reporting, it is true,
but what does the Mission do? What are its remaining
tasks? Do those tasks require 125 United Nations staff
and other resources to fulfil them? As for the quarterly
briefings, the Secretariat and the Security Council both
have far more pressing business at hand. We urge fellow
Council members to prudently adjust the reporting
briefing period for UNMIK from three to six months.
None of that should be construed as a lack of
support for Kosovo, however. Indeed, the opposite
is true. The United States affirms its support for

Thankfully, work has finally started to revitalize
the Austerlitz Bridge in Mitrovica, which will
remove barriers that, for too long, have perpetuated
and reinforced divisions rather than bringing people
together. We would like to thank NATO and the NATO
mission in Kosovo for their support for security during
the revitalization of the bridge and for continued
essential work to ensure a secure and safe environment
in Kosovo.
We note with some disappointment that the pace
of progress on normalization slowed over the past year.
We call on the leaderships in Belgrade and Pristina to
reinvigorate the dialogue process, including by rapidly
reaching compromises and fully implementing the
agreements Prime Minister Vučić and Prime Minister
Mustafa reached in August 2015. The implementation
of those agreements has lagged for too long. We call
on leadership of both sides to uphold their political
commitments and advance the dialogue without delay.
Vice-President Biden recently visited Serbia and
Kosovo, where he noted the important progress that
both countries had made on the road to comprehensive
normalization. In Belgrade, Vice-President Biden
welcomed the progress Serbia had made towards its
goal of EU accession and the difficult reforms it is
making to get there. We encourage Prime Minister
Vučić and President Nikolić to stay the course and carry
on with the significant work that remains. Serbia’s
future prosperity lies with Europe and is dependent on
a transparent and just society.
In Pristina, the Biden family was honoured by
the Government of Kosovo, which named a road after
the late Beau Biden, who served in Kosovo with the
Department of Justice in 2001, helping to establish

16-2691117/25

S/PV.7760

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

judicial solutions and the rule of law. As Vice-President
Biden noted, Kosovo has made tremendous progress
since his previous visit in 2009. But as the Vice-President
said, there is more work to be done. Kosovo’s leaders
have had to make very tough decisions for the future
of their country. Kosovo’s leaders need to continue to
work with their neighbours. With regard to Serbia, I
have already spoken about the need to fully implement
dialogue agreements, and, with regard to Montenegro,
Kosovo needs to ratify its agreement to demarcate their
shared border so that Kosovo can continue advancing
along its European path.
At the same time, Kosovo continues to face serious
economic challenges that demand greater action by its
Government. While the Government has taken some
steps to introduce policies to foster economic growth,
we encourage more progress to improve governance,
combat corruption, increase transparency and bolster
the rule of law. We welcome the extension of the
mandate of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, which will help strengthen justice and fight
corruption there. Progress in those areas will help
attract foreign investment, thereby contributing to
Kosovo’s development.
As the United States and Kosovo’s international
partners work with the Government to advance
democratic and economic development, it is of serious
concern that there are those in Kosovo who would
seek to use violence and misinformation to derail the
country’s progress. The recent resumption, by some
political parties, of the use of tear gas in the Assembly
and the heinous attack against the public broadcaster
have no place in a democracy. Such actions are counter
to democratic values and threaten the welfare of the
country and all of its people. We commend Kosovo
President Thaçi for his personal efforts to advance
reconciliation. Laying a wreath in Staro Gracko
to commemorate the children killed by ethnically
motivated criminals in 2003 was a courageous step to
benefit the country.
We also welcome and encourage the important
work that Kosovo is undertaking to address the serious
problem of foreign fighters, which is a threat to us all
and must be addressed collectively. That underscores
the need for a responsible, inclusive approach to
security challenges that fully integrates the entire
region, including Kosovo, into the vital international
institutions that are working to increase the security
of our peoples. That must include INTERPOL, where
18/25

25/08/2016

we can cooperate and coordinate on issues vital to the
national security of all United Nations States Members
and where shared values bring us together. It serves
no one’s interests, except those of criminals and
extremists, to prevent Kosovo from making the fullest
possible contribution to ensuring its security and that
of its neighbours.
In conclusion, as we gear up for the annual high-level
meeting of the General Assembly, we note the progress
that Kosovo is making in its bid for recognition and,
one day, membership in the United Nations. We applaud
Suriname’s recent recognition of Kosovo. We call on all
Member States to recognize Kosovo and welcome the
country’s people into the international community as
they strive to take their rightful place as a full-fledged
Member of the United Nations. It is good for Kosovo,
good for the international Organization and good for
the international community. And it is inevitable.
Mrs. Nuñez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) for his briefing. I would also like
to welcome and express my gratitude for the statement
by Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
We have also paied close attention to the statement by
Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
First, as we have said in previous statements,
Uruguay believes that resolution 1244 (1999) is the
internationally accepted legal basis for resolving the
situation in Kosovo, which includes full respect for the
principles of the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Serbia.
We are encouraged to hear that the political
conditions in Kosovo are improving to some extent,
as indicated in the most recent report (S/2016/666) of
the Secretary-General and as just mentioned by Special
Representative Tanin. Nevertheless, the challenges
on the security front continue to be significant.
There has been tension, attacks and other alarming
incidents, including — and I would like to highlight
this point — on members of the minority communities,
many of them Kosovar Serbs. Uruguay regrets the
occurrence of those incidents, expresses its firm
rejection of the use of violence and encourages all
efforts to find a way to promote peaceful and inclusive
16-26911

25/08/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

dialogue in order to make progress towards resolving
the problems of Kosovo.
We are discouraged by the lack of significant
progress with regard to the practical implementation
of the agreements reached within the context of
the dialogue process undertaken between Belgrade
and Pristina facilitated by the European Union. We
urge all parties to step up the dialogue so as to reach
compromise and make progress along the path towards
stability and development.
Uruguay attaches the greatest importance to full
respect for human rights. We understand that in the
case of Kosovo what is of particular importance are
the efforts undertaken on the issue of persons who
disappeared in the recent conflict. We are particularly
pleased to note the holding of a working session of the
Joint Working Group on Missing Persons, in which
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) participated and at which Belgrade
and Pristina agreed to increase their exchanges of
information on specific cases. We believe that those
steps, in addition to providing consolation to the
families of the disappeared and healing the wounds of
the past, are acts of justice that are important strides
towards reconciliation.
My country is also concerned about the situation
of the internally displaced. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees estimates
that the total number of internally displaced persons
in Kosovo at the end of June 2016 stood at 16,714. In
that regard, we note with satisfaction the fact that the
Kosovo authorities endorsed a concept document on the
regulation of displaced persons and durable solutions.
The document points to the need to establish a legal
foundation to ensure accountability of the authorities
and to define institutional mechanisms that would then
facilitate the return of families and internally displaced
persons in safe and sustainable conditions.

S/PV.7760

Europe, the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo. Moreover, we would like
to highlight the substantial contribution of the United
Nations agencies present on the ground.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would like
to start by congratulating Ambassador Zahir Tanin,
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing. I would
also like to thank His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and Ambassador Vlora Çitaku of the
Republic of Kosovo for their statements.
My delegation welcomes the fact that, despite some
residual tension, there has been an improvement in the
political situation in Kosovo, marked by a palpable
decrease in demonstrations and violent acts, as well
as the holding of legislative elections that unfolded
without any major incident. Furthermore, we welcome
the fact that the new President and the new Prime
Minister have reaffirmed their commitment to the
process of normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina as launched under the auspices of European
Union, as well as the fact that they are committed to the
full implementation of all agreements already reached,
including the agreement on the establishment of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
in Kosovo.

Another important aspect highlighted in the
report of the Secretary-General is the phenomenon
of migration through the region towards Europe. In
that connection, we believe that regional cooperation
focused on a human rights approach is fundamental.

While we regret the lack of progress since the
latest meeting held in Brussels, Senegal would like
to encourage both parties to keep up the momentum
towards improving the political situation. I encourage
political actors in Kosovo to work to maintain a
peaceful climate, which depends largely on the quality
of the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade. My
delegation also encourages both parties to continue
and intensify that dialogue to the highest possible level
under the auspices of the European Union and urges
partner countries with influence to exert that influence
to promote the talks. Furthermore, my delegation
welcomes the progress made with respect to integrating
the judges, prosecutors and support staff of the Serbian
judicial system into that of Kosovo pursuant to the
relevant agreement between Belgrade and Pristina.

I wish to conclude by reiterating the fact that
Uruguay very much values the role played by UNMIK
in promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights. We also recognize the important role played
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in

Further grounds for satisfaction for my country
are the European Commission’s positive assessment of
Kosovo’s fulfilment of requirements to advance its visa
liberalization application, giving rise to the Commission’s
proposal to lift the European visa requirements for the

16-2691119/25

S/PV.7760

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

people of Kosovo, on the understanding that, by the
day of adoption of the proposal, Kosovo would have
ratified the agreement on territorial demarcation with
Montenegro and strengthened its track record in the
fight against organized crime and corruption. Finally,
my delegation welcomes the efforts undertaken by
the Government of Kosovo in terms of promoting
the rule of law, as well as its intention to establish an
inter-ministerial coordination group between ministries
and relevant institutions.
It is for those reasons that the extension of the
mandate of European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX) through 14 June 2018 seems
appropriate to us, as it will no doubt contribute to
the consolidation of the achievements in the areas of
the rule of law and human rights. Furthermore, we
welcome the activities undertaken by UNMIK in terms
of promoting reconciliation, transitional justice, human
rights and support for the process of normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina.
In addition to encouraging continued dialogue,
Senegal would like to urge all stakeholders to work
to calm the situation and make strides towards
development by promoting the implementation of the
agreements of 25 August 2015 in Northern Kosovo. We
therefore reiterate our support for the joint European
Union-United Nations programme aimed at building
trust among communities by protecting their cultural
heritage. Accordingly, we advocate strengthening
cooperation on the exchange of information to resolve
the issue of disappeared persons.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to again
pay tribute to Special Representative Tanin for his
enlightened leadership of UNMIK. We also welcome the
positive contributions of the Kosovo Force, EULEX, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and, of course, the European Union, all involved players
clearly committed to peace and progress in Kosovo.
Mr. Aboulwafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing.
We would like to reiterate Egypt’s complete support for
his efforts. I would also like to welcome Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora
Çitaku and to thank them for their statements.
Egypt wishes to reaffirm the importance of building
on the absolute commitment voiced by the leaders
of both communities to implement the agreements
20/25

25/08/2016

reached between them. There is also a need to spare
no effort to achieve a peaceful, complete settlement
of all pending issues between Belgrade and Pristina
through dialogue and serious negotiations, based on
the principle of goodwill and mutual respect shown
by both sides within the framework of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, as
well as all the relevant Council resolutions, especially
resolution 1244 (1999). That outcome can be achieved
only by establishing a conducive environment in the
region and the resumption of the political dialogue
under the auspices of the European Union.
We also underscore the importance of making
progress in the implementation of the August 2015
Agreement, including all its provisions, and of seizing
the opportunity to achieve a lasting settlement, which
would open the door to future economic and political
development and prosperity for all peoples in the region.
We also welcome the ratification a few months ago of
the headquarters agreement with the Netherlands to
host the Specialist Chambers to investigate war crimes.
We hope that this will lay the foundations for the rule
of law, justice and full reconciliation in Kosovo. We
should provide all the necessary support to ensure that
the Chambers are successful in its work, and we hope
to see it establish its premises and begin to function as
soon as possible.
We would also like to highlight the following
efforts undertaken by the authorities of Kosovo:
the voluntary repatriation of displaced persons, the
protection of the religious and cultural heritage, efforts
towards reconciliation and non-discrimination at all
levels of society, the protection of minority rights and,
of course, the strengthening of the rule of law. We
must also provide support to the authorities to address
the challenges posed by immigration and the spread
of extremism and violence. We support the five-year
strategy announced by the authorities to combat
extremism. We hold out the hope that the most recent
presidential elections will serve as a starting point for a
successful internal political process.
We support the efforts by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and the Special
Representative. We would also like to underscore the
importance of strengthening coordination between the
Mission and the European Union and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe in order to fully
implement the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).
16-26911

25/08/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Mr. Méndez Graterol (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing. I also welcome the statement by Mr. Ivica
Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign of Serbia. And I welcome the presence of
Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates that
strict adherence to international law — non-intervention
and respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
unity and political independence of States and the
peaceful settlement of disputes — is an essential
element for the maintenance of international peace and
security. In advocating for a peaceful settlement of
the Kosovo issue, my country believes that resolution
1244 (1999) continues to be the applicable international
legal basis for the achievement of a successful political
solution in the interest of peace. In that regard, we call
for ensuring the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Serbia.
We also reiterate our support for the implementation
of the First Agreement on Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations, signed of 19 April 2013.
In that context, the support of the United Nations
remains crucial in Kosovo, particularly through the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), so as to promote security, stability
and respect for human rights. That work has been
complemented by the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX). We express once again that UNMIK, KFOR
and EULEX, based on their respective mandates,
should continue to play a proactive, balanced, neutral
and complementary role to direct dialogue, with a view
to promoting a lasting and mutually acceptable solution
on the Kosovo issue.
Our country believes that dialogue and negotiations
between Serbia and the local authorities in the province
of Kosovo must be maintained so that the parties can
reach a mutually acceptable solution on the issue. We
regret that to date there has not been significant progress
in that process, and we therefore encourage all the
parties to intensify their efforts to reverse the situation.
Of particular importance is the establishment of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
in northern Kosovo, among other aspects. We therefore
urge the authorities of the province to work decisively
to achieve that goal, as was agreed at the highest level in
Brussels. Similarly, we consider it important to support

S/PV.7760

the process of the voluntary return of Serbs displaced
from their homes in Kosovo, in strict compliance with
the 2013 Brussels agreements.
We consider it necessary to foster full respect for the
human rights of minorities persons displaced from their
places of origin, so that they can fully enjoy those rights
free of discrimination. However, we are concerned by
the ongoing incidents against Serbian Kosovar citizens
in certain areas. In that regard, we once again urge
that the appropriate measures be taken to rectify that
situation and to prevent persecution and harassment
based on ethnic or religious grounds. Furthermore, the
reconciliation process requires ongoing efforts by the
Joint Working Group on Missing Persons with a view to
clarifying the fates of those who disappeared during the
conflict. We welcome the results of the Working Group’s
meeting in June, whereby the parties committed to
stepping up exchanges of information on specific cases
and to organizing ad hoc operational meetings more
frequently. In terms of cultural and religious heritage,
we reiterate the need for the parties to work together in
order to ensure their effective protection.
In the context of the fight against impunity, we
encourage all parties to make efforts and take concrete
steps that can lead to increased trust in the judiciary
and the courts. We therefore urge them to intensify their
efforts so that the Specialist Chambers can come into
effect, which would be responsible for investigating the
allegations of war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed in the armed conflict in Kosovo, as one
more step towards the reconciliation process between
the parties.
In conclusion, we once again encourage the parties
to redouble their efforts to find a political solution that
is peaceful, just and lasting within the framework of
international law, and in full compliance with resolution
1244 (1999) and the Brussels agreements of 2013.
Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): I welcome First
Deputy Prime Minister Dačić and Ambassador Çitaku
to the Security Council today, and I thank Special
Representative Tanin for his briefing.
New Zealand welcomes progress in the political
situation in Kosovo, as outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2016/666) and in Special
Representative Tanin’s briefing. In particular, we are
pleased to see some improvement in the standards
of political engagement, following the disruptive
incidents in the Kosovo Assembly earlier this year. We

16-2691121/25

S/PV.7760

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

look forward to an even more settled political future
for Kosovo, free from political violence and with due
respect for its democratic institutions of Government
and for its courts and judges.
In a climate where political disillusionment is
apparently increasing, it is particularly important
to ensure all people, in particular youth, feel they
have a stake in Kosovo’s future. We continue to call
for renewed efforts to normalize relations between
Kosovo and Serbia. In that regard, we hope that more
progress can be made in implementing agreements
reached between the two sides, including in relation
to energy, telecommunications and Serb-majority
municipalities in Kosovo.Kosovars and Serbians
will always be neighbours, and all will benefit from
pursuing reconciliation and developing habits of
peaceful coexistence.
We welcome efforts by the European Union (EU),
including by EU High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy Federica Mogherini, to
facilitate dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. It
is encouraging that European leaders remain focused
on supporting reconciliation in Kosovo and the
normalization of relations in the region. Reconciliation
efforts will be strengthened by confronting the past
in order that people can move forward together.
We therefore welcome the progress made towards
establishing the Specialist Chambers to try cases
brought forward by the EU Special Investigative Task
Force. We hope that the court will be operational this
year, with support from the EU and, in particular, of
the Netherlands.
Finally, we continue to support the Security Council
considering the adoption of a more flexible approach to
how it considers this agenda item, mindful of the many
other issues of more immediate gravity that the Council
has to deal with.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin,
for his briefing. I assure him once again of our support
in the exercise of his functions. I also thank the First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and Kosovo’s
Ambassador, Ms. Vlora Çitaku, for their statements.
The future of Kosovo and its regional integration no
longer primarily plays out in the Security Council, but
22/25

25/08/2016

in the framework of the political dialogue held under
the auspices of the European Union. New progress has
been made on that front in recent months, in particular
with the start of work on the bridge in Mitrovica, which
we welcome.
Nevertheless, those advances are not enough. We
expect that all the commitments made in the context
of the agreements concluded under the auspices of
the European Union will be implemented as soon as
possible, including with regard to the setting up of an
asociation/community of Serb-majority municipalities,
which is a key element of the dialogue. We therefore
urgently call upon the Kosovar and Serbian authorities
to intensify their efforts to produce further concrete
results in the coming months. It is particularly important
that the dialogue at the political level can resume as
soon as possible.
The normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina remains generally a vital prerequisite for
their respective progress on the path towards European
integration, which was once again encouraged at the
Paris-Balkans 2016 Summit, held on 4 July.
The continuation of efforts to consolidate the rule
of law in Kosovo must also remain a priority. That first
concerns the fight against impunity. We had already
had an opportunity to welcome the swift ratification by
the President of Kosovo of the headquarters agreement
signed with the Dutch Government for the installation
of Specialist Chambers in The Hague. That is a crucial
step. We know that the Kosovo authorities work to
enable all components of the Specialist Chambers to
start functioning as soon as possible and to take action
against those responsible for the crimes set out in the
Marty report. We encourage them to continue along
that path.
The consolidation of the rule of law also involves
the fight against radicalization in all its forms. France
welcomes the unconditional commitment of Kosovo in
that area, both locally and in the international coalition
against Da’esh. I also take this opportunity to reiterate
our support for the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, which contributes every day to the
rule of law and security in Kosovo and whose mandate
was just renewed by the Council of the European Union.
France also welcomes the relative decline in tension
registered in Kosovo’s internal political scene since the
presidential election in February. The building of an
independent, modern, democratic State also entails the
16-26911

25/08/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

establishment of a peaceful and responsible dialogue
among the various stakeholders of the political scene,
in compliance with the provisions of the Constitution
and in the framework of existing institutions. Violence,
hateful rhetoric and disruptions in the proceeedings
of the legitimately elected Assembly have no place in
the type of society that the overwhelming majority of
Kosovar citizens aspire to. We will therefore continue
to condemn them with the same firmness, whatever the
reasons. We also remain concerned about the persistence
of incidents against members of minority communities
and against religious and cultural heritage sites.
It is important that the Kosovo authorities continue
to make efforts in favour of dialogue among the
different political forces and for the establishment
of a peaceful and inclusive society. The reforms
implemented in the framework of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union are
already leading in that direction. Kosovo can count on
our full support in that regard.
Finally, France continues to support the efforts
of the Kosovar authorities to achieve international
recognition of their State. Kosovo’s participation in
the Olympic Games in Rio de Janeior, crowned by
the country’s first Olympic gold medal, in judo, is an
important symbolic step in that regard.
I conclude by recalling once again our hope for a
continued gradual transfer of competencies from the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo to the State’s authorities, as well as for a review
of the cycle of the Council’s review of the situation
in Kosovo, in view of the continuous progress with
regard to the consolidation of Kosovo’s institutions
and the bilateral dialogue between Kosovo and
Serbia. Our debates seem to be out of sync with those
enouraging developments.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): Like the speakers who took the floor before
me, I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin, and to welcome
the presence of the First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
Mr. Ivica Dačić, as well as Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
As the Security Council is well aware, without
prejudice to its position of principle, Spain has always
been prepared to constructively support measures and
processes that are compatible with our position and that

S/PV.7760

can as a benefit the people of the territory of Kosovo
as a whole. In that context, Spain has from the outset
supported the high-level talks between Pristina and
Belgrade facilitated by the European Union. We believe
that the dialogue should continue to play a key role and
remain a priority. It is very important for the dialogue
to continue not only at a technical level, but above all
at the political level. It is crucial that the agreements
achieved thus far be implemented and that work
continues in the joint quest to find solutions to specific
problems encountered by the citizens of Kosovo.
We are aware of the fact that circumstances such
as respective cycles of elections explain the absence in
recent months of high-level meetings in the framework
of that dialogue. However, now that those events are
behind us, it is time for the parties to decisively return
to the dialogue with renewed political courage. We
are also aware that none of the parties is 100 per cent
satisfied by the dialogue. That is logical, for the process
is still a work in progress. But the progress made since
the process began, in April 2013, is undeniable. There
has been progress at the political level and citizens have
enjoyed specific benefits. That should be enough to
justify the renewal of the parties’ decisive and genuine
commitment to the process.
In the same manner and for the same reason, there
must also be courage and political will to implement the
commitments undertaken to date. In that respect, Spain
remains convinced that the establishment of Serbmajority communities and municipalities is essential
and must be prioritized. That is both important for
both parties and an unavoidable step in achieving
genuine reconciliation among the various communities
in Kosovo. While it is a key issue, unfortunately it
remains unresolved.
I would like to again express Spain’s full support
for the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
and Kosovo and for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. My country is fully aware of the
important continuing role that the Mission is called
upon to play in Kosovo today. We highly commend
Special Representative Tanin’s prioritized attention to
reconciliation, among other issues, and to communities
living peacefully among one another, with full respect
for human rights. All of those issues are essential if we
truly wish to definitively overcome the situation that
gave rise to the conflict in Kosovo in the first place.

16-2691123/25

S/PV.7760

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The role of political leaders and representatives
is in all self-defined democratic societies. Their
responsibilities lie beyond mere management of public
affairs. They must serve as an example of living together
in peace. In that respect we must take note of the positive
elements indicated by the Special Representative and
highlighted in the report (S/2016/666) of the SecretaryGeneral that relate to certain improvements in the
political environment in Priština. However, that path
still lies far ahead. We urge all political actors to
definitively reject all incendiary rhetoric and support
for violent or illegal actions and to fight such actions
with the weapon of the law, thereby setting a responsible
example in the exercise of public functions.
It is also our responsibility to do what is right
here at the Security Council. Presentations in our
regularly scheduled debates should always take place
in a constructive spirit, with a view to achieving
definitive reconciliation, as we all desire, and not just
the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). Hence
the importance of those discussions and of organizing
them on a regular basis.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malaysia.
My delegation welcomes His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and
Ambassador Vlora Çitaku back to New York and
thanks them for their statements. We also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zahir Tanin
for his briefing.

25/08/2016

integration, with a view to promoting peace, stability
and prosperity for Kosovo and the region.
On the political front, Malaysia has noted in
the report (S/2016/666) of the Secretary-General a
significant reduction in the number of violent protests
by various parties in Kosovo. Such protests had featured
prominently in prior reports of the Secretary-General.
We also welcome the progress made in the integration of
judges, prosecutors and support staff from the Serbian
judicial system into the Kosovo system, as part of the
15-point Brussels Agreement in 2013.
We urge both sides to further intensify efforts to
implement the outstanding commitments set out in
the Brussels Agreement by engaging constructively
with each other in a spirit of dialogue and cooperation.
In particular, we wish to see further progress
on establishing the association of Serb-majority
municipalities, on the energy and telecommunications
sector and on the opening of the Mitrovica bridge.
Malaysia commends the ongoing efforts by the
Kosovo Government to counter terrorism, violent
extremism and radicalization. With regard to the latest
developments during the reporting period, we welcome
the Assembly of Kosovo’s adoption of the law on
preventing money-laundering and terrorist financing.
With regard to the Kosovo Specialist Chambers, based
in the Netherlands, we note that the court has not yet
started functioning, as it is currently awaiting approval
from the Netherlands Parliament.

Malaysia congratulates Serbia on its formation
of a new Government following the recent general
elections, and His Excellency Mr. Dačić in particular
on his reappointment. We also congratulate Kosovo
for its participation in the Olympic games in Rio de
Janeiro and for winning a gold medal in its first-ever,
and memorable, participation in the Olympics.

Malaysia sees value in the call for a reduction in
the frequency of the Council’s meetings on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We concur with the view that the situation
in Kosovo does not merit the current level of attention
on the part of the Council. We are also concerned at
the unproductive exchanges we often witness in the
Council Chamber regarding the issue of Kosovo, which
runs contrary to the necessary spirit of reconciliation,
constructive engagement and normalization of relations.

Malaysia is encouraged by the improvements in
the political and economic situation in Kosovo. The
economy seems to be steadily recovering, following the
implementation of reform measures on the part of the
Kosovo Government. We call on the leaders of Kosovo
to remain steadfast in implementing the socioeconomic
reforms, particularly in tackling the problem of
unemployment. Those reforms are especially important
in view of Kosovo’s aspiration to achieve European

Lastly, I join my other colleagues in reaffirming
support for UNMIK, which continues to play a key role
in promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo. We also commend the leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the important role of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the Kosovo Force in
ensuring peace, security and the rule of law in Kosovo.

24/25

16-26911

25/08/2016

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

S/PV.7760

The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

16-2691125/25
