A /75/PV.104

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

104th plenary meeting

Monday, 13 September 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 19
Sustainable development (continued)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.135)
The President: We will proceed with the meeting,
but if we do not have a quorum when the time comes
to take decisions on draft resolutions, I will have to
suspend the meeting. With that understanding the
General Assembly will continue its consideration of
agenda item 19, entitled “Sustainable development”, in
order to hear the remaining speakers in explanation of
position after the adoption of resolution 75/326.
Before giving the floor to those wishing to speak in
explanation of position, I would like to remind members
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Kus (Slovenia): Allow me to present a general
statement on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States on the adoption of resolution 75/326,
concerning the modalities for the international meeting
entitled “Stockholm+50: a healthy planet for the
prosperity of all — our responsibility, our opportunity”.
The EU and its member States welcome the adoption
of the modalities resolution for the Stockholm+50
international meeting, to be held in June 2022. We
thank once again the co-hosts, Sweden and Kenya, for
the initiative. We would like to thank all the delegations
that participated in the negotiations in a constructive

spirit, enabling us to reach a swift agreement on
the modalities.
The EU looks forward to Stockholm+50 as an
opportunity for profound discussions on holistic
approaches, solutions and actions that can enable
us to work together as one to address such major
challenges as climate change, pollution and the loss of
biodiversity, work that is a precondition for achieving
sustainable development and prosperity for all while
encouraging systemic change that goes beyond the
environmental dimension.
The issues that we are looking to bring to
Stockholm+50 include, first, the creation of
transformative perspectives on economic development
in line with planetary boundaries, reflecting new
approaches that consider nature as capital and involve
ministers responsible for trade, finance and economic
affairs as well as non-governmental sectors; secondly,
the promotion of decarbonization, the circular economy,
sustainable consumption and production and resource
efficiency; thirdly, lessons learned in the area of green
recovery; and fourthly, follow-up to landmark reports
such as the latest report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, the United Nations Environment
Programme’s report Making Peace with Nature and The
Economics of Biodiversity: The Dasgupta Review.
Addressing topics such as these requires
conversations that include various relevant Government
sectors as well as representatives of business, finance
and all parts of civil society, especially indigenous
peoples, local communities and young people, to help

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-25002 (E)

*2125002*

A/75/PV.104

identify and agree on the enablers that can best help
us to make a difference and achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals. That is why we want to emphasize
that from the EU’s perspective, the language on
stakeholder accreditation in the resolution represents
the bare minimum, and we had hoped to see much more
inclusive language on participation.
Mr. Liu Liqun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Guinea on behalf of the Group of 77
and China (see A/75/PV.103).
Climate change, environmental pollution and
the loss of biodiversity currently pose a grave threat
to human survival and development. The coronavirus
disease pandemic has shown us that man and nature
are symbiotic and that building a beautiful homeland on
our planet is a shared responsibility of the international
community. China attaches great importance to
ecological progress, is an active participant in global
environmental governance and has taken major action
to address climate change and protect the ecological
environment. In October, the fifteenth Conference of
the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity
will be held in Kunming, in China. China will endeavour
to be a good host and work to ensure positive outcomes
for the Conference that will help us to build a clean and
beautiful world.
China supports the holding of an international
meeting in Stockholm in June 2022 to mark the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment. We participated constructively in
the consultations on resolution 75/326 and made positive
efforts to promote a consensus among all the parties.
However, we were deeply disappointed that the positions
of the Group of 77 and China on the participation of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and other
matters were not taken into consideration.
China values the efforts and contributions of
NGOs regarding global ecological and environmental
protection and supports their orderly participation in
United Nations activities in compliance with existing
rules. According to the existing consensus, NGO
participation both in high-level General Assembly
meetings and intergovernmental meetings is based
on the non-objection principle, which is designed to
ensure their effective participation while maintaining
the intergovernmental character and nature of the
conferences in question. However, in total disregard for
2/10

13/09/2021

the existing principles and institutional arrangements
on the matter, deliberate efforts have been made to
challenge the long-standing General Assembly practice
and principle of non-objection, seriously undermining
Member States’ consensus and solidarity. Given our
grave concerns about paragraph 15 of annex II to the
resolution, China will not join the consensus on that
paragraph and calls on Member States to continue
extensive, in-depth discussions on the matter in order
to reach a full consensus and safeguard solidarity on
reasonable arrangements for NGOs’ participation in the
work of the United Nations according to the rules and
practice of the General Assembly.
Mr. Lennartsson (Sweden): On behalf of Kenya
and Sweden, the co-facilitators of resolution 75/326,
on “Modalities for the international meeting entitled
‘Stockholm+50: a healthy planet for the prosperity of
all — our responsibility, our opportunity’”, I would like
to thank all delegations for their active and constructive
engagement during the informal consultations.
Next year we will mark the fiftieth anniversary of
the pioneering United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment in Stockholm, in 1972. That conference
greatly contributed to the emergence of a global
environmental agenda through its various outcomes,
which included the creation of the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP). Over the past five
decades, Member States have agreed and committed
to action, notably through the landmark conferences in
Rio and Johannesburg, as well as through the adoption
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
While significant progress has been made in
meeting many sustainable development challenges, the
science is clear. Environmental change is undermining
hard-won development gains. The implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals is lagging, and
the pandemic has caused further severe setbacks. We
need to do more, faster and together. But while tackling
climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution demands
different responses from each of us, no country will be
able to resolve this challenge alone. The coming decade
is crucial. A multilateral approach is necessary. The
title of the Stockholm+50 meeting calls attention to
the fact that our challenges are interlinked. A healthy
planet and the prosperity of all is essential to achieving
sustainable development and ensuring the well-being
of this and future generations. The title also highlights
the fact that it is our responsibility to leverage this
21-25002

13/09/2021

opportunity. Stockhom+50 should be a platform
for promoting collective action for strengthened
cooperation and the accelerated implementation of
sustainable development, including its environmental
dimension. With a focus on cross-cutting actions that
are designed to reduce inequalities and especially to
benefit the poor and the vulnerable, Stockholm+50
will also contribute to achieving a sustainable recovery
from the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Success will require an approach that encompasses
the whole of the United Nations system. Resolution
75/326 requests the Secretary-General to appoint the
Executive Director of UNEP as Secretary-General of the
meeting. UNEP will serve as the focal point for providing
support to the organization of Stockholm+50. In that
capacity, UNEP will be well positioned to support the
preparations and discussions, ensuring coherence and
consistency between Stockholm+50 and UNEP at 50.
The United Nations Environment Assembly and other
relevant United Nations bodies are invited to provide
input to the meeting as appropriate. The Stockhom+50
international meeting will be convened in Stockholm
on 2 and 3 June 2022 and we encourage participation
at the highest possible level. With the adoption of this
modalities resolution, the preparations for a successful
meeting next year in Stockholm can now accelerate.
We are looking forward to Member States’ constructive
engagement in the preparatory process leading up to
Stockholm+50.
In conclusion, I would like to express our sincere
appreciation to UNEP and the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management for their
excellent technical support during the consultations,
and to once again thank all delegations for their active
engagement in the process so far and you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor.
Mr. Kelson (Australia): I am making this statement
on behalf of Canada, New Zealand and my own
country, Australia.

A/75/PV.104

Nations meetings, as well as stakeholder engagement
more broadly. In that regard, we want to register our
support for paragraph 15 of annex II to the resolution
under discussion, which contains the necessary
provisions to ensure civil society’s meaningful
participation in the international meeting. We note
the concerns of certain delegations with regard to the
paragraph, and we would like to express our appreciation
for delegations’ willingness to arrive at compromise
language. It is language that has been around for many
years and ensures that we, the General Assembly,
hold the final decision-making power on civil-society
organization participants in United Nations meetings.
We also reiterate that the language enjoys broad support
in the General Assembly, having been included in the
six most recently adopted modalities texts.
Canada, Australia and New Zealand would again
like to thank Sweden and Kenya for their co-facilitation
of this process, and we look forward to a successful
international meeting in 2022.
The President: I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to Ms. Njambi Kinyungu and Mr. Magnus
Lennartsson, the Deputy Permanent Representatives of
Kenya and Sweden to the United Nations, who ably and
patiently conducted the discussions and negotiations on
resolution 75/326 in informal consultations on behalf of
Mr. Martin Kimani and Ms. Anna Karin Eneström, the
Permanent Representatives of Kenya and Sweden to the
United Nations.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 19?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 66 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa

At the outset, we would like to express our deep
appreciation to Sweden and Kenya for their efforts in
co-facilitating resolution 75/326. We are very pleased to
see the adoption of the modalities for the international
meeting entitled “Stockholm+50: a healthy planet for the
prosperity of all — our responsibility, our opportunity”.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guinea to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.112/Rev.1 on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.

Canada, Australia and New Zealand would like to
reaffirm their commitment to inclusive and transparent
approaches to civil-society participation in United

Mr. Diallo (Guinea): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of 77 (G-77)
and China. At the outset, we would like to stress

Draft resolution (A/75/L.112/Rev.1)

21-250023/10

A/75/PV.104

13/09/2021

that African countries are making enormous efforts
to contain and overcome the repercussions of the
coronavirus disease pandemic, which has presented
the continent with unprecedented challenges. Despite
the progress that has been made in recent years, the
global health crisis has directly affected Africa’s ability
to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and in
particular to address the many challenges and threats to
its peace and stability such as terrorism, transnational
organized crime, trafficking in drugs, arms and
humans, pandemics and so forth, which ultimately
impede advances in the achievement of sustainable
development in its economic, social and environmental
dimensions. In that regard and where draft resolution
A/75/L.112/Rev.1 is concerned, it is very important to
highlight the crucial role of African countries in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, as well as in
building peace for sustainable development.

effect on global solidarity and partnership. This year, in
our deep concern about the issue, the Group of 77 and
China made tremendous efforts to accommodate the
concerns of all parties and showed the greatest possible
flexibility in formulating alternative language for the
NEPAD draft resolution on causes of conflict in order
to achieve a consensus text.

Peace and security in Africa have an important
bearing on the stability and development of the world
generally. Consequently, partnerships are essential,
particularly for pooling efforts and means of action in the
areas of crisis prevention and resolution, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. The international community should
collectively uphold the leadership and ownership of
African countries in suppressing conflicts, by acting
on the root causes of such conflicts, which are linked
to poverty, hunger, social inequality, bad governance,
human rights violations, impunity and the feelings of
marginalization that foster identity withdrawal.

The discussions this year and for many years before
have demonstrated clearly that the causes of conflict in
Africa are many. Complex internal and external factors
continue to cause, fuel and perpetuate disputes in many
parts of the world, including Africa. African countries
can address the causes of human insecurity if afforded
the policy space and international solidarity. The work
of the United Nations in the areas of conflict prevention
and resolution and peacebuilding requires constant
rethinking and should be based on the principles of
national ownership and respect for African resolutions.
The key will be ensuring the speedy and comprehensive
implementation of the 2030 Agenda.

The G-77 and China, the proponent of this draft
resolution, has always supported the ambition of
the Group of African States to step up international
cooperation for Africa in a spirit of mutual benefit
and international solidarity. We would like to express
our thanks and appreciation to the African Group,
represented by the co-coordinators, Ms. Nadja Micael
of Eritrea and Mr. Mamadou Gueye of Senegal, as well
as to the facilitator, Mr. Yasser Halfaoui of Morocco,
for their brilliant work and great leadership during the
negotiation process. We would also like to thank all
partners for their active commitment, which enabled us
to arrive at a consensus-based text.
In the past few years this important annual
resolution regarding the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD) has been adopted by a recorded
vote, owing to some delegations’ unwillingness to
accept consensus-based language in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, which has had an adverse
4/10

We should reiterate that international cooperation
in a spirit of mutual benefit is very significant for
developing countries, including those in Africa. With
that in mind, we will step up our efforts to cooperate
with all our partners around the world and work with
African countries to fight the pandemic and advance
post-pandemic recovery, eliminate the root causes of
conflicts and inject new impetus into Africa’s lasting
peace and sustainable development for a shared future
for all.

The G-77 and China would like to point out that
African countries have taken numerous and significant
steps to address peace and security challenges at the
national and regional levels. Despite the progress that
has been made in the area of security, the international
community and partners should continue to support
activities and initiatives aimed at strengthening African
efforts to address the continent’s peace and security.
In order to prevent and resolve conflict at its earliest
stages, we stress the importance of ensuring that the
United Nations system supports African countries’
efforts to achieve sustainable and durable peace.
The President: The General Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.112/Rev.1,
entitled “Implementation of the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General
on the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa”.
21-25002

13/09/2021

I give the
the Secretariat.

A/75/PV.104

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
Turkey has also become a sponsor of A/75/L.112/Rev.1.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.112/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/75/L.112/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 75/327).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position, I would like to remind
members that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Hamdouni (Morocco): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of
African States. I align these remarks with the statement
just made by the representative of Guinea on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China in his introduction to
resolution 75/327.
The African Group values and welcomes the
General Assembly’s consensus adoption of the
resolution on “Implementation of the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa”. Its importance
cannot be overemphasized. It highlights a milestone
in the progress made by African countries in facing
emerging challenges to the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development. The African
Group welcomes and commends the advice submitted
for the first time by the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) to the General Assembly prior to
the Assembly’s consideration of this agenda item, which
contributed to enhancing the peacebuilding perspective
in the resolution with a view to building on the PBC’s
long-standing and cumulative experience in support of
Africa’s peacebuilding needs and priorities.
The African Group emphasizes that the work of
addressing the root causes of conflict and insecurity
is directly linked to the need for adequate reforms,
national policies and international solidarity. We
therefore want to take this opportunity to call on the
international community and development partners to
continue supporting African countries, particularly
those emerging from conflict, in their efforts to develop

their human and institutional capacities. That assistance
should focus on means of implementation, particularly
financial resources, the transfer of technology and
capacity-building. Considering that aid remains an
important source of financing for development in
many countries, including in Africa, we encourage
development partners to fulfil their commitments
regarding the implementation of the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda, including official development
assistance commitments.
The current era of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic requires even greater efforts in
terms of policy and action. The resolution that we have
adopted today emphasizes that the COVID-19 pandemic
has had overwhelming effects generally, including on
health, emergency and crisis management in conflictaffected areas, where health systems were already
facing many challenges and ill-equipped to deal with
threats posed by outbreaks of infectious diseases such
as COVID-19. We also reiterate our firm condemnation
of the violent attacks and threats directed against
medical personnel and facilities, which will have longterm consequences for the civilian populations and
health-care systems of the countries concerned, as well
as those of neighbouring regions, along with negative
effects on sustainable development. We also want to
underline that the work of the United Nations in the area
of conflict prevention and resolution and peacebuilding
requires constant rethinking and should be based on
national ownership and in full harmony with African
needs and priorities.
The African Group also reiterates that international
cooperation in a spirit of mutual benefit is highly
significant for all developing countries, including
on the African continent. With that in mind, we will
step up efforts to cooperate with all our development
partners in implementing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and supporting the African
Union’s Agenda 2063.
With regard to resolution 75/327, the African
Group — with the valuable support of the Group of 77
and China and all delegations — has made tremendous
efforts this year to streamline its text and make it
concise, fit for purpose and better able to deliver on key
messages regarding the causes of conflicts in Africa,
and our endeavour has succeeded. The African Group
welcomes the remarkable collective efforts this year to
ensure that the various views converged and to adopt
a consensus-based resolution that also accommodated

21-250025/10

A/75/PV.104

the concerns of all parties. We commend the flexibility
shown in formulating consensus-based language
throughout the text of the resolution, and we want to
warmly thank the facilitator for his tireless efforts in
moving the process towards consensus. Our sincere
thanks and appreciation go to the coordinators, our
African experts, who negotiated brilliantly on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China. We would also like to
thank all delegations once again for their constructive
engagement and valuable input.
Finally, we would like to take this opportunity
to thank the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa
for its support throughout the preparation and
negotiation processes.
Mr. Mogyorósi (Hungary): Hungary would like
to express its appreciation to the co-facilitators for
their tireless work and commitment in the drafting
of resolution 75/327, and at the same time to add the
following remarks in its national capacity.
I want to recall the fact that at its adoption,
Hungary voted against the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration and is not involved
in its implementation in any way. That is why we
cannot accept any reference to the Global Compact
for Migration in resolution 75/327, especially because
of the Compact’s reference to migration as the best
solution to labour-market and demographic problems in
countries of destination.
Hungary believes in the effectiveness of on-site
support to developing countries that guarantees local
populations peaceful and prosperous lives in their
home countries and does not promote their migration.
The Hungarian Government therefore seeks to
implement development programmes that establish
lasting solutions locally for those in need and improve
the living conditions of people in vulnerable situations.
That is why we are unable to accept the reference to the
Global Compact in the current resolution and would like
to dissociate ourselves from its operative paragraph 11.
Ms. White (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by expressing our appreciation to Morocco as
facilitator and to our colleagues for the progress made in
negotiating resolution 75/327, on the causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa.
We would like to thank the Group of African States
for their work in restoring consensus on this important
6/10

13/09/2021

text. As we set out in last week’s adoption of resolution
75/322 on the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
(see A/75/PV.102), the United Kingdom attaches great
importance to Africa’s peace, security and sustainable
development. We support African-led efforts to unlock
inclusive economic growth, strengthen security and
stability, promote and protect human rights, build
resilience to the effects of climate change, invest in
education, health and job creation and ensure greater
participation by women and young people, including
through the African Union.
Ms. Sutton (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to join the consensus on this
important resolution (resolution 75/327) and expresses
its appreciation to Member States for their constructive
engagement. We welcome the progress that has been
made by African countries, the African Union,
subregional organizations and the United Nations
in their efforts in the areas of conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, counterterrorism and development on the African continent.
As we work towards the goal of a conflict-free Africa,
intensified efforts, support and a coordinated approach
among stakeholders in addressing the challenges before
us remain essential.
We want to highlight our firm commitment
to the notion that the three dimensions of
sustainable development — economic, social and
environmental — are themselves interlinked, and
that progress towards sustainable development must
be balanced and integrated. The United States also
underscores that the rule of law, strong institutions, good
governance and management, including in the areas of
anti-corruption, transparency and accountability, are
essential in supporting sustainable development.
We would like to conclude by extending our sincere
thanks to Morocco, and to Mr. Yasser Halfaoui for his
role as facilitator.
Ms. Ito (Japan): In the wake of the Assembly’s
adoption of resolution 75/322 last week, Japan
welcomes its consensus adoption of resolution 75/327,
on the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa. We thank the facilitator, the
Permanent Mission of Morocco, and the coordinators,
the Permanent Missions of Eritrea and Senegal, as well
as the Group of African States and all our colleagues,
for their constructive engagement in the negotiation
process. While we see the resolution’s adoption
21-25002

13/09/2021

by consensus as a testament to the commitment of
Member States and the United Nations to peace and
development in Africa, we believe that the scheduling
of the informal consultations should be improved for
next year. In particular, introducing the draft resolution
earlier in the session would enable Member States to
engage more productively and effectively.
Overall, we are pleased that the resolution has
been made more action-oriented with regard to the
intrinsic connections between peace and development
in Africa. In that spirit, Japan has long advocated for
institution-building and human development as means of
realizing human security, durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa. Strengthening stable and
reliable institutions and ensuring good governance have
always been key priorities of the Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD). The
eighth meeting of TICAD will be held next year in
Tunisia, jointly organized by the Office of the Special
Adviser on Africa, the United Nations Development
Programme, the African Union and the World Bank,
with the aim of setting out a pathway for African
development in the post-coronavirus (COVID-19) era,
making full use of the unique dynamism created by
the private sector. At the same time, the meeting will
contribute to sustainable and inclusive development in
Africa, aligned with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the African vision outlined in the
African Union’s Agenda 2063.
In closing, I want to reiterate Japan’s unwavering
support for Africa and the importance of genuine
multilateral, multisectoral partnerships. We remain
fully committed to turning the COVID-19 human
security crisis into opportunities to build societies back
better, with greater resilience and increased links with
all partners.
Finally, we would like to thank the Secretariat
and the Office of the Special Adviser for their
valuable support.
Mr. Liu Liqun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Guinea on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
We welcome the General Assembly’s adoption
by consensus of resolution 75/327, on the causes of
conflict in Africa. I would like to underscore China’s
firm commitment to the promotion of durable peace and
security, development and prosperity on the African

A/75/PV.104

continent. China has demonstrated the greatest possible
flexibility and devoted huge efforts to achieving
consensus on the resolution.
As the coronavirus disease pandemic has continued
to spread, people have fallen back into poverty in huge
numbers all over the world. The risk of food crises is
mounting. African countries, especially in sub-Saharan
Africa, have been severely affected. The international
community should uphold multilateralism and seek
win-win cooperation with a view to ensuring that
the fruits of development can benefit all countries
and people. However, certain countries have chosen
to politicize development issues and repudiate the
consensus among the United Nations membership,
which has seriously undermined international
cooperation, to the detriment of the maintenance of
regional peace and security.
Peace and security in Africa have a bearing on
world stability and development. The international
community should jointly safeguard African leadership
in peace and security affairs in Africa, support African
solutions to African problems and oppose unjustified
external interference. We should promote political
settlement and peaceful reconciliation and help Africa
improve its own peacekeeping, stabilizing and counterterrorism capabilities. We should promote economic
growth and social development in Africa, expedite the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals,
including poverty reduction, and eliminate breeding
grounds for conflicts.
China and African countries are brothers and
partners. When it comes to helping Africa maintain
peace and security, China has never been absent. More
than 2,000 Chinese peacekeepers are safeguarding
peace in Africa as we speak. Within the framework
of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, China
has continually increased its contributions to Africa’s
peace and security affairs. We have established the
China-Africa Peace and Security Fund to provide
robust support and assistance to countries in need.
China will continue to uphold the principles of
sincerity, real results, amity and good faith in pursuing
the greater good and shared interests among countries
and will support African countries in their pursuit of
development paths suited to their national conditions,
with a view to achieving long-term stability.
Mrs. Kafková (Czech Republic): The Czech
Republic aligns itself with the statement to be delivered

21-250027/10

A/75/PV.104

13/09/2021

on behalf of the European Union and its member States
and would like to add the following remarks in its
national capacity.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
European Union, in its capacity as observer, to make a
statement after adoption.

The Czech Republic is pleased to join the consensus
on resolution 75/327. We fully recognize the importance
of implementing the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development. Through its development cooperation,
the Czech Republic assists partner countries in Africa
in promoting democracy, human rights and good
governance, as well as in building resilience and
achieving sustainable development.

Mr. Gonzato (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries North
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, as well as the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.

The Czech Republic did not join the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration
or participate in the Intergovernmental Conference
to Adopt the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration in Marrakech, and it voted against
resolution 73/195, by which the General Assembly
endorsed the Global Compact, for reasons we clearly
outlined in our explanation of vote on 19 December
2018 (see A/73/PV.60). Recalling those facts, the Czech
Republic cannot accept the expression “reaffirms”
in operative paragraph 11 of the resolution on the
implementation of the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General on the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa,
and must therefore dissociate itself from the paragraph.
The Czech Republic reaffirms its full support
for multilateralism, the rule of law and human rights,
and recognizes that multilateral cooperation is
indispensable in finding global solutions to such global
challenges as migration.
Ms. Ruiz Tello (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
welcomes resolution 75/327 as an important contribution
to the understanding and inspiration of actions that will
enable us to tackle the causes of conflicts in Africa and
promote durable peace and sustainable development.
While we support the consensus on the resolution,
the Chilean Government has reservations about the text
of operative paragraph 11, since Chile is in the process
of updating its regulatory framework in the area of
migration, which establishes foundations for proper
migration management, with a view to ensuring that
migration is safe, orderly and regular.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position after adoption.
8/10

At the outset, I would like to express the EU’s
gratitude to Morocco, as facilitator of the negotiation
process for resolution 75/327, on the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa, and to Eritrea and Senegal, as coordinators
for the Group of 77 and China, as well as to those
colleagues representing groups and Member States
who participated in informal consultations. I also
want to direct special thanks to the Group of African
States. We know how important this resolution is for
the Group. Last year the EU was regrettably unable to
vote in favour of resolution 74/302, due to the insertion
of controversial language that did not enjoy universal
support. This year we welcome the fact that we were
able to find alternative language that everyone could
support. We know that the African Group worked hard
to achieve that consensus. We also appreciate the work
that was done to update the resolution and make it more
focused and action-oriented. That is something we have
long called for and we will continue to work to mirror
that positive step in all relevant resolutions.
Africa and the EU have a close and long-standing
partnership for both security and development. The
EU is Africa’s biggest development, investment and
trade partner. Deepening our partnership with Africa
is at the very top of the EU’s priorities. Indeed, in the
current context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19),
solidarity and close cooperation are crucial in the fight
against the pandemic, including through the distribution
of vaccines. To date, the EU has mobilized funds to
provide more than 1 billion vaccines through the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility. In addition,
Team Europe intends to donate at least 200 million
vaccine doses globally through the end of the year. The
EU has been a committed partner in supporting African
countries not only in dealing with the health emergency
but also in addressing the socioeconomic fallout from
the crisis, including by supporting debt-relief efforts
for African countries.
21-25002

13/09/2021

Peace and security issues remain at the core of
the partnership between the African Union (AU)
and the EU, based on mutual responsibility, national
ownership and reciprocal commitment. The EU’s
support to Africa is both financial and political. We
believe that Africa should have an even stronger voice
in multilateral forums. The EU continues to support
African-led peace and security initiatives such as the
road map for Silencing the Guns by 2030, as well as
the AU’s efforts to secure predictable resources for
African-led peace operations. The EU also contributes
significant financial support and personnel to peace
and security operations in Africa. Since 2003, the EU
has committed €3.5 billion in support of African-led
initiatives, contributing to early responses to crises,
capacity-building in the field of peace and security
and the financing of AU-mandated or -authorized
peace support operations. The European Union works
alongside the African Union in key locations such as the
Sahel, Somalia and Libya, supporting efforts to ensure
effective delivery on Security Council mandates. The
European Union is currently deploying 10 Common
Security and Defence Policy missions and more than
4,000 personnel in Africa. More broadly, we are
deploying more than 13,000 troops in support of peace
and security in Africa.
Our daily work in the United Nations to promote
sustainable development and conflict prevention
and resolution on the African continent testifies to
the priority we give to these issues. That is why this
resolution is so important to us and why we are so
pleased that we could adopt it by consensus today.
In conclusion, I want to assure the Assembly of our
ongoing and unwavering support to the African Group.
The EU and its member States will continue to work
to enhance and strengthen our cooperation with our
African partner countries.
The President: We have heard the last speaker on
this item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 66 and agenda item 66 as a whole?
It was so decided.

A/75/PV.104

Agenda item 13 (continued)
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Draft resolution A/75/L.136
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/75/L.136.
I give the floor to the representative of Slovenia,
who will speak in explanation of position before
adoption on behalf of the European Union.
Ms. Česarek (Slovenia): I would like to deliver this
statement on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The EU and its member States attach great
importance to the fight against malaria. Urgent action
is required to address the persistent threat of this
disease, which is one of the deadliest in the world,
killing hundreds of thousands of people every year. We
are committed to doing our part to fight and eliminate
malaria, among other things as a major donor to the
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.
Nevertheless, we feel compelled to voice our
concern about the complete lack of communication
and negotiation on draft resolution A/75/L.136, which
we are adopting today. We are deeply worried that the
draft resolution has not been negotiated in any way. The
facilitators did not allow Member States any possibility
to give input on the text. We were barely given enough
time to read the text, much less properly consult with
our capitals. That is not in line with established practice
regarding the presentation of draft resolutions for
adoption in the General Assembly. While we are willing
to accept the proposed text for adoption today, we must
stress that we do not consider this acceptable procedure
for any future draft resolutions, since we firmly believe
that there should be a minimum of consultation with
Member States before the adoption of any text.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position before adoption.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.136, entitled “Consolidating gains
and accelerating efforts to control and eliminate
malaria in developing countries, particularly in Africa,
by 2030”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

21-250029/10

A/75/PV.104

13/09/2021

Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.136, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Singapore, Thailand
and Turkey.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.136?
Draft resolution
(resolution 75/328).

A/75/L.136

was

adopted

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Kingdom, who wishes to
speak in explanation of position after adoption.
Ms. White (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom is proud to be a major malaria donor, which
is central to our ambition to end preventable deaths
of mothers, newborns and children around the world.
We are committed to working with partners to deliver
sustainable results for tackling this devastating disease.
Resolution 75/328 is one of the key tools we have
to make the global malaria response more efficient
and effective. Unfortunately, we have not had the
opportunity to do so this year. Instead, we once again
have another mostly recycled text submitted shortly
before adoption, with no consultation. While some
countries are nearing the elimination of malaria, others
are falling further behind. We owe it to those countries
and to the victims of malaria around the world to do
better. The United Kingdom has joined the consensus
on today’s resolution in the spirit of our continued
support for efforts to control and eliminate malaria.
But we want to be clear that our expectation for the
General Assembly’s next session is that we will make
time for substantive negotiations on this topic that will
enable us to seize the opportunity to strengthen this
resolution. If we do not have time to do so, we should
consider biennializing it. We look forward to working
with our partners in this Hall and in the year ahead
on this important endeavour and stand ready to offer
our assistance.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position after adoption.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 13?
10/10

It was so decided.
The President: I should like to remind delegations
that the following agenda items remain open for
consideration during the seventy-fifth session of the
General Assembly: 9, 14, 15, 23 and its sub-item (a),
30, 32, 34 and its sub-item (a), 37, 38, 40, 43 to 49, 70
and its sub-item (b), 73 and its sub-items (a) through
(c), sub-item (b) of agenda item 105, 111, 112, 118, 119
and its sub-item (a), 120 and its sub-items (g), (i) and
(k), 122, 127, 128 and its sub-items (a) and (b), 130 and
its sub-items (a), (c), (f), (g), (m) and (x), 131, 138 to 159
and 161 to 171.
As Member States are aware, those items have
been included in the provisional agenda of the
seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly, with
the exception of item 32, entitled “Elimination of
unilateral extraterritorial coercive economic measures
as a means of political and economic compulsion”; item
40, entitled “The situation in the occupied territories of
Azerbaijan”; sub-item (k) of agenda item 120, entitled
“Confirmation of the appointment of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development”; sub-item (b), entitled “Central role
of the United Nations system in global governance”, of
agenda item 128, entitled “Strengthening of the United
Nations system”; sub-items (a), (c), (f), (g), (m) and (x)
of agenda item 130, entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and other organizations”;
item 140, entitled “Programme budget for 2020”;
item 149, entitled “United Nations pension system”;
and item 150, entitled “Administrative and budgetary
coordination of the United Nations with the specialized
agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration at the current
session of agenda items 9, 14, 15, 23 as a whole, 30, 32,
34 as a whole, 37, 38, 40, 43 to 49, 70 as a whole, 73 as
a whole, sub-item (b) of agenda item 105, 111, 112, 118,
119 as a whole, 120 as a whole, 122, 127, 128 as a whole,
130 as a whole, 131, 138 to 159 and 161 to 171?
It was so decided.
The President: As announced in the Journal of the
United Nations, the closing of the seventy-fifth session
will take place tomorrow at 3 p.m. in this Hall.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.
21-25002
