S/PRST/2014/6

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 March 2014
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7148th meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 March 2014, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Sierra Leone”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“As the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL) completes its mandate on 31 March 2014, the Security Council
commends the remarkable achievements made by Sierra Leone over the past
decade as well as its contribution to important regional and global initiatives.
The Security Council further commends the effectiveness of the approach of
the United Nations, international financial institutions, regional and
sub-regional bodies and the broader international community to peacebuilding
in Sierra Leone.
“The Security Council welcomes the considerable progress that has been
made by Sierra Leone in strengthening institutional and human resources
capacities of State institutions, including in the security, justice and
governance sectors which play crucial roles in safeguarding stability and
promoting democracy.
“The Security Council also welcomes the successful presidential and
parliamentary elections conducted in 2012 which have helped to consolidate
Sierra Leone’s democratic institutions.
“The Security Council recognises the important contribution of UNIPSIL
in promoting peace, stability and development in Sierra Leone, particularly
during the 2012 electoral process. The Security Council expresses its
appreciation for the efforts of the Mission and the United Nations Country
Team, under the leadership of the Executive Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral.
“The Security Council underscores the importance of continued support
to Sierra Leone as it embarks on the next stage of its development, beyond
UNIPSIL, including the constitutional review process, and notes the
willingness of the United Nations and bilateral and multilateral partners to
continue, as requested by the Sierra Leonean authorities, to play a significant
role in this regard. In addition, the Security Council urges the international
community and development partners to continue to provide coordinated and
coherent support to Sierra Leone to meet its peacebuilding and development
priorities.
14-27755 (E)

260314

*1427755*

S/PRST/2014/6

“The Security Council stresses that there is important work ahead to
further embed peace and secure equitable prosperity for the benefit of all
Sierra Leoneans. The Security Council welcomes the adoption by the
Government of Sierra Leone of the Agenda for Prosperity covering the period
from 2013 to 2018 and notes the importance of the implementation of this
programme in accordance with the Mutual Accountability Framework agreed
between the Government of Sierra Leone and Sierra Leone’s Development
Partners’ Committee in March 2013.
“The Security Council reaffirms the important potential role of extractive
industries in Sierra Leone’s economic development, and encourages the
Government of Sierra Leone and international partners to strengthen protection
of workers’ rights and national capacities for transparent regulation, oversight,
and revenue collection from such industries, as well as to address issues of
land ownership with a view to establishing mutually beneficial arrangements
for local communities and the private sector, and calls upon the government to
tackle corruption.
“The Security Council stresses the importance for Sierra Leone’s longterm stability of ensuring a peaceful, credible and transparent electoral process
in 2017.
“The Security Council reiterates its request in resolution 2097 that the
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) make available its good
offices to support the Government of Sierra Leone and the new United Nations
Resident Coordinator as necessary.
“The Security Council welcomes the work of the Sierra Leone
Configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. The Security Council recalls
its request in resolution 2097 (2013) for the Peacebuilding Commission to
review its engagement with a view to scaling down its role and welcomes the
Commission’s shift to a lighter form of engagement for a transitional period
over next 12 months, as outlined in its report to the Council (S/2014/211). The
Security Council requests that Sierra Leone contributes to the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission to gather lessons learnt and best practices.
“The Security Council congratulates the Special Court for Sierra Leone
on the completion of its mandate, recalls the strong support it expressed for the
Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone as it commences its functioning, and
reiterates its call in resolution 2097 (2013) for Member States to contribute
generously.”

2/2

14-27755
