General Auembly-Twenly-ninth Seasion

142

to facilitating recourse to it for the judicial settlement
of disputes, inter alia by simplifying the procedure, re-

ducing the likelihood of undue delays and costs and
allowing for greater influence of parties on the composition of ad hoe chambers,
Recalling the increasing development and codifica·
tio!l of international law in conventions open for universal participation and the consequent need for their
uniform interpretation and application,
Rec,ognizing that the development of international
law may be reflected, inter alia, by declarations and
resolutions of the General Assembly which may to that
extent be taken into consideration by the International
Court of Justice,
Recalling further the opportunities afforded .,by the
power of the International Court of Justice, under
Article 38, paragraph 2, of its Statute, to decide a case
ex aequo et bono if the parties agree thereto,
I. Recognizes the desirability that States study the
possibility of accepting, with as few reservations as
possible, the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice in accordance with Article 36
of its Statute;
2. Draws the attention of States to the advantage
of inserting in treaties, in cases considered possible
and appropriate, clauses providing for the submission
to the International Court of Justice of disputes which
may arise from the interpretation or application of such
treaties;
3. Calls upon States to keep under review the possibility of identifying cases in which use can be made of
the International Court of Justice;
4. Draws the attention of States to the possibility
of making use of chambers as provided in Articles 26
and 29 of the Statute of the International Court of
Justice and in the Rules of Court, including those which
would deal with particular categories of cases;
5. Recommends that United Nations organs and the
specialized agencies should, from time to time, review
legal questions within the competence of the International Court of Justice that have arisen or will arise
during their activities and should study the advisability
of referring them to the Court for an advisory opinion,
provided that they are duly authorized to do so;
6. Reaffirms that recourse to judicial settlement of
legal disputes, particularly referral to the International
Court of Justice, should not be considered an unfriendly act between States.

2280th plenary meeting
12 November 1974

3233 (XXIX). Participation in the Convention on
Special Missions, its Optional Protocol concerning the Compulsory Settlement of Disputes and the Vienna Convention on the Law
of Treaties

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by its resolution 2530 (XXIV) of
8 December I 969, it adopted and opened for signature
and ratification or for accession the Convention on
Special Missions and its Optional Protocol concerning
the Compulsory Settlement of Disputes and resolved
to consider at a later session the question of issuing

- - - - - - - - -

---------------~

invitations in order to ensure the widest possible participation therein,
Noting the Declaration on Universal Participation
in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties,
adopted by the United Nations Conference on the Law
of Treaties,~ in which the General Assembly was invited to give consideration to the matter of issuing
invitations in order to ensure the widest possible participation in that Convention,
Decides to invite all States to become parties to the
Convention on Special Missions, its Optional Protocol
concerning the Compulsory Settlement of Disputes and
the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. 5
2280th plenary meeting
12 November 1974

3247 (XXIX), Participation in the United Nations
Conference on the Representation of States
in Their Relations with International Organi•
zations

The General Assembly,
Recalling that by its resolution 3072 (XXVIII) of
30 November 1973 it decided that the United Nations
Conference on the Representation of States in Their
Relations with International Organizations would be
held early in 1975 at Vienna,
I. Decides to invite all States to participate in the
United Nations Conference on the Representation of
States in Their Relations with International Organizations and requests the Secretary-General to take all
necessary steps to give effect to resolution 3072
(XXVIII) and the present resolution;
2. Decides to invite also the national liberation
movements recognized by the Organization of African
Unity and/or by the League of Arab States in their
respective regions to participate in the Conference as
observers, in accordance with the practice of the United
Nations.
2303rd plenary meeting
29 November 1974

3314 (XXIX). Definition of Aggression
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Com·
mittee on the Question of Defining Aggression, established pursuant to its resolution 2330 (XXII) · of
18 December 1967, covering the work of its seventh
session held from 11 March to 12 April 1974, including the draft Definition of Aggression adopted by the
Special Committee by consensus and recommended for
adoption by the General Assembly, 6
Deeply convinced that the adoption of the Definition
of Aggression would contribute to the strengthening
of international peace and security,
1. Approves the Definition of Aggression, the text
of which is annexed to the present resolution;
4 Official Records of the United Nations Conference on the
Law of Treaties, Documents of the Conference (United Nations
publication, Sales No.: E.70.V.5), document A/CONF.39/26.
p. 285.
~ Ibid., document A/CONF.39/27, p. 287.
6 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/9619 and Corr.I).
