S/PRST/2014/2

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 January 2014
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7099th meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 January 2014, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Mali”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf
of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Mali.
“The Security Council welcomes the successful holding of peaceful and
transparent legislative elections on 24 November and 15 December 2013 in
Mali and commends the people and authorities of Mali for the manner in
which they were conducted. The Security Council commends the efforts of
domestic and international observers and bilateral and international partners to
support the electoral process. The Security Council expresses its appreciation
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) for the security and logistical support it provided during
the electoral process. The Security Council underlines that, in addition to the
successful holding of the presidential elections in July and August 2013, the
holding of the legislative elections marks a further step in the restoration of
democratic governance and the full return of constitutional order in Mali.
“The Security Council commends the initial efforts of the Government of
Mali to launch a series of national consultative events on the situation in the
North of Mali to promote good governance, institutional reform, economic and
social development and to reinforce national unity and security. The Security
Council encourages further steps towards consolidating stability, advancing
inclusive national dialogue and reconciliation, and fostering social cohesion.
The Security Council underscores the need to address the underlying causes of
recurrent crises which have affected Mali, including governance, security,
development and humanitarian challenges, and drawing lessons from past
peace agreements.
“The Security Council reiterates its call for an inclusive and credible
negotiation process open to all communities of the North of Mali, with the
goal of securing a durable political resolution to the crisis and long-term peace
and stability throughout the country, respecting the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of the Malian State. The Security Council lends its full
support to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali to use
good offices, in close coordination with the international community, towards
14-21416 (E) 230114

*1421416*

S/PRST/2014/2

the restoration of peace and security throughout the national territory of Mali,
in the context of a comprehensive agreement ending the crisis.
“The Security Council recalls its resolution 2100 (2013) and, in this
regard, calls on all the signatories of the Ouagadougou Preliminary Agreement
of 18 June 2013, and those armed groups in the North of Mali that have cut off
all ties with terrorist organizations and committed unconditionally to the
Agreement, to swiftly and fully implement its provisions, including the
cantonment of armed groups, the re-establishment of State administration
throughout the country and the urgent launching of inclusive and credible
peace talks.
“The Security Council reiterates its demand that armed groups in Mali
put aside their arms and reject the recourse to violence. The Security Council
calls on all relevant Malian parties to agree on active measures to further the
cantonment of armed groups, as an essential step leading to an effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process, in the context
of a comprehensive peace settlement. The Security Council reiterates its
support for MINUSMA’s active role in supporting the strengthening of the
above processes.
“The Security Council stresses the need to ensure the full, equal and
effective participation and representation of women at all levels and at an early
stage of the stabilization phase, including the security sector reform and DDR
processes, as well as in the national political dialogue and electoral processes.
“The Security Council expresses concern about the fragile security
situation in the North of Mali, including the recent incidents that revealed that
terrorists and other armed groups have reorganized themselves and regained
some ability to operate. The Security Council stresses the primary
responsibility of the Government of Mali for the provision of stability and
security throughout its territory. The Security Council stresses the importance
of achieving without further delays the complete operational deployment of
MINUSMA to stabilize key population centres and protect civilians, including
women and children, especially in the North of Mali, and to continue to
support the re-establishment of State authority throughout the country and the
promotion of the rule of law and protection of human rights. The Security
Council calls on all Member States to support the swift completion of
MINUSMA’s deployment. The Security Council urges all parties in Mali to
cooperate fully with the deployment and activities of MINUSMA, in particular
by ensuring their safety and security.
“The Security Council takes note of the investigation led by Malian
judicial authorities of military personnel, including General Amadou Haya
Sanogo, in connection with violence committed in 2012. The Security Council
stresses the importance of maintaining Malian civilian control and oversight of
the Malian Defense and Security Forces as a key element of the overall reform
of the security sector and commends in this regard the contribution of
international donors including the European Union (EU) through its Common
Security and Defence Policy mission EUTM Mali.
“The Security Council recalls that those responsible for violations of
international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human rights must

2/3

14-21416

S/PRST/2014/2

be held accountable and, in this regard, encourages the Government of Mali to
conduct investigations on such acts and swiftly bring the perpetrators to justice
and to continue to cooperate with the International Criminal Court. The
Security Council strongly condemns incidents of sexual violence in armed
conflict, including against children, in Mali, acknowledges efforts by the
Government of Mali to prioritize judicial investigations of incidents of sexual
violence in armed conflict, and encourages efforts to speed up the return of
judicial authorities to the North.
“The Security Council, while noting that thousands of refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs) have returned to their areas of origin,
commends the Government of Mali for its efforts to address the humanitarian
challenges and calls on the Government to achieve lasting solutions for
refugees and IDPs, including by creating the conditions conducive to their
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return. The Security Council remains
gravely concerned by the extent of the food crisis and calls on the international
community to continue to increase its assistance to affected populations,
particularly women and children, and address the gap in the funding of the
Consolidated Appeal for Mali.
“The Security Council welcomes the efforts of the international
community as well as of the Malian Government within the framework of the
mutual commitments of the Brussels 15 May 2013 conference “Together for a
new Mali”. The Security Council calls upon all relevant United Nations
agencies and the international community to strengthen their support for the
Government’s efforts to implement its socioeconomic development plans,
including supporting the provision of basic services to the population, in
particular in the North of Mali.
“The Security Council calls upon the international community to
continue to support the people and Government of Mali towards achieving
lasting peace, stability and reconciliation in Mali and the development of the
country.
“The Security Council reiterates its continued concern about the alarming
situation in the Sahel region and reaffirms its continued commitment to
address the complex security and political challenges in this region, which are
interrelated with humanitarian and developmental issues. The Security Council
reaffirms its request, in this regard, to the Secretary General to ensure early
progress towards the effective implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.”

14-21416

3/3
