UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/976
14 September 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

REPORT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL MISSION TO JAKARTA AND DILI,
8 TO 12 SEPTEMBER 1999

I.

OBJECTIVES OF THE MISSION

1.
The Security Council Mission dispatched to Jakarta and Dili from 8 to
12 September 1999 was entrusted with the task of discussing with the Government
of Indonesia concrete steps for the peaceful implementation of the 5 May
Agreement (S/1999/513). The Mission was to welcome the undertaking by the
Government of Indonesia to fulfil its obligations under the 5 May Agreement, but
to note that the Government’s efforts so far had not been able to prevent an
intensification of violence in the Territory. It was to state its particular
concern at the recent campaign of violence against the United Nations Mission in
East Timor (UNAMET) and urge the Government to ensure security and to allow
UNAMET to implement its mandate without hindrance. The Mission was asked to
stress that the people of East Timor had made a clear choice in favour of
independence, that their will must be respected and that the international
community looked forward to working with the Government of Indonesia in bringing
East Timor to independence.

II.
2.

COMPOSITION OF THE MISSION

The Mission was composed of the following members:
Ambassador Martin Andjaba (Namibia), Head of mission
Ambassador Hasmy Agam (Malaysia)
Minister Alphons Hamer (Netherlands)
Ambassador Danilo Türk (Slovenia)
Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland)

99-26220 (E)

140999

*9926220E*

/...

S/1999/976
English
Page 2

Mr. Francesc Vendrell (United Nations Secretariat), Deputy Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General
III.

PROGRAMME AND SUMMARY OF MEETINGS

3.
Briefing by United Nations and UNAMET staff (8 September). In the
briefings, staff described unequivocally the deterioration in the security and
humanitarian situation in East Timor since the announcement of the result of the
ballot, in contrast with the attempt by the Indonesian authorities to give a
reassuring account. This and other briefings left the Mission in no doubt that
large elements in the military and police authorities had been complicit in
organizing and supporting the action of the militias.
4.
Meeting with Foreign Minister Alatas (8 September). The Mission conveyed
to Foreign Minister Alatas the grave concern of the Security Council over the
current situation in East Timor and expressed its wish to work with the
Government in a spirit of pragmatism and cooperation to address the security and
humanitarian situation. The Mission emphasized the need to ensure that UNAMET
and international relief organizations would be allowed to return to East Timor
and carry out their functions fully. A final withdrawal of UNAMET would send a
very bad signal of the failure of the Government to stabilize the situation.
Foreign Minister Alatas expressed Indonesia’s shared concern over the crisis in
East Timor, but insisted that while the Government would welcome any assistance
in providing humanitarian relief, it would not contemplate any foreign military
presence in East Timor before the Indonesian Parliament met and addressed the
outcome of the popular consultation. Until then, Indonesia should be allowed to
resolve the security situation. The Mission stressed that if the situation were
to continue deteriorating while the Government did not accept the offer of help
from the international community, Indonesia would be subjected to severe
international criticism.
5.
Meetings with the Jakarta diplomatic corps (8 and 10 September). The
Mission discussed the current situation in East Timor with Jakarta-based
ambassadors. A number of ambassadors firmly underscored the complicity by the
Indonesian military and police in the actions of the militia and described a
coordinated campaign to rid the Territory of all foreign presence. Concerns
were also expressed that the Government no longer had control over the military,
at least with respect to the situation in East Timor, where the military was
wilfully contradicting the policy of the Government. The ambassadors strongly
supported the idea of the visit of the Mission to East Timor. They expressed
doubts that the Government would agree to cooperate with an international
security force in East Timor. Following the Mission’s visit to East Timor, the
ambassadors were briefed on the Mission’s findings.
6.
Meeting with Madam Megawati Soekarnoputri (8 September). The Mission
explained its objectives and asked Madam Megawati to refrain from treating any
emerging willingness of the Government of Indonesia to accept an international
security presence as a stick with which to beat the Government. She agreed, but
declined to make a public statement in support of the idea of international
intervention. She criticized President Habibie strongly for agreeing to the
5 May Agreement process when, as she alleged, his legitimacy as leader of

/...

S/1999/976
English
Page 3

Indonesia was fading away.
political aspects.

The Mission declined to enter into the domestic

7.
Meetings with Mr. Xanana Gusmao (9 and 12 September). Mr. Gusmao appealed
in the strongest terms to the Mission to act immediately to save lives in East
Timor. He stated categorically that East Timor was not in a state of civil war;
rather, it was suffering what amounted to a campaign by the military to
exterminate East Timorese and lay waste to its cities, possibly with the intent
to partition the Territory. He reported that 12 battalions of the Indonesian
Armed Forces (TNI) had entered the Territory from West Timor, and stated that,
should that "invasion" reach the westernmost of Falintil’s four cantonment
sites, Falintil would have no choice but to defend itself. There were currently
thousands of internally displaced persons seeking refuge at the cantonment
sites. Following the Mission’s visit to Dili, representatives of the Mission
called upon Mr. Gusmao to brief him on the situation on the ground. When it
became evident that the Government was about to announce its willingness to
cooperate with the international community, Mr. Gusmao was encouraged to issue a
statement in measured and conciliatory terms.
8.
Meeting with President Habibie (9 September). The Mission conveyed to the
President that the situation in East Timor had gone far beyond the acceptable
and asked him to consider the offer of assistance from the international
community. President Habibie rejected any foreign military presence before the
Indonesian Parliament had acted on the consultation result. He said that would
send the wrong signal to Indonesians regarding the military and risk the
Balkanization of Indonesia. The Mission underlined the fundamental point that
the degree of confidence which the Security Council would have in Indonesian
actions would be directly related to the extent to which UNAMET could deploy and
operate normally. The President agreed that it was essential to keep UNAMET in
East Timor and maintained that security for the UNAMET compound would be
redoubled and its water and food needs met. The Mission reached agreement with
the President that it would travel to Dili, both to assess the situation firsthand and to show its support to UNAMET. On preparations for phase III, the
Mission suggested that bringing forward the preparation of the security element
of the United Nations share of the responsibility for the Territory would be a
way of contributing to the maintenance of security in phase II. President
Habibie rejected the idea.
9.
Meeting with Defence Minister General Wiranto and the General Staff
(9 September). While acknowledging that there were problems in East Timor,
General Wiranto stated that TNI was committed to handling the situation, however
complex. After the results of the balloting were announced, the pro-integration
group, concerned about what it considered to be biased behaviour on the part of
UNAMET staff, had erupted into violence. A further complication was that a
substantial number of the police and military in East Timor were local East
Timorese and were thus, in his words, "understandably" against independence.
Linguistic and cultural differences, coupled with the size of the territory, had
made the work of TNI more difficult. General Wiranto had full confidence that
martial law would allow his forces to stabilize the situation and begin to tend
to the needs of the refugees. In his view, pro-integration anger at UNAMET was
so high that the situation would only deteriorate further if United Nations
troops were brought in at the current stage. The Mission contested his analysis
/...

S/1999/976
English
Page 4

throughout and pointed to the lack of political will on the part of the
Government. News reports received during the meeting, telling of violence
against the UNAMET compound, graphically illustrated the General’s misplaced
confidence.
10. Meeting with Indonesian NGO representatives (10 September). A group of
Indonesian NGO leaders met with two members of the Mission to convey their
concerns and discuss the situation in East Timor. The group presented a joint
statement signed by 15 NGOs calling for: immediate Security Council meetings to
decide on the dispatch of a peacekeeping force to East Timor; concrete steps by
the Government to stop the violence in East Timor by complying with the 5 May
Agreement and arresting militias; and the immediate lifting of the martial law
in East Timor by the Government of Indonesia.
11. Visit to Dili (11 September). The Mission had highly useful meetings with
local military commanders, toured the town and visited the UNAMET compound. It
also met with Bishop Nasciemento. While there were no security incidents during
the period of the visit, the Mission was left with a strong sense of shock at
the destruction which had taken place, concern at UNAMET’s severe loss of
confidence in the security provided by the local forces and distress at the
desperate state of the displaced population. A large media party represented
this to the outside world. During the course of the visit, it became clear that
General Wiranto’s views had also undergone a change.
12. President Habibie’s press statement and the Mission’s visit with the
President (12 September). Shortly before a scheduled visit with the Mission,
President Habibie announced to the press that while the Indonesian defence
forces had done their utmost under very difficult and complex circumstances to
stabilize the situation in East Timor, they had had to recognize that there were
limits to what they could further achieve. He had therefore informed the
Secretary-General of Indonesia’s readiness to unconditionally "accept
international peacekeeping forces through the United Nations from friendly
nations to restore peace and security in East Timor, to protect the people and
to implement the results of the direct ballot of 30 August 1999". Foreign
Minister Alatas would travel to New York to prepare for the implementation of
the cooperative effort between the United Nations and the Government of
Indonesia.
13. During the subsequent meeting with the Mission, the President expressed his
Government’s willingness to allow for evacuation to Australia of the internally
displaced persons in the UNAMET compound; to facilitate air drops of food and
other necessities to other internally displaced persons in the hills; as well as
to ensure that Falintil would not come under attack by the militias.

IV.

ANALYSIS

14. Reports by the Secretary-General to the Security Council during phase I of
the popular consultation described the impunity with which pro-autonomy militias
were allowed to carry out violent activity. It was apparent to the Mission,
through its own observation and through discussion with United Nations staff,
that this activity could not have occurred without the involvement of large
/...

S/1999/976
English
Page 5

elements of the Indonesian military and police. Briefings by UNAMET staff in
Jakarta and Dili described how, during post-consultation violence which forced
the closure of UNAMET’s regional offices, there were clear instances when police
and TNI forces stood aside to allow militias into towns to conduct organized and
coordinated campaigns of arson and terror. One aim of this was to rid the
Territory of any international presence, including UNAMET, humanitarian workers
and the media, thereby limiting outside observation. Another was to implement a
coordinated, forced relocation programme in which tens of thousands of East
Timorese have been moved to West Timor. There were consistent reports of the
direct involvement of large elements of TNI and the police in this forced
relocation campaign. The organized and coordinated nature of this campaign, the
Territory-wide effort to force out UNAMET and other international presences and
the lack of adequate response to militia violence despite the overwhelming
superiority of TNI and the police all support the view that militia activities
were organized and supported by parts of TNI.
15. There was clearly a disconnect between the situation on the ground and the
assessment of the situation in East Timor as presented by President Habibie and
his senior advisers. They described the post-ballot violence as stemming from
disgruntled pro-autonomy supporters angry at perceived UNAMET bias, with the
Indonesian military struggling to resolve the latest expression of long-standing
strife between East Timorese. However, as outlined above, the widespread
destruction on the ground was the result neither of popular sentiment nor of
civil war. Rather, there were clear signs that the evidence could, as many
UNAMET staff described it, be "switched on and off". During its 11 September
meeting with Defence Minister General Wiranto, the Mission received word that
militias were at that very moment attempting to loot vehicles from the UNAMET
compound. When General Wiranto had his staff check on the situation, he was
apparently told at first that the situation at the compound was normal, despite
the seriousness of the actual circumstances. The Mission had the distinct
impression that when the General travelled to Dili along with the Mission and
toured the city, he had not been prepared for the extent of the destruction.
Accurate first-hand information as to the situation on the ground may well have
contributed to the change in Government policy.
16. It was clear to the Mission that martial law, implemented on 7 September,
had not succeeded in stabilizing the situation. In Dili, there appeared little
left for the militias to loot by the time of the arrival of the Mission on
11 September. Despite assurances by the authorities that UNAMET’s security
would be a prime objective of martial law, on 10 September, Aitarak militia were
allowed freely past TNI and police checkpoints into the environs of the UNAMET
compound. UNAMET then observed TNI soldiers assisting the militia in their
attempt to loot UNAMET vehicles. When UNAMET military liaison officers came
under direct threat and demanded that TNI act to stop the militiamen, the TNI
soldiers informed them that they had no orders to shoot the militia. Direct
evidence such as this, as well as the destruction of the city as a whole, made
nonsense of the argument that martial law might solve the problem of the
violence which had befallen East Timor.
17. It was also apparent that the introduction of martial law had been unable
to respond adequately to the humanitarian crisis in East Timor, despite
assurances by the authorities that that had been one of its aims. The campaign
/...

S/1999/976
English
Page 6

of militia terror and forced relocation had created a crisis which was largely
unobserved and unobservable at the time of the Mission. It has gone largely
unreported that considerable numbers of militiamen entered East Timor from West
Timor to bolster the actions of the militia there. There were widespread
reports of militias taking pro-independence supporters and activists from the
displaced populations in transit and in West Timor. There were also reports
that the tens of thousands of East Timorese who had fled to the Falintil
cantonment sites and elsewhere in East Timor were perilously close to
starvation.

V.

CONCLUSIONS

18. It became increasingly clear to the Mission during its visit that the
accounts given by the Government of events in East Timor and of action taken by
Indonesia to carry out its responsibilities under the 5 May Agreement did not
tally with the briefings provided by United Nations staff and senior diplomatic
representatives in Jakarta and Dili, nor with events observed on the ground.
Confronting the Government with its lack of credibility in this regard
contributed to the development of policy in a positive direction.
19. The involvement of large elements of the Indonesian military and police in
East Timor in organizing and backing the unacceptably violent actions of the
militias has become clear to any objective observer and was acknowledged
publicly by the Minister of Defence on 11 September. The repeated failure of
the defence forces, in spite of their undoubted capability, to carry out the
Government’s obligations and assurances to provide security to UNAMET,
international organizations and the population as a whole meant that the
Indonesian authorities were either unable or unwilling to provide the proper
environment for the peaceful implementation of the 5 May Agreement. The
introduction of martial law on 7 September did not alter this state of affairs.
Cooperation between the Government of Indonesia and the international community
therefore became essential for effective implementation; and the Government’s
recognition of this on 12 September is to be welcomed. This cooperation must be
directed above all to providing security and basic needs to all sections of the
East Timorese population without discrimination and to the refugee population in
West Timor.
20. In humanitarian terms, the situation of the majority of the population in
East Timor and of the refugee population in West Timor is extremely grave.
While further detailed analysis and assessment is necessary, there is an urgent
need to address this problem, ideally with the full cooperation of the
Indonesian authorities. Action is needed to deter further violence by the
pro-autonomy militias or clashes between the militias and the pro-independence
Falintil.
21. There is strong prima facie evidence of abuses of international
humanitarian law committed since the announcement of the ballot result on
4 September. This needs further investigation. UNAMET’s report of 11 September
(see annex) is relevant in this respect.

/...

S/1999/976
English
Page 7

22. Although the Mission made it unequivocally clear that the security and
operability of UNAMET was an important criterion of Indonesian performance in
carrying out its responsibilities, the relevant authorities allowed UNAMET’s
situation to deteriorate during the Mission’s stay. UNAMET’s security will need
to be kept under constant review, and evacuation of Dili arranged if necessary,
until an international security force is present on the ground. The security
and welfare of the internally displaced persons (IDPs) in the UNAMET compound
require special attention.
23. The Security Council Mission pays tribute to the Head of UNAMET and to its
staff, and to the members of United Nations and international humanitarian
organizations still working in and on East Timor, for their courage and
determination in upholding the standards and practices of the United Nations in
appalling circumstances.
24. Preparation of United Nations action to fulfil its responsibilities under
phase III of the 5 May Agreement could be advanced to dovetail with the enhanced
security to be provided by international security cooperation in phase II.
25. Consideration should be given to the regional and international importance
of Indonesia and to Indonesia’s need for support in its transition to full
democracy and a successful market economy. This is an extremely sensitive time
in internal Indonesian politics. But the problem of East Timor demands priority
because of the intensity of its humanitarian crisis and because of ineffective
Indonesian action so far in responding to Security Council resolutions
implementing the 5 May Agreement. These two factors could be brought together
because the implementation of the 5 May Agreement will contribute to the
successful process of transition for Indonesia.
26. This Mission of the Security Council was above all dedicated to helping the
Government of Indonesia to develop its understanding of the international
community’s perception of the East Timor crisis. Our task was significantly
assisted by the Government’s realization that the international community gave
priority to East Timor and was beginning to take action to signal this in
concrete terms. The Indonesian Government’s announcement of 12 September was
the result. The work of the Security Council Mission should be viewed in that
wider context.

VI.

RECOMMENDATIONS

27. The Mission submits the following recommendations for the consideration of
the Security Council as a result of its visit to Jakarta and Dili from 8 to
12 September 1999:
(i)

The grave humanitarian crisis in East Timor should be given the
topmost priority by the United Nations, in terms both of supply of
basic needs to the displaced population, including in West Timor, and
of insistence that the Government of Indonesia provide access and
security to United Nations and international humanitarian
organizations;

/...

S/1999/976
English
Page 8

(ii)

The Security Council should welcome the decision of the President of
Indonesia to invite an international peacekeeping force to cooperate
with Indonesia in restoring peace and security in East Timor and
should adopt a resolution without delay to provide a framework for the
implementation of that proposal;

(iii)

The Secretary-General, advised by his Special Representative in East
Timor, should consider reducing to a minimum, or if necessary
evacuating, the UNAMET deployment in Dili before the arrival of an
international security presence, provided that the safety and welfare
of the IDPs in the UNAMET compound has been satisfactorily arranged;

(iv)

The Security Council should consider authorizing an advance party of
the international security presence to undertake urgent and essential
tasks in and around Dili related to UNAMET and the provision of
humanitarian supplies;

(v)

The Secretary-General should be invited to submit plans for the
advance preparation of United Nations action in phase III in ways
which contribute to the more effective implementation of phase II
under the new circumstances;

(vi)

The Security Council should hold the Government of Indonesia to its
obligations under phase II of the 5 May Agreement, both before and
after the arrival of an international security presence, with
particular insistence on the proper care of IDPs and on curtailing the
role of the militias and preventing any clashes between the militias
and Falintil;

(vii)

The Security Council should institute action for the investigation of
apparent abuses of international humanitarian law on the ground in
East and West Timor since 4 September.

/...

S/1999/976
English
Page 9

Annex
The destruction of East Timor since 4 September 1999:
report prepared by UNAMET on 11 September 1999
1.
The events witnessed in East Timor since 4 September 1999 represent the
fulfilment of the worst threats made by the pro-autonomy campaigners and their
Indonesian Government supporters. In the guise of a backlash against the vote
for independence, what has actually happened is nothing less than a systematic
implementation of a "scorched earth" policy in East Timor, under the direction
of the Indonesian military.
2.
A detailed assessment of the situation in East Timor is impossible at this
time. The United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) has been completely
pinned down in the headquarters compound and, except for certain essential
tasks, has been unable to make any direct observation in Dili, let alone in the
rest of the Territory. We receive many unconfirmed reports of deaths and major
atrocities, some of which, thankfully, have proved to be unfounded. The
following conclusions come from our cautious assessment of a variety of sources
of information.
Widespread destruction
3.
In Dili it would appear that virtually every home or building has been
systematically looted of its contents, and a large proportion of them have been
burned. The central business district has been entirely gutted. Militias and
TNI soldiers have been observed over the past few days loading trucks with
equipment and supplies taken from these homes, and the dock in Kupang, West
Timor, is said to be bulging with kitchen appliances for sale. We believe that
similar situations exist in other regions, such as Aileu, Ermera and Maliana.
Forced displacement
4.
Similarly, reports have been received from all over the western part of
East Timor of massive forced displacement of the population to refugee camps in
West Timor. The preparation of such camps was publicly announced by General
Wiranto in late August, ostensibly to receive the mass of people who would be
voluntarily fleeing East Timor in the aftermath of the vote. It now appears
that efforts are under way to permanently disperse these people all around
Indonesia. But the terror has not ended with their displacement. We have
reliable and corroborated reports that the militia/TNI are at this moment
combing the refugee camps with lists looking for students, intellectuals and
activists, then taking these people away.
5.
The entire urban population of Dili has either fled to the hills or been
forcibly relocated outside of East Timor. There are unconfirmed reports that a
triage was performed before departure, and that large groups have disappeared.
We have received reliable eyewitness testimony that people were carefully
checked and interrogated during transit, and that certain individuals were
killed and thrown overboard. In Kupang there are reportedly tens of thousands
of internally displaced persons (IDPs), and a large East Timorese militia

/...

S/1999/976
English
Page 10

presence is roaming the streets, terrorizing the local population, and the East
Timorese IDPs in particular.
6.
In our view, this massive forced relocation outside of East Timor has been
designed to give the impression of large-scale dissatisfaction with the vote, a
situation of civil war, and to bring large groups of the population under
Indonesian control away from the spotlight of international attention. But it
cannot be ruled out that these are the first stages of a genocidal campaign to
stamp out the East Timorese problem by force.
Selective execution of students, intellectuals and activists
7.
In addition to the killings reported as part of the relocation programme,
there are many reports of deaths in East Timor. In particular, many proindependence activists and other community leaders, including the clergy, are
feared to have been killed in reprisal for their support, real or implied, for
the independence option. There are also reports of mass killings in various
locations, including Dili and the IDP camp in the church in Suai.
8.
It is clear that these crimes against humanity are part of a "scorched
earth" policy. The reduction of East Timor to rubble, aside from teaching the
East Timorese a lesson and sabotaging their chances of a successful transition
to independence, sends a warning to other potential breakaway regions of
Indonesia. But the worst may be yet to come. Much of the population remains
very vulnerable to starvation or attack. The pro-independence guerrillas are,
as far as we know, still concentrated in certain areas, and the political
leadership is concentrated in Dare, quite close to Dili. Food and water
shortages are becoming critical, and we cannot rule out further military
operations against these populations.
9.
This destruction has not been conducted by frustrated and insecure
civilians. That is the myth which the Indonesian authorities are striving to
convey. The evidence for a direct link between the militia and the military is
beyond any dispute and has been overwhelmingly documented by UNAMET over the
last four months. But the scale and thoroughness of the destruction of East
Timor in the past week has demonstrated a new level of open participation of the
military in the implementation of what was previously a more veiled operation.
This open military role has now been legitimized by the invocation of martial
law.

-----
