174

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

I. Notes with apprecwtwn the report of the Human
Rights Committee on its eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth
sessions66 and expresses satisfaction at the serious and constructive manner in which the Committee is continuing to
undertake its functions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the States parties to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights that
have extended their co-operation to the Human Rights Committee when submitting their reports under article 40 of the
Covenant and urges States parties that have not yet <lone
so to submit their reports to the Committee as speedily as
possible;
3. Urges the States parties to the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights that have been requested by
the Human Rights Committee to provide additional information to comply with that request;
4. Takes note of the decisions of the Human Rights
Committee on the question of periodicity. and on guidelines regarding the form and content of reports from States
parties under article 40, paragraph I (b) of the Covenant
as well as of the adoption by the Committee of general
comments under article 40, paragraph 4. of the Covenant; 67
5. Commends the States parties to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights that have
submitted their reports under article 16 of the Covenant and
urges States that have not yet done so to submit their reports
as soon as possible;
6. Takes due note of Economic and Social Council decision 198 I/ 162 of 8 May I 98 I concerning the review of
the composition, organization and administrative arrangements of the Sessional Working Group of Governmental
Experts on the Implementation of the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and looks forward
to further results in this regard at the first regular session
of the Council in 1982;
7. Again invites all States that have not yet done so to
become parties to the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights as well as to consider acceding
to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights;
8. Invites the States parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to consider making the
declaration provided for in article 41 of the Covenant;
9. Appreciates that the Human Rights Committee continues to strive for uniform standards in the implementation
of the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and of the Optional Protocol thereto;
10. Emphasizes the importance of the strictest compliance by States parties with their obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and,
where applicable, the Optional Protocol thereto;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep
the Human Rights Committee informed of the activities of
the Commission on Human Rights, the Sub-commission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities
and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and also to transmit the annual reports of the Human
Rights Committee to those bodies;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report on
the status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil

66
Official Records of the General AH<'mhlv, Thirt,·-.,ixth s,,.uion. Supplement No. 40 (N36/40).
·
67
Ibid., annexes V-Vll.

and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
13. Welcomes the measures taken by the Secretary-General to improve the publicity for the work of the Human
Rights Committee and requests the Secretary-General to
consider the most appropriate steps for the publication of
the Committee's documentation and to report on this question to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
all possible steps to ensure that the Division of Human
Rights of the Secretariat is able to assist effectively the
Human Rights Committee and the Economic and Social
Council in the implementation of their respective functions
under the International Covenants on Human Rights, taking
into account General Assembly resolutions 3534 (XXX) of
17 December 1975 and 31/93 of 14 December 1976.
73rd plenary meeting
25 November /98/

36/59.

Capital punishment

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision 35/437 of 15 December 1980,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 68
I. Invites Member States to submit further comments
and observations on the draft resolution entitled "Measures
aiming at the ultimate abolition of capital punishment (draft
Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights)" ,69 submitted at the thrity-fifth
session of the General Assembly, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit to the Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report containing the views expressed by Governments;
2. Decides to consider at its thirty-seventh session, under the item entitled ·'International Covenants on Human
Rights", the idea of elaborating a draft of a second optional
protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 70 aiming at the abolition of the death penalty.
73rd plenary meeting
25 November /98/

36/60.

Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons
from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopted by the
General Assembly in its resolution 3452 (XXX) of 9 December 197 5,
Bearing in mind article 7 of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights,7 1
Recalling also its resolutions 32/62 of 8 December 1977,
in which it requested the Commission on Human Rights to
draw up a draft convention against torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in the light
of the principles embodied in the Declaration, and 32/63
of 8 December 1977,
Noting that, in its resolution 11 of 5 September 1980, the
Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime
"' A/36/441 and Add. I and 2.
"" Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session, Annew,. agenda item 65, document A/351742. para. 20.
"' Resolution 2200 A I XXI). annex.
,, Ibid.
