United Nations

A/RES/60/159

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 February 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 71 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 2005
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/60/509/Add.2 (Part II))]

60/159. Human rights in the administration of justice
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the principles embodied in articles 3, 5, 8, 9 and 10 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1 and the relevant provisions of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocols
thereto, 2 in particular article 6 of the Covenant, which states, inter alia, that no one
shall be arbitrarily deprived of his life and prohibits the imposition of the death
penalty for crimes committed by persons below 18 years of age, and article 10, which
provides that all persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with humanity and
with respect for the inherent dignity of the human person,
Bearing in mind also the relevant provisions of the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 3 the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 4 in particular
the right to equal treatment before tribunals and all other organs administering justice,
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 5 in particular article 37, according to
which every child deprived of liberty shall be treated in a manner that takes into
account the needs of persons of his or her age, and the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 6 in particular the obligation to treat
men and women equally in all stages of procedures in courts and tribunals,
Calling attention to the numerous international standards in the field of the
administration of justice,
Convinced that the independence and impartiality of the judiciary are essential
prerequisites for the protection of human rights, good governance and democracy as
well as for ensuring that there is no discrimination in the administration of justice,
and should therefore be respected in all circumstances,

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex, and resolution 44/128, annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
4
Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
5
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
6
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
2

05-49714

A/RES/60/159

Noting the adoption by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination of general recommendation XXXI on the prevention of racial
discrimination in the administration and functioning of the criminal justice system, 7
Emphasizing that the right to access to justice, as contained in applicable
international human rights instruments, forms an important basis for strengthening the
rule of law through the administration of justice,
Mindful of the importance of ensuring respect for the rule of law and human
rights in the administration of justice, in particular in post-conflict situations, as a
crucial contribution to building peace and justice and ending impunity,
Recalling the Guidelines for Action on Children in the Criminal Justice System 8
and the establishment and subsequent meetings of the Inter-Agency Coordination
Panel on Juvenile Justice,
Calling attention to the relevant provisions of the Vienna Declaration on Crime
and Justice: Meeting the Challenges of the Twenty-first Century, 9 and of the plans of
action for its implementation and follow-up, 10
Recalling its resolution 58/183 of 22 December 2003, as well as Commission on
Human Rights resolution 2004/43 of 19 April 2004, 11 and Economic and Social
Council resolution 2004/28 of 21 July 2004 entitled “United Nations standards and
norms in crime prevention and criminal justice”,
Reaffirms the importance of the full and effective implementation of all
1.
United Nations standards on human rights in the administration of justice;
2.
Reiterates its call to all Member States to spare no effort in providing for
effective legislative and other mechanisms and procedures, as well as adequate
resources, to ensure the full implementation of those standards;
Affirms that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat
3.
terrorism, including in the administration of justice, complies with their obligations
under international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law;
Invites Governments to provide for training, including anti-racist,
4.
multicultural and gender-sensitive training, in human rights in the administration of
justice, including juvenile justice, to all judges, lawyers, prosecutors, social workers,
immigration and police officers and other professionals concerned, including
personnel deployed in international field presences;
Invites States to make use of technical assistance offered by the relevant
5.
United Nations programmes in order to strengthen national capacities and
infrastructures in the field of the administration of justice;
Appeals to Governments to include in their national development plans the
6.
administration of justice as an integral part of the development process and to allocate
adequate resources for the provision of legal-aid services with a view to promoting
_______________
7

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/60/18), chap. IX.
Economic and Social Council resolution 1997/30, annex.
9
Resolution 55/59, annex.
10
Resolution 56/261, annex.
11
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
8

2

A/RES/60/159

and protecting human rights, and invites the international community to respond
favourably to requests for financial and technical assistance for the enhancement and
strengthening of the administration of justice;
Encourages the regional commissions, the specialized agencies, United
7.
Nations institutes active in the areas of human rights and crime prevention and
criminal justice, and other relevant parts of the United Nations system, as well as
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, including national
professional associations concerned with promoting United Nations standards in this
field, and other segments of civil society, including the media, to continue to develop
their activities in promoting human rights in the administration of justice;
Invites the Commission on Human Rights and the Commission on Crime
8.
Prevention and Criminal Justice, as well as the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
to closely coordinate their activities relating to the administration of justice;
Calls upon mechanisms of the Commission on Human Rights and its
9.
subsidiary bodies, including special rapporteurs, special representatives and working
groups, to continue to give special attention to questions relating to the effective
promotion and protection of human rights in the administration of justice, including
juvenile justice, and to provide, where appropriate, specific recommendations in this
regard, including proposals for advisory services and technical assistance measures;
10. Calls upon the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to reinforce, within
their respective mandates, their activities relating to national capacity-building in the
field of the administration of justice, in particular in post-conflict situations and, in
this context, in cooperation with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the
Secretariat;
11. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to continue organizing
training courses and other relevant activities aimed at enhancing the promotion and
protection of human rights in the field of the administration of justice, and welcomes
the publication of the Manual on Human Rights Training for Prison Officials; 12
12. Welcomes the increased attention paid to the issue of juvenile justice by
the High Commissioner and the United Nations Children’s Fund, in particular through
technical assistance activities, and, taking into account the fact that international
cooperation to promote juvenile justice reform has become a priority within the
United Nations system, encourages the further activities of the High Commissioner
and the United Nations Children’s Fund, within their mandates, in this regard;
13. Encourages the Inter-Agency Coordination Panel on Juvenile Justice to
further increase cooperation among the partners involved, to develop common
indicators, tools and manuals, to share information and to pool their capacities and
interests in order to increase the effectiveness of programme implementation, and
takes note with appreciation of the publication entitled “Protecting the rights of
children in conflict with the law”; 13
14. Welcomes the adoption by the Economic and Social Council of the
Guidelines on Justice in Matters involving Child Victims and Witnesses of Crime, set

_______________
12
13

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.04.XIV.1.
Available from www.unodc.org/pdf/criminal_justice/Protecting_children_en.pdf.

3

A/RES/60/159

out in the annex to its resolution 2005/20 of 22 July 2005, and encourages all relevant
actors to draw upon the Guidelines where appropriate;
15. Encourages the independent expert for the United Nations study on
violence against children to address in his final report the prevalence of violence in
the juvenile justice system;
16. Invites Governments, relevant international and regional bodies, national
human rights institutions and non-governmental organizations to devote increased
attention to the issue of women in prison, including the children of women in prison,
with a view to identifying and addressing the key problems;
17. Underlines the importance of rebuilding and strengthening structures for
the administration of justice and respect for the rule of law and human rights in postconflict situations, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure system-wide
coordination and coherence of programmes and activities of the relevant parts of the
United Nations system, including through the proposed Peacebuilding Commission
and the Rule of Law Assistance Unit, in the field of the administration of justice in
post-conflict situations, including assistance provided through United Nations field
presences;
18. Stresses the special need for national capacity-building in the field of the
administration of justice, in particular through reform of the judiciary, the police and
the penal system, as well as juvenile justice reform, in order to establish and maintain
stable societies and the rule of law in post-conflict situations, and in this context
welcomes the role of the Office of the High Commissioner in supporting the
establishment and functioning of transitional justice mechanisms in post-conflict
situations;
19. Decides to consider the question of human rights in the administration of
justice at its sixty-second session under the item entitled “Human rights questions”.
64th plenary meeting
16 December 2005

4
