S/PV.6789

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6789th meeting

Wednesday, 20 June 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Li Baodong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Araud
Mr. Berger
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Vinay Kumar
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Haroon
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Laher
Mr. Menan
Mr. Tatham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

12-38202 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1238202*

S/PV.6789

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

interest to the Council. Of course, when it comes to the
interactive dialogue, they will all be at the disposal of
the Council’s members in order to answer any questions.
Of course, Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye, Chief
Military Adviser, needs no introduction and is known
to all.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance with
rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations; Lieutenant General Chander
Prakash, Force Commander of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; Major General Paolo Serra, Force
Commander and Head of Mission of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon; Major General Moses Bisong
Obi, Force Commander of the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan; and Major General
Fernando Rodrigues Goulart, Force Commander of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, to
participate in this meeting.
I would also like to welcome the other Force
Commanders and Chief Military Observers present in
the Council Chamber today.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I should like
to thank you, Sir, for giving Council members this
opportunity to engage in an interactive dialogue with
all our Force Commanders. They have been meeting
throughout this week, as in previous years — indeed,
they have met 10 times this year — for the annual
conference of leaders of the military components of our
17 peacekeeping operations. Their week of discussion, I
believe, has been very useful. This is the third time they
have come to address the Security Council and engage
in this exchange.
I note that this year we have also invited Lieutenant
General Gutti, Commander of the African Union
Mission in Somalia. We have done so because we enjoy
very close cooperation with that African Union force.
I have nothing further to add. I believe that it
would be useful — with your agreement, Sir — for
them to introduce themselves one by one so that we
can all identify them. Four of them will be giving us
brief presentations on issues that I believe will be of

2

I wish only to add that these are all exceptional
officers who are carrying out extremely sensitive
missions and enjoy my full confidence. I am proud to
work alongside them every day.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his statement and for his suggestion that
the Force Commanders should introduce themselves.
At the invitation of the President, the Force
Commanders of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations introduced themselves to the members
of the Council.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank all the
Force Commanders and Chief Military Observers for
introducing themselves. On behalf of the Council, I
welcome them to our meeting.
I give the floor to Lieutenant General Prakash.
Lieutenant General Prakash: At the outset, I
would like to take this opportunity to thank you, Sir,
for the support that you provide to the men and women
in uniform who proudly serve under the United Nations
flag in the Democratic Republic of Congo. I also thank
you for giving me an opportunity to talk to the Council
about the need for a system to assess and support
common military standards in peacekeeping operations
and avoid underperformance of units.
I will cover this subject in three parts: what this
issue is about, what needs to be addressed and what is
already being done in this regard, and what more can
be done.
Turning to the first part concerning why this is an
issue that needs to be addressed, Council members are
well aware that a force component in a Chapter VII
mission is made up of troops from different regions
of the world with different military orientations. They
hold varied types of equipment and the troops back
home are trained to adhere to their national doctrines
and objectives. This is further complicated by issues of
culture and language, and sometimes by the perceptions
of their performance as per national expectations.

12-38202

S/PV.6789

Some may observe from what I have just said that
there is nothing new here and that the United Nations
forces have managed to get by not withstanding these
challenges. But it also needs to be highlighted here
that, over time, the peacekeeping environment has
become increasingly complex and challenging and
come under increasing scrutiny. Thus, the ability to
absorb the differences and shortcomings that I have
just outlined is getting weaker and weaker. When one
thinks of missions in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, South Sudan and Darfur, it is very evident that
the business of military peacekeeping is now a specific
and demanding affair in its own right, especially
when it comes to the highest priority mandated task of
protection of civilians.
I now turn to the issue of what is being done in this
regard. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the troop-contributing countries (TCCs) already have a
process of predeployment procedures, memorandums
of understanding and laid-down training standards and
concept of operations. This is supplemented by training
material, standard operating procedures and manuals
issued by the Office of Military Affairs, missions and
even the troop-contributing countries.
In spite of the fact that all this is happening, we still
face some situations and challenges in the field missions
that highlight the fact that more needs to be done. For
instance, the protection of civilians requires the force
component to be very agile and flexible, and to operate
in difficult terrain and risky and demanding situations.
Not all contingents find themselves optimized to be
able to effectively perform in that kind of scenario for
reasons of training, equipment and sometimes even
mental psyche. Some peacekeepers still arrive with
a mindset and orientation of peacekeeping as a soft
operational tour.
In the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), we continue to find that contemporary
peacekeeping, when it comes to the protection of
civilians under imminent threat, is a fine balance
between prompt and robust action required from a
soldier in uniform and a person who cares and nurtures
the vulnerable civilian community in his area of
operational responsibility. The traditional training of
an officer and a soldier fielded to the missions does not
equip them with all of the range of skills, techniques
and sometimes even the mental attitude to operate in
this wide band.

At this point, I am reminded of a statement in a
recent publication of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, which states that “United Nations
peacekeeping is ostensibly a political endeavour”.
Therefore, having a system that conditions our young
men and women peacekeepers to operate in such a
challenging environment is a reality of the business
of modern-day peacekeeping. As to what more can be
done, I would like to make a few suggestions.
First of all, the initiative of the Office of Military
Affairs to base all contributions from TCCs on a
generic infantry battalion is a welcome initiative in the
right direction. To give members a practical example
of standardization, in MONUSCO we have contingents
holding varied types of armoured personnel carrier,
in varied numbers. We have been pushing hard for the
standardization of holdings based on operational needs.
That has resulted in optimized use of holding of critical
equipment and has generated much-needed financial
savings, without jeopardizing operational efficiency.
Going further, we need to have a system that covers
the whole lifespan of activities — from preparation to
deployment to de-induction — and that addresses the
issues related to operational performance and the image
projection of the United Nations in the field. While
some of that already exists, as I previously explained,
nevertheless there are some gaps that need to be plugged
in order to have a fully effective system in place. In
my opinion, the preparation and predeployment phase
is most critical. We need to place greater emphasis on
issues that make United Nations peacekeeping under
Chapter VII peacekeeping different from war fighting.
Also, greater attention needs to be paid to preparing
units under orders for deployment to a mission area
on the mission-specific tasks. If the TCCs so desire,
missions can provide teams to those units to brief and
focus potential peacekeepers on their forthcoming
tasks and duties.
In addition to the forum that already exists, there
would be an advantage in facilitating greater interaction
and communication between policy/decision-makers in
national capitals and missions that are beneficiaries
of troops provided by the capitals, so that both the
contributor and the receiver are on the same page when
it comes to understanding the requirements, constraints,
limitations and performance of units.
Moreover, for contingents deployed in the mission
area, there is a need for a regular formal feedback

12-382023

S/PV.6789

system to be introduced tokeep the troop-contributing
countries informed, of course through the permanent
missions, about the operational performance of
their troops. In MONUSCO, the chain of command
in the Mission is conducting operational readiness
inspections, the findings of which could well be
formally shared with TCCs. I may highlight here that
that feedback will comment on the multidisciplinary
facets of peacekeeping, even to include issues
related to community liaison and dealing with civil
populations and humanitarian actors under challenging
circumstances.
While I have made some suggestions for the
collective improvement of the performance of units, I
think there is also a need to have the very best leaders
for the future missions, ideally with comprehensive
and good grounding in United Nations peacekeeping
missions. To support that, there needs to be a rigorous
and honest personnel reporting system to inform national
and United Nations authorities to facilitate the selection
system, the aim being to have the right person for the
right job. Also on this requirement, troop-contributing
countries could be encouraged to incorporate a specific
United Nations peacekeeping module into the junior
and senior staff college courses syllabuses. That would
help military officers to pick the various nuances and
intricacies of peacekeeping, such as the political and
humanitarian aspects, which is currently a shortcoming
noticed in military peacekeepers.
In conclusion, while I have provided some
suggestions for the adoption of a system to improve the
performance of military components in United Nations
peacekeeping, I request that this not be interpreted as the
current system falling short of expectations. As a force
commander, I am proud of what troops in MONUSCO
are delivering today in a most challenging environment.
That said, it is the mark of any professional set-up that
we constantly endeavour to improve. It is in that context
that I have provided members with some ideas and
suggestions.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Lieutenant
General Prakash for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Major General Serra.
Major General Serra: It is an honour for me, as
Head of Mission and Force Commander of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), to be
given this opportunity to address the Security Council

4

today on the challenges of leading a composite force
towards common operational goals.
I shall elaborate on the subject of my presentation
by first outlining aspects of the complexity of UNIFIL.
I shall then turn to some of the key challenges inherent
in a composite force, how those may impact the
implementation of UNIFIL’s mandate, and possible
ways to address them. Let me first underline the
complexity of the Mission.
As of June, the total military strength of UNIFIL
stood at approximately 12,000 soldiers, from 39 troopcontributing countries. UNIFIL also has an important,
albeit small, civilian component, consisting of about
1,000 civilian staff, including approximately 660
national civilian staff members. In addition, I can also
count on capabilities provided by the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization Observer Group
Lebanon, which is composed of 48 military observers.
Both military and civilian components work closely
together in implementing the Mission’s mandate under
resolution 1701 (2006). It is also important to mention
that, in addition to ensuring close collaboration among
the different components, the Force works in close
cooperation with the Lebanese Armed Forces, carrying
out an average of 10 to 12 per cent of operational
activities jointly every day.
The UNIFIL area of operations can be considered
very small — 64 kilometres in width and 40 kilometres
in depth, totalling 1,026 square kilometers — and
bordered by the 120-kilometre-long Blue Line to the
south and south-east. The Litani River, in the north, and
a 34-kilometre-long coastline along the Mediterranean
Sea, in the west, define the shape of the area of
operations. With the exception of the Plain of Tyre, the
terrain is undulating, with a series of steep hills and
deep valleys, making it an area very difficult to control.
The area of maritime operations extends 110 nautical
miles from north to south along the Lebanese coastline,
and approximately 45 nautical miles east to- est, for a
total size of 5,000 square miles.
As members are aware, in an effort to ensure
that the Mission is configured more appropriately to
fulfil its mandated tasks, UNIFIL is in the process of
implementing the recommendations of the strategic
review that was conducted by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations pursuant to resolution 2004
(2011).

12-38202

S/PV.6789

In implementing the military capability study
conducted from 27 November to 7 December
2011, UNIFIL is reviewing the possibility of troop
adjustments, in coordination with the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, with a view to having
leaner but no less capable forces, while ensuring that
the Force’s ability to discharge its mandated tasks is
preserved and consistent with the priorities identified
by the strategic review.
UNIFIL also continues to work closely with the
Lebanese Armed Forces through the strategic dialogue,
with a view to increasing the capacity of the Lebanese
Armed Forces to assume effective and sustainable
security control of the UNIFIL area of operations and
Lebanese territorial waters.
The focus remains on leveraging all those initiatives
towards achieving a move to a permanent ceasefire.
I shall now turn to the specific challenges of leading
a composite force towards common operational goals.
First, I would like to reflect on the multinational
nature of UNIFIL and some of the key lessons learned
in that regard. Surely, there are challenges in leading
and coordinating troops from 39 different countries
from the continents of Africa, Asia, Europe, Central
America and South America. Above all, however,
multinationality is an added value. It is a testimony to
the concerted efforts of nations to promote stability in
southern Lebanon. In order to ensure interoperability
and sound cooperation among military personnel, it
is important to ensure that members of the Force are
able to communicate among themselves — in our case
in English. Also, the diverse backgrounds and varying
approaches that troops bring from their past national,
regional or non-United Nations multinational operational
experiences tend to bear on the way they tackle
operational challenges. That reality has highlighted the
need for a comprehensive doctrinal body, comprising
manuals, policies and standard operating procedures.
The United Nations generic infantry battalion manual,
recently developed by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations — a battalion being an infantry unit with
manpower of about 750 troops — provides an essential
tool for troop contributors, both during predeployment
preparations and in operational employment.
Secondly, in building multinational forces, a
capability-driven approach to generating resources
is essential. Our focus in UNIFIL will be on
quality-oriented strategies, instead of quantity.

Interoperability of material and equipment is required
to maximize operational efficiency. Clear operational
standards would also help new contributor counties to
develop national capacities in order to serve in UNIFIL
or similar United Nations peacekeeping operations.
As was highlighted in the recently conducted
strategic review, a third challenge lies in the integration
of the civilian and military components, both within
the Mission and in securing better integration of efforts
among UNIFIL, the United Nations Special Coordinator
for Lebanon and the United Nations country team. In
order to strengthen and institutionalize the relationship
between the political and military leadership of
UNIFIL, a civilian has been appointed as Deputy
Head of Mission and a comprehensive and integrated
Mission planning mechanism is being instituted. For
that purpose, an integrated Mission planning team led
by the newly appointed Deputy Head of Mission has
been established.
Fourthly, it is essential to accommodate
multinationality in the composition of land forces.
Currently, UNIFIL land forces consist of nine
manoeuvre battalions, seven of which belong to a
single troop-contributing country and two of which can
be considered multinational, namely, the Irish-Finnish
battalion and the Spanish battalion with a small unit
from El Salvador. Based on experience gained on the
ground, I can say that the ideal solution would be to
have homogeneous battalions. But a multinational
battalion with different nationality sub-units, at the
company level of around 150 troops, would also be
manageable and very effective. Multinationality below
that level is recommended only for specific tasks,
such as in the case of the Slovenian “human terrain”
detachment, consisting of 11 troops, together with
the Italian brigades, or the Timor-Leste team, also
composed of 11 troops, dealing with logistic support
within the Portuguese engineer company.
A final challenge relates to the UNIFIL Maritime
Task Force, which currently comprises nine ships from
six different countries, supported by two helicopters.
The rotation periods of ships differ by country, ranging
from one month to two years. To improve efficiency and
institutional knowledge, it will be useful to standardize
the rotation cycle of maritime units to a minimum level
of from four to six months.
As concerns interoperability, the effectiveness of
the maritime component depends on clearly identified

12-382025

S/PV.6789

capabilities, equipment and training. Due to the fact that
troop contributors have different types of equipment
and procedures in communications, the Maritime Task
Force has no common means for data exchange and
uses commercial satellites as a primary means to meet
minimum military requirements.
In conclusion, multinationality can be a factor of
strength for United Nations peace operations and will
work as a force multiplier if certain conditions are met.
The key words are unity of command and synergy of
efforts.
At this point, please allow me to convey to
members how greatly the Mission has benefited from
the unwavering support it has received over the years
from the Council. Nearly six years since the adoption of
resolution 1701 (2006), we are witnessing the calmest
period in southern Lebanon in many years. That is
largely due to UNIFIL’s deterrent presence and close
collaboration with the Lebanese Armed Forces, the
Government and the people of South Lebanon.
The Lebanese Armed Forces have proved to be
a reliable institution, able to bring together all of
Lebanon’s confessional groups. Cooperation with
the Lebanese Armed Forces remains at the core of
UNIFIL’s mandate, with a view to improving their
capabilities to eventually take over the tasks mandated
in resolution 1701 (2006). However, notwithstanding
the success of military operations, ultimate success is
contingent upon effectively addressing the roots of the
conflict through a political process. It will therefore be
vital to take advantage of the window of opportunity
that UNIFIL’s presence has created, to make progress
towards the establishment of a permanent ceasefire and
a long-term solution.
Very soon, the Council will discuss the extension
of UNIFIL’s mandate. As Head of Mission and Force
Commander of UNIFIL, I count on the continued
support of the Security Council in maintaining
the Force’s ability to discharge its mandated tasks,
consistent with the priorities identified by the strategic
review. Being optimistic about the future is inspiring;
the rest is knowledge, resources, goodwill and hard
work.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Major
General Serra for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Major General Obi.

6

General Obi: I have been asked to speak as
Force Commander on the challenges of dealing with
a complex political environment in peacekeeping
operations. I will draw from my experience as Force
Commander of the defunct United Nations Mission in
the Sudan (UNMIS) and of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS), with particular reference
to the inter-communal crisis that took place in Jonglei
state, South Sudan, at the turn of the year, in December
2011 and January 2012.
Briefly, by way of background, the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA), which was signed in Naivasha
in 2005, left several issues unresolved by the time South
Sudan seceded on 9 July 2011. Among the unresolved
issues are border demarcation and the sharing of oil
revenues, both of which have become pivotal issues
in the most recent crisis between the Sudan and
South Sudan, with accompanying challenges to the
implementation of the UNMISS mandate.
As to the challenges, in the case of the previous
Mission, UNMIS, the Abyei issue posed a range of
challenges. Of particular note is the challenge of
protecting civilians when parties to the Agreement
were in conflict, as was the case in May 2011. The issue
of the commitment, or lack of it, of the parties was
well highlighted in that case. As Force Commander,
one had to remain actively engaged with the militaries
on both sides and also work closely with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General at the political
level. Doing that ensured that air routes were kept open,
reinforcements made possible, certain evacuations
carried out and humanitarian operations conducted.
The South Kordofan crisis, at the point of liquidating
UNMIS, posed a complex range of challenges. One of
those was having United Nations troops in enclaves,
for example Kauda in the Nuba Mountains and
Julud, which effectively became out of control of the
parties to the CPA. The challenges at that point were
complex — having to deal with the liquidation of the
mission, mandate implementation and even protecting
and sustaining the troops themselves, in a thoroughly
complex environment. Again, active engagement
with all parties concerned was crucial under such
circumstances.
In the current Mission, UNMISS, some of the
challenges naturally stem from the mandate of
the Mission, which on the face of it looks fairly
straightforward but, as is so often the case, the devil is in

12-38202

S/PV.6789

the details. A key word in the mandate is “support”. Of
course, we support peace consolidation, the protection
of civilians and conflict mitigation. This means that
we must provide support to the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan as it fulfils its responsibility
to protect civilians. But what is also key is the task of
UNMISS to protect civilians in imminent danger when
the Government of the Republic of South Sudan is not
doing so.
Out of this arise the military tasks and, again,
support and assistance to the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan in creating and sustaining
a safe and secure environment. Of course, that in
itself causes challenges, since the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan has occasionally had priorities
other than ours, not the least of which is engaging in
conflict on the border with the Sudan. There is a real
risk in UNMISS not being seen as committing efforts
and resources towards the protection of civilians, and
instead giving the impression of simply backfilling the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) while it fights
on the border.
Equally, there is a perception among the people of
South Sudan that UNMISS is failing in its mission to
protect civilians, since it appears to be doing nothing
to prevent the Sudanese Armed Forces from bombing
civilians near the border; thus, a question arises
regarding the need for a Chapter VII mandate.
Of course, we can do nothing but report what we
see to New York for the Security Council to take action,
as getting into direct conflict with a Member State
would fall outside our mandate. The mandate is not
well understood by the people of South Sudan and much
effort has to been expended, including in organizing
seminars and various other outreach programmes,
to explain just what our mandate is. The absence of a
border monitoring mechanism has not helped issues
in that case. Also, the mandate recognizes national
ownership and primary responsibility, yet the Mission
must be prepared to protect when the host nation is not
doing so. That, to me, is a leading rule.
Of course, when humanitarian organizations are
working in the border areas to sustain those who are
fleeing fighting, it behooves us to ensure that they
can operate in a safe and secure environment. But
understandably, some humanitarian organizations are
uncomfortable with that arrangement because of its
inherent conflict with their humanitarian principles. So

it often happens that one cannot win. I must say, however,
that we have been actively involved in the protection
of civilians, even in those areas, in conjunction with
humanitarian agencies — the Yida and Pariang areas
are two of the many examples.
Finally, I should like to present to the Council the
dilemma of what we should do if it is the SPLA itself
that is threatening civilians. My rules of engagement
would allow the soldiers under my command to use
force — and indeed lethal force — if required, but to
do so could in some cases, I sense, be a game changer
in terms of our relationship with the SPLA and the host
nation and the amount of consent that we currently
enjoy. My fellow Force Commanders may have their
views on that, and I would be pleased to share them.
Those are some of challenges of dealing with a complex
political environment.
As to the Jonglei crisis, let us turn to the events
of late December 2011 and January this year. Many
will be familiar with how cattle and access to grazing
areas and water are pivotal to the lives of the people in
that region of Africa and how cattle rustling, among
other acts, often results in violent clashes and many
deaths. Thus it was in 2011 when, following attacks and
revenge attacks, the Murle tribe attacked the Lou Nuer,
and the Lou Nuer chose to exact their revenge in late
December, and advanced with a strength of over 6,000,
which is a conservative estimate, upon Likuangole, a
Murle community.
The Mission’s early warning early/response strategy
paid off, leading to the spotting of the advancing column
on 23 December 2011. Before that time, we conducted
daily air and ground patrols that enabled us to spot the
advancing column. That information was immediately
shared with Government officials, security agencies
and the humanitarian community, which enabled those
in harm’s way to move out while others were evacuated
by the Mission.
UNMISS carried out necessary deployments
and reinforcements, along with the SPLA and, later,
the Southern Sudan Police Service. We had rightly
identified Pibor as the centre of gravity, as it is the
seat of Government and county headquarters, with a
substantial civilian population. A decision was taken
to prevent the advancing ravaging youth from causing
harm to the civilians in the town. The decision was also
shared with the Government of the Republic of South

12-382027

S/PV.6789

Sudan and the SPLA, and together we took the measures
necessary to protect civilians in the town.
The Mission’s crisis management support team
had been activated upon receipt of the report of an
advancing column of armed Lou Nuer youth, in order
to assess our options. It was quite clear to me that
we had to be prepared to intervene to support the
SPLA, provide it with physical and moral support,
and encourage it to take responsibility in protecting
civilians. I therefore directed that our troops in
settlements — including Likuangole, Gumuruk and
other front-line settlements — be reinforced.
Clearly, as a member of the senior leadership team
in the Mission, I was required to act at the political
level. By acknowledging that the ultimate solution to
the problem could only be a South Sudanese solution,
we agreed that Vice-President Riek Machar should
be flown to the area to speak to the Lou Nuer. That
decision, and holding my troops in Likuangole to
facilitate his visit in the face of such a force, were very
crucial decisions I had to take.
There then followed a lengthy process of negotiation
and mediation, but the Lou Nuer youth, having
attacked Likuangole, proceeded forward to Pibor,
where most of the Murle from smaller settlements,
including Likuangole, had moved. By those actions, we
encouraged the SPLA to be also prepared to defend. I
moved my armoured personnel carriers over a distance
of 200 kilometres through muddy terrain to reinforce
and embolden the SPLA. With our APCs in manoeuvre,
the Lou Nuer were engaged in Pibor. Having taken
some casualties, that became a turning point and the
Lou Nuer had to withdraw.
Now, what are the lessons learned? Our early
warning strategy had paid off. Our crisis management
support team had activated in good time. Efforts
were shared with Governments, which emphasized
the importance of cooperation with the host nation.
Together, we worked with the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees as a team and
a force multiplier, including by using the media.
What, then, did not work well? Poor communications
and the absence of military helicopters were very
crucial. It became difficult to reinforce the troops
because some of the civilian helicopters would not
carry our ammunition, classifying them as dangerous
cargo. Finally, given that the major events took place in

8

late December 2011, a few months into the lifespan of
the Mission, there was a shortage of required staff and
the Mission had not fully generated its force. While the
force had the available combat power, half of it had to
be committed towards that operation.
Having said that, I would like to say that collectively,
with the Government and the people of South Sudan,
although there were casualties, we were able to prevent
a situation in which we would have lost more people.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Major
General Obi for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Major General Goulart.
Major General Goulart: It is a great honour for
me to speak to the Security Council on behalf of the
military component of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). My presentation today
will focus on the military component’s contribution to
Haiti’s stabilization and the support it provides to that
country’s institutions.
Since its creation in 2004, MINUSTAH has been
working tirelessly towards establishing the rule of law,
restoring public safety and order, protecting civilians,
supporting the democratic process and preserving
human rights. In the context of the Mission’s broad
mandate, the military component’s contribution is
primarily aimed at promoting security and stability,
protecting civilians and responding to disasters. In
addition to that, however, the military also makes a
focused contribution to strengthening relevant Haitian
institutions.
Acting under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter and in close coordination with the United
Nations police and the Haitian National Police (HNP),
MINUSTAH’s military component has been making
steady progress in all its mandated tasks. In this regard,
daily operations are conducted in order to assist in
the maintenance of the rule of law and public order.
Each military unit manages its area of responsibility
by conducting patrols and setting up checkpoints. Such
activities have deterred violence and crimes and instilled
a sense of security in the local population, thereby
improving law and order. By maintaining a secure
environment in Haiti, the military component has also
helped to enable further political and socio-economic
developments in the country.
We are very proud of the accomplishments that
have helped Haiti to recover from the 2010 earthquake

12-38202

S/PV.6789

and the efforts made to reduce criminal violence
and improve protection of the civilian population.
Regarding the cholera outbreak, the Mission’s rapid
response, supported by the military component, has
been mitigating the effects and spread of the disease.
That support includes preparing cholera treatment
centres, allocating medical teams and distributing clean
water to affected populations. I should also mention that
the measures that the Mission and other agencies have
been developing to fight cholera have had the additional
effect of enhancing the Haitian response capacity in
that area.
I should also highlight the various work projects
done by the military engineers. Besides fulfilling the
force’s requirements, they are engaged in demolishing
unsafe buildings, removing debris, preparing sites
for relocating internally displaced persons, cleaning
ditches and canals, repairing roads and drilling wells.
The engineer units have been working effectively to
support the Haitian Government through improvements
in HNP installations, constructing new police stations,
preparing the ground for schools and hospitals, and
erecting prefabs to house the judiciary. Such efforts
mitigate the effects of rains and storms, improve living
conditions for poor communities, make the population
more secure and further enhance the conditions needed
for stability in the country.
Regarding institutional development, the security
generated by the military presence is unquestionably
its best contribution to strengthening the country’s
political and security sector institutions. Particularly
relevant are the military component’s contributions to
the HNP and the Haitian Coast Guard, as well as its
support for the electoral process. Military units conduct
regular joint operations with United Nations police and
the HNP in order to prevent crime and arrest criminals
and gang members. Where there are demonstrations
and civil unrest, the military component provides
backup and support as needed. More important, our
presence has been a confidence-builder for the HNP,
which knows that it can count on our support as it goes
through its own development process.
Such joint operations have recently featured
support for the HNP in its actions against the former
Haitian military or former members of the Forces
armées d’Haiti, and other elements threatening to
organize into a second armed force and questioning
the Government’s authority. I am pleased to report that
MINUSTAH’s military component, working closely

with its police counterpart, successfully supported the
HNP’s operation against such elements last month.
Operation Sunrise proved firmly that joint operations,
when planned in advance and in close conjunction with
the Government, bring the Mission improved results.
During the past year, the military component’s
interaction with the HNP has increased even more.
Joint planning and coordination have improved our
success in the field, but more importantly, by observing
and participating in joint exercises, the HNP has been
able to demonstrate increased planning capacity for
security operations.
Along the same lines of support for Haitian
institutions, our plan is to add a new task for
MINUSTAH’s maritime element, composed of
Uruguayan patrol boats and crews. That unit will
incorporate a capacity-building role for the Haitian
Coast Guard, in partnership with MINUSTAH’s
police component. Taking advantage of the mentoring
experience and French-speaking abilities of the United
Nations officers, the Uruguayan crews will provide
the Coast Guard with technical knowledge to improve
its training and thereby increase its participation in
patrolling Haiti’s maritime borders.
Another of the military component’s contributions
is its participation in the electoral process. In the period
leading up to elections, military units are involved in
logistical support for polling stations and warehouses
around the country, mainly by transporting ballot
boxes and electoral material to them. On election days,
the military component provides overall security in
departments or regions that have a high-level threat
assessment. This covers polling stations and areas
where electoral material is being gathered or counted,
as well as key Government buildings and sites, in case
of election-related violence.
As some here may remember, the military
component’s role in preventing the violence that
resulted in December 2010 after the announcement of
the first round of presidential elections was extremely
important to preventing the situation from spiraling out
of control. Along the same lines, the military component
is ready to provide support for the upcoming local and
partial senatorial elections, though the date has yet
to be confirmed. It should also be noted that, while
MINUSTAH’s resources and assets have enabled it to
support elections effectively, the Government of Haiti
will have to inherit many of these tasks and functions.

12-382029

S/PV.6789

In the wake of the adoption of resolution 2012
(2011), MINUSTAH has completed a drawdown of its
military, police and civilian capabilities. The military
component’s authorized strength is currently at 7,340
troops, of whom 7,285 are currently effective, after
a reduction of 1,600 troops and related equipment.
Along with the drawdown, the military component
has reconfigured its force to maximize mission
effectiveness. The remainder have been concentrated in
higher-risk areas and, thanks to close coordination with
the police component, the presence of formed police
units in areas being vacated by the military has ensured
the gradual transition of responsibilities to the HNP.
Looking towards the future, we are currently
considering the military component’s next configuration,
taking into account resolution 2012 (2011), according
to which future adjustments of the force configuration
should be based on the overall security situation on the
ground and the increasing development of Haitian State
capacities.
All in all, we firmly believe that MINUSTAH has
successfully been carrying out its tasks in providing
security and stabilization in Haiti. However, some key
challenges, which I would like to present to the Council
before finishing my presentation, remain ahead of us.
Above all, the HNP must be further strengthened
so that it can assume the entire responsibility for the
country’s security needs. The Government of Haiti
and MINUSTAH have the same objective: the timely
drawdown and ultimate departure of the Mission.
However, that must happen without a security vacuum
being created when the military component withdraws.
In addition, the country’s capacity to conduct elections
with limited external support, to deal with the effects
of seasonal rains and hurricanes by itself and to remain
focused on the path of good governance, political
stability and socio-economic development are of
paramount importance.
I thank the Council for its attention, and I reaffirm
the continuous strong commitment of the military
component in giving all its strength and best effort to
the accomplishment of the mandate that MINUSTAH
received from the Council.

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to welcome all the Force Commanders
who have joined us today and to commend the initiative
of Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous. His input
will certainly be useful and very beneficial.
Before moving to the substance of my statement, on
behalf of the Kingdom of Morocco, I would like to pay
a warm tribute to the Blue Helmets and to commend
their devotion, commitment and spirit of sacrifice
for the noble goals of the United Nations. I take the
opportunity to reiterate our condolences to the families
of those countries that have lost members of their armed
forces or police or civilians in the service of the United
Nations.
No one can dispute that the peacekeeping mission
is the most tangible and visible activity of our
Organization’s work. It is increasingly complex and
demanding in terms of human and financial resources.
Its fundamentals remain the same.
First, peacekeeping certainly remains the most
effective and least costly way to restore and to build
peace.
Secondly, the multidimensional nature of recent
peacekeeping operations requires us to find responses
tailored to the changing needs of such operations, as
well as to the new challenges and circumstances that
arise once missions have been mandated.
Thirdly, peacekeeping requires different approaches
in order to take into account the realities specific to
each situation. In that respect, seeking harmonized
practices, other than in logistics, cannot be through a
one-size-fits-all approach or an end in itself.
Fourthly, in trying to find innovative responses to
new challenges, it is essential to remain committed to
the core principles of United Nations peacekeeping,
namely, respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States, the consent of parties, impartiality
in implementing Council mandates and the non-use of
force except in the case of legitimate defence.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Major
General Goulart for his briefing.

Fifthly and lastly, as others have underscored this
morning, the protection of civilians remains the primary
responsibility of nation States and, when mandated by
the United Nations, requires adequate training and
logistical resources for its implementation.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

In reaction to the presentations that we heard this
morning, allow me to highlight the following elements.

10

12-38202

S/PV.6789

First, it is essential to adapt the financial and material
resources available to peacekeeping operations to
mandates adopted by the Council. In that context,
notwithstanding the need for rationalization, budgetary
and financial constraints should not hamper the
effectiveness and efficiency of operations mandated by
the Security Council.
As was amply and tangibly demonstrated this
morning, peacekeeping operations usually take place
in difficult conditions, sometimes with the involvement
of actors who threaten the security and physical safety
not only of civilians, but also of Blue Helmets. In that
respect, in addition to early-warning systems, Blue
Helmets must have the necessary means and equipment
to defend themselves, and those who attack them must
be fully brought to account.
In order to succeed, any peacekeeping mission must
base its activity on the neutrality and impartiality that
characterize the work of the United Nations, pursuant
to the mandates established by the Council. That is the
only way to ensure the trust and the cooperation of the
parties to a dispute.
More than a decade ago, resolution 1353 (2001) set
the stage for increased cooperation among the Council,
the troop- and police-contributing countries and the
Secretariat. Despite some progress, the full potential of
such triangular cooperation is far from being achieved.
We must do more, and we are committed to doing
so. In that context, the issue of training was rightly
emphasized by several speakers this morning. We
believe that training at the national level and through
modules prepared by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations should be complemented by the sharing of
knowledge and good practices among troop-contributing
countries.
In that regard, the issue of multilingualism is
extremely important and must be reflected in the goal of
ensuring greater effectiveness and cooperation between
peacekeepers and not only the authorities, but also the
people that they are mandated to serve and protect.
Finally, I would like to take advantage of the
presence of the Force Commanders with us today to
highlight the importance of inter-mission cooperation.
Moreover, in the context of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, which I have the honour to
chair, we have decided to keep that topic as a priority in
our debates and analysis. I would like to ask the Force
Commanders who are here if they can share with us

the best practices that they have acquired in the field
so that we can be inspired by them and ultimately
establish them as consistent practices to be applied in
other missions.
On the basis of Morocco’s commitment to the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the role of the
United Nations as an arbiter in the peaceful settlement
of disputes and in maintaining international peace and
security, my country has consistently contributed to
peacekeeping operations almost since its independence.
We will spare no effort in continuing to contribute
to strengthening the role of the Organization in
maintaining peace and to the ongoing improved
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate.
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding are at the core
of United Nations activities, and those of the Security
Council in particular. It is therefore not only useful
but also, in our view, extremely important to take the
opportunity to interact at regular intervals with the Force
Commanders and directly hear their points of view and
recommendations based on their unique experience.
I therefore thank the Generals, our briefers today, for
their very comprehensive and useful presentations. I
also welcome all military commanders here today and
thank them for their presence. I would also offer a word
of thanks to Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous
for his introduction and for facilitating the organization
of today’s meeting.
Let me begin by commending the work of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations and paying tribute to
all women and men that compose the personnel of the
various missions for the way they carry out their duties,
often in very challenging and difficult conditions. They
deserve our continuous admiration and support.
Let me also commend the work of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), not only in
facing the challenges of the ever more complex and
multidimensional activity of peacekeeping, but also
because of the reform process currently under way and
also, more recently, on the development of the United
Nations generic infantry battalion manual.
I will be very brief, since we believe that we are
here today essentially to listen. I will limit myself to
some comments on two or three issues already raised
by the briefers.

12-3820211

S/PV.6789

First, it is really a challenge for United Nations
peacekeeping operations to fulfil so many diverse
mandates and different tasks in the most varied
conditions, diverse environments and different
geographical areas, and with personnel coming from
dissimilar backgrounds and using different languages.
We therefore believe that a system is needed to put
in place and ensure common operational military
standards, of which the manual is a good example. A
precondition for such a system is to guarantee adequate
training before the deployment of a mission, a training
that takes into consideration the specific conditions on
the ground, but also essential values and objectives of
the United Nations, including issues of human rights,
women’s participation, the protection of civilians, in
particular, vulnerable groups, and respect for cultural
diversity and environmental conditions.
On another, related issue, it is very important
that a balanced number of caveats and clear rules
of engagement be defined in order to allow a force
commander to reach the common operational goals.
Another theme I would like to address is the issue of
political consent by the parties on the ground, which is
essential to ensure the sustainability of a peacekeeping
mission and which implies a shared strategic
understanding of its objectives, and the permanent,
constructive and responsible cooperation between those
parties and the United Nations mission. In that context,
a specific mechanism could be implemented within
each mission in order to monitor how the parties are
implementing their given consent through meaningful
cooperation and to report its issues through the
Secretariat to the Security Council. That would allow
the Council to react in a prompt and timely manner to
sudden changes in the level of political support enjoyed
by the mission concerned.
It is often said that peacekeepers are the first
peacebuilders. That aspect merits our full attention,
since the quality of the connection between the two
sides of the same reality constitutes in most cases the
key to sustained success of United Nations actions
and interventions. That connection starts, obviously,
at Headquarters through proper coordination among
different branches of the Secretariat, but it is essential
to ensure that it remains a permanent concern of the
leadership of each mission. Indeed, the military
component plays an important role in early peacebuilding
efforts, namely, by keeping law and order, allowing
people to go back to their normal lives, establishing a

12

secure environment, strengthening the rule of law and
promoting institution-building. Naturally, none of those
efforts can work properly and effectively without the
full involvement and commitment of the host country
in a process of responsible national ownership.
Let me conclude by reiterating my country’s tribute
to all men and women who, often through personal
sacrifice and risk, act on our behalf in order to achieve
peace and security in the world.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Today is a very appropriate
time to address the situation of peacekeepers, as well
as to meet with them and hear some of their opinions.
We thank Mr. Ladsous and we thank and welcome all
the Force Commanders for their insightful briefings,
their clarity and incisiveness in presenting perspectives
on the subjects under consideration, which brings the
value of constant interaction between the Security
Council and the field into appropriate focus.
Lest we forget, the briefers are officers and
gentlemen, so while a lot has been said, so much has
not been said. While their briefings have evoked many
memories of actions taken in the service of humankind,
it would not be right not to mention here the injuries
and fatalities suffered by our valiant standard-bearers,
the most recent examples being the losses suffered in
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
The incident in MONUSCO last month resulted
in injuries to some of our peacekeepers, but that has
clearly not dented our commitment to United Nations
peacekeeping in any form whatsoever. Over the past
50 years, 130 Pakistanis have laid down their lives
during peacekeeping activities, which is one of the
highest numbers of fatalities suffered by any single
State Member of the United Nations and which speaks
of our continual commitment to defend — at whatever
the cost to us — the sanctity of the blue uniform.
Against the backdrop of such sobering statistics,
the imperativeness of enhancing the safety and security
of peacekeepers cannot be overemphasized. The
imperiled safety of troops can undermine the sanctity
of peacekeeping operations. Insufficient resources and
a lack of operational readiness can also jeopardize
troop safety.
Lieutenant General Prakash spoke of standardization,
performance and adequate resource provision. Those

12-38202

S/PV.6789

aspects are important not only for us to consider but
for the contributors to the security of all our missions
to accomplish the mandates effectively. It can be
suggested that, to an extent, underperformance and
standardization should be addressed by developing
training modules and assessment parameters within
the context of a mission’s challenges. We can undertake
that important task by evaluating the troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) with more structured predeployment
visits that encompass a host of tests and scenario-based
exercises, with a view to checking the operational
efficacy of all outfits. In fact, we recommend that
approach. The module can be developed to assess the
operational readiness and worthiness of our troops. We
welcome the Department of Peacekeeping Operations’
reinforced focus in that specific area.
Given the broad geographical base of TCCs,
achieving standardization in equipment, mechanical
transport and training may not be easy. However, it is
important and essential to determine baseline standards
to avoid underperformance. Quality and performance
should not be compromised out of the desire to widen the
base of TCCs or in the name of regional representation
or other geopolitical considerations. We must continue
to place the highest premium on professional excellence.
In all United Nations peacekeeping missions,
leading a composite force towards common operational
goals is a pressing challenge that is exacerbated by
numerous factors. First, peacekeeping operations are
not conventional warfare, with a well-defined adversary.
Often there is no defined adversary. Secondly, the
presence of multinational contingents entails numerous
diversities, for example in terms of training, weapons,
equipment, the articulation of command and control
imperatives, and communication. Finally, a wide
range of strains, including alien terrain, weather and
the prevailing political and security situation, also
contribute significantly.
The challenges of common operational goals are
exacerbated by complex mandates, where support for
host nations has to be provided in difficult political
environments. Such assistance includes support for
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants, security structure reforms in the host
State, improvements in the judicial and correctional
systems, the protection of civilians, humanitarian
support and infrastructure development. That is indeed
a wide range of issues that need to be addressed.

I think that the United Nations peacekeeping
Missions in Liberia and East Timor are stellar examples
in that regard, and — this is very important — those
tasks need the active cooperation not only of the United
Nations as a whole but also of the Security Council in
particular, as well as the ownership of host States.
Today’s meeting has highlighted the challenges
and complexity of peacekeeping operations. We in the
Security Council must ensure that complexities are
simplified and operational strains eased out. We can do
so by laying down clear and achievable mandates that
are not fraught with individual national priorities or
complicated by unwieldy political propositions.
Reinforcing
triangular
cooperation
among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and TCCs is
therefore essential. The Security Council must drive
such cooperation. A one-off briefing close to mandate
renewal does not suffice.
Sustained dialogue is also essential in the wake of
drawdown and reconfiguration. These must be thought
out in much more complex situations, such as in
Africa. Technical assessments carried out to implement
drawdown and deployment must be based on realities
on the ground and shared on a timely basis with TCCs.
Consultations with the TCCs concerned therefore
become vital, not just on the ground but also here in
New York.
The operational success of peacekeeping is
predicated on the timely and assured deployment
of human and material resources. Questions of
resources — and this is an important point — cannot
be hedged on the pretext of financial constraints; I will
say a little more on this issue later on. Under-resourced
Missions are neither effective nor safe. The Security
Council and the Secretariat must therefore ensure the
provision of resources to peacekeeping missions, in
consultation with all stakeholders.
Finally, let me say that underlining and strengthening
coordination between peacekeeping and peacemaking
also remains essential for success. Successful military
operations can neither replace nor obviate political
dialogue and reconciliation. If we cannot win peace,
we will not be able to enforce it.
Lastly, I wish to raise the issue of the ever-pressing
need for money. The strapped Western Powers, which
foot most of the annual $6 billion bill to keep the peace
in Africa alone, are today in difficult situations when

12-3820213

S/PV.6789

it comes to paying more, and we should understand
that. But at times like this, I return to the sage advice
of The Economist, the most effective media organ in
the United Kingdom — I think my friend Mark Lyall
Grant will agree — which I believe is one of the most
no-nonsense, common-sense publications in the world.
The Economist states, in this month’s edition — rather
appropriately and aptly — that peacekeepers are doing
a useful job in Africa and deserve to be properly paid.
The United Nations Africa missions have helped to
create the continent’s own peacekeepers, and as useful
as such missions are, Africa will need external help
from the United Nations peacekeepers for decades.
Money is grudgingly spent. Helicopters and other
effective equipment are often essential. The current
world situation, with inflation rampant everywhere,
has not left a safety margin for the countries, especially
those in Asia, providing those troops, so very often
these helicopters are withdrawn, as was the case with
MONUSCO recently, with devastating consequences.
The Economist says, rather arrestingly, that sticking to
such a low fixed price is self-defeating in the United
Nations. The advice they give us in the end, which I
think all present could definitely benefit from, is that
without peacekeepers
“conflicts will begin again — and the ensuing costs
would be enormously higher, not just in terms of
military action … but in relief efforts, forgone trade
and ruined futures. Without peace, nothing happens
in Africa. It is worth a few more dollars a day.” (The
Economist, 9 June 2012)
Ms. Rice (United States of America): First, let me
thank all of the Force Commanders, as well as the men
and women under their command, for their service and
dedication. They have our strong support for the work
that they and all peacekeepers are doing for the cause
of international peace and security. The tragic deaths
only 12 days ago of seven Nigerian peacekeepers in the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire remind us
yet again of the dangerous and difficult circumstances
in which United Nations peacekeepers operate. We
mourn their loss, express our condolences to their
families and remain mindful of the great risks facing
their colleagues worldwide who continue to carry out
missions of critical importance.
I am pleased that we have now standardized
the practice of inviting the United Nations Force
Commanders to address the Security Council while they

14

are here for their annual conference. Our interaction
with them injects practical expertise and insight from
the field into the Council’s discussions. I am also glad
that they will be meeting with the General Assembly’s
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations this
week.
There have been significant developments in
United Nations peacekeeping since we met last year.
The Security Council has ended the original United
Nations Mission in the Sudan and established new
missions in Abyei, South Sudan and Syria. The
Council has also made important changes in ongoing
missions to better enable peacekeepers on the ground
to fulfil their mandates. Working with the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, we have taken steps
to promote inter-mission cooperation, particularly
between the United Nations Mission in Liberia and the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, where it
has proved critical to supporting democratic outcomes.
We decreased force levels in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti to almost pre-earthquake
levels, as security has improved in that country. We
authorized increased troop levels and enhanced United
Nations logistical support for the African Union
Mission in Somalia to further weaken Al-Shabaab and
bring more stability and hope to the Somali people than
they have experienced in decades. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has responded to the Council’s call for stronger
measures to protect civilians by developing creative
early-warning mechanisms to reduce the chances of
attacks against civilians.
Strengthening peacekeeping remains a top priority
for the United States at the United Nations. Our
positions are well known. Mandates must be clear and
achievable. Missions must have the resources required
to carry out those mandates, including well-trained,
equipped and skilled personnel, and there should be an
exit plan that includes a political strategy — a vision of
the desired end-state and effective early peacebuilding.
Today’s multidimensional peacekeeping missions must
have the capabilities and resolve to use force effectively
to deter threats, to defend themselves, to protect
civilians and, in the case of Chapter VII mandates, to
uphold the express will of the Security Council. The
United Nations has many troop contributors that uphold
the highest professional standards of proficiency
and conduct, and we thank them for their service.

12-38202

S/PV.6789

We must not allow a relatively few poor performers
to undermine that reputation and put lives at risk.
Therefore, the Secretariat must be firm about troop
contingents, standards of readiness and performance.
The Secretary-General should be ready to send home
any contingents that do not act in accordance with the
mission mandate or whose training and equipment
maintenance standards are seriously deficient to the
point of undermining the missions’ operations.
Peacekeepers and all field mission staff must be
held to the highest standard of conduct and discipline,
particularly with regard to the sexual exploitation and
abuse of vulnerable populations. We must not, and will
not, tolerate any such abuse by peacekeeping personnel
of the very populations they are charged with protecting.
For missions to succeed for the people they
serve, capable and committed peacekeepers and
commanders are necessary but not sufficient.
Operational effectiveness requires strong support
from Headquarters, as well as modern management,
administrative and logistics practices and, of course,
the contributions of the crucial civilian components. To
that end, the United States strongly supports the rapid
implementation of the global field support strategy. We
remain concerned by gaps in aviation capacity and are
determined to continue working with the Secretariat
and troop-contributing countries to help close them.
It is critical that the Secretariat holistically assess the
best mix of aircraft, including military, civilian, fixedand rotary-wing aircraft, to meet missions’ needs.
Helicopter-contributing countries should be fairly
compensated for providing the United Nations with a
scarce and high-value asset.
We welcome the efforts being made by the
Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries
and other partners to improve training and to set
standards for professional skills. We hope the new
scenario-based training models for the protection of
civilians, now available to peacekeeping training centres
and troop-contributing countries, the Secretariat’s
resources and capabilities matrix, and a United
Nations capabilities standards manual for infantry
battalions will improve performance in the field. We
look forward to the feedback of force commanders and
troop-contributing countries on those initiatives.
As the United Nations implements existing
initiatives to strengthen the effectiveness and
efficiency of peacekeeping missions, we must also

continue to explore new areas of innovation in best
practices and technology. The Council has placed a
heavy responsibility on the shoulders of the generals
present here. There are nearly 100,000 men and
women in uniform from over 100 countries serving
in United Nations missions, and doing so in some of
the most dangerous and fragile places on Earth. We
have asked the generals to bring, build and maintain
peace and protect the vulnerable in the most difficult
circumstances. It is very important to us that all their
soldiers return home safely. Yet, as we know, that work
is as honourable and essential as it is difficult. We are
grateful for their service and bravery.
In that spirit, we appreciate the generals’ candour
and openness with us about their missions’ needs,
challenges and limitations so that the decisions that
we make here in New York reflect the realities on the
ground.
Mr. Zhukov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome the Force
Commanders back to this meeting of the Security
Council, which has now become a regular event. Lest
we forget, it was first held in August 2010 during the
Russian presidency of the Security Council (S/PV.6370).
It gives us a chance to better understand the current
problems that peacekeepers face in implementing their
Security Council mandates, as well as to get feedback
first-hand and to ensure that the Council’s military
expertise remains relevant.
United Nations peacekeeping continues to be very
much in demand. Peacekeepers play a leading role in
supporting the efforts of national Governments towards
stabilization, peacebuilding, providing protection to
civilians and monitoring compliance with ceasefires.
United Nations peacekeeping activities are constantly
changing, both conceptually and operationally. It
is important to adapt them to emerging problems
and effectively react to new political realities and
challenges. In that light, the United Nations in recent
years has experienced an increasing demand for its
resources and, as a result, has been called upon to
tackle unprecedented tasks.
The events that peacekeepers have had to deal
with confirm once again the vital nature of the core
principles of peacekeeping. Peacekeepers must strictly
abide by their mandates and not get dragged into
internal political conflicts. They should not render tacit
support to one of the parties to a conflict. That can lead

12-3820215

S/PV.6789

to extremely negative consequences and can call into
question the reputation of the United Nations. Sadly, we
have seen such unfortunate precedents in recent times.
Of course, peacekeeping mandates should be clear.
They should not leave any latitude for malleable or
subjective interpretation. They should be practically
feasible and appropriate to the situation at hand.
Peacekeepers can carry out only primary tasks in
the field of peacebuilding. Inflating mandates to
include unmandated peacebuilding functions is
counterproductive.
An ongoing problem remains that of providing the
necessary level of military expertise for measures taken
within the framework of United Nations peacekeeping.
There is a Charter mechanism that exists for that
purpose; it is the Military Staff Committee. We believe
it should step up its activities.
In order to improve United Nations peacekeeping,
we should more effectively tap the resources of regional
organizations, in strict compliance with Chapter VIII
of the Charter. Useful improvements have been made in
that sphere. Putting them into practice will allow us all
to avoid repeating past mistakes in the future.
We hope that today’s meeting is a good chance
for all of us to reach a common understanding when it
comes to further steps to enhance the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
to congratulate you, Mr. President, for your initiative of
organizing this meeting as an opportunity to continue
our analysis of the state of peacekeeping operations.
I would also like to thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his statement and for his efforts. I would also like
to express my gratitude for the statements delivered by
the Force Commanders. I also welcome the presence
of the other generals who are joining us today. Their
perspectives and experience on the ground contribute
greatly to today’s debate.
Colombia is encouraged by the progress made by
the United Nations system towards attainable goals for
the peaceful coexistence of peoples, through judicious
cooperation of United Nations peacekeeping operations
with regional organizations to build national and
regional capacities and to develop strategies to increase
peacekeeping operations’ effectiveness in attaining
sustainable results. In our view, it is crucial to build on

16

work already done towards setting common goals and
taking systematic steps towards them.
The Security Council, the General Assembly,
troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat must
increase their cooperation in defining clear and realistic
mandates, providing sufficient resources and planning
in the long term. It is critical for the General Assembly
and the Security Council to enhance dialogue and
cooperation so that decisions taken will enjoy broad
support and mandates will be in line with available
resources.
The challenges faced by peacekeeping missions — and
the expectations of them — are ever greater, and security
conditions on the ground are ever more complex,
even as resources are limited. Mandates should be
devised with the political context and particularities
of each specific situation in mind, and with a view
to the available resources. We welcome initiatives to
improve communication among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and troop-contributing countries. We
stress the importance of triangular cooperation, as a
mechanism to promote cooperation and trust, in facing
peacekeeping challenges. More meetings should be held
with troop-contributing countries prior to renewing
mandates in order to discuss substantive issues with
practical implications for the conduct of missions.
It is important to increase the number of troopand police-contributing countries, because developing
nations currently provide the majority of uniformed
peacekeepers. We reiterate the importance of building
the capacities necessary to effectively carry out
mandated tasks. We commend the progress made by
the Secretariat in promoting capacities in order to
improve effectiveness on the ground in matters of the
intelligence, personnel in the field, capacity-building,
human resources and equipment necessary to ensure
smooth and timely deployments. The necessary
measures should be taken to increase security for
troops on the ground and to provide them with adequate
equipment. We recognize and commend the progress
made in monitoring and intelligence technology.
Stabilization and reconstruction require strategic
plans to strengthen national capacities in affected or
host countries, as well as social, political and sustainable
development programmes. No strategy for lasting peace
can overlook the important role that peacekeeping
operations play in stabilizing host countries by
supporting institutions and laying the groundwork

12-38202

S/PV.6789

necessary for peacebuilding. The troops, police and
civil personnel who make up peacekeeping operations
do support work that is closely tied to peacebuilding.
In that regard, a coordinated approach, with improved
communication and dialogue with the Peacebuilding
Commission, would be very helpful in identifying gaps
in international assistance and support. The Commission
should be invited to contribute its knowledge and
experience to Security Council debates. It could also
be instrumental in helping the United Nations broker
ties with international financial institutions, which are
critical to countries’ revitalization.
Colombia continues to stand ready to contribute to
peacekeeping operations to the extent it can and to take
an active part in discussions about how to strengthen
United Nations peacekeeping efforts.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous for
having launched this important meeting and for his
guidance of this discussion. I extend a warm welcome to
the Force Commanders. The clarity of their perspectives
works for an increased synergy between the Security
Council and the situation on the ground. I commend
them, especially in light of the great sacrifices they
make in heading the various peacekeeping operations.
Guatemala attaches fundamental importance to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, among other
reasons because we are a country that has benefited
directly from them. They fulfil a basic function of the
United Nations and constitute an indispensable tool
in the Organization’s work, in which we take part as
a troop-contributing country in South America, Africa
and the Middle East. United Nations peacekeeping forces
continue to evolve conceptually and operationally, as
we have heard this morning. The increase in the number
of peacekeeping operations in recent years has placed
ever greater demands on United Nations resources,
posing unprecedented challenges. Clearly, addressing
them will require the attention and participation of all
parties — the Security Council, Member States and the
Secretariat.
We thank the Force Commanders in attendance
today for sharing their important thoughts with us.
Because we have troops and observers in all their
missions, Guatemala has direct knowledge of the quality
of their leadership and the depth of their commitment.
We would like to make a few brief observations.

First, we reiterate the important need for
peacekeeping operations to have clear, feasible and
verifiable mandates that are adapted to each specific
situation. Clearly, the primary responsibility for
meeting those conditions falls to the Council.
Secondly, we are right to demand results from the
heads of missions and from the troops in the field.
However, we must also ensure that we provide them
with the necessary tools to effectively carry out their
tasks.
Thirdly, we must address the issue of the large
gaps in capacity, resources and training, through better
coordination among the Security Council, the General
Assembly — through the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee — the
Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries. In that
respect, the comments of Lieutenant General Prakash
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
most useful.
Fourthly, we emphasize the importance of
attaching the utmost priority to improving the security
and protection of personnel deployed in the field,
in particular when dealing with crisis situations or a
complex political environment. For their part, host
Governments must respect the basic principles of
peacekeeping operations.
Fifthly, the four Force Commanders whom we
heard from today discussed both the advantages and
the challenges they face in dealing with multinational
troops, in particular in attempting to integrate a diverse
range of military strategies from various cultures
into a cohesive and integrated force. Like others, we
believe that troop-contributing countries themselves
can contribute to that coherence by preparing their
troops and officers before they are integrated into a
peacekeeping mission. For its part, the Guatemalan
Ministry of Defence has established a specialized
training school to train troops and officers of the
entire Central American region who are subsequently
deployed in peacekeeping operations.
Sixthly, we greatly appreciated the comments
made by Major General Fernando Rodrigues Goulart
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
which focused on the contribution made by the
military component to ensure the stabilization of the
host country and to support its institutions. In general
terms, the military component is the largest component

12-3820217

S/PV.6789

of a mission and frequently serves as the face of the
mission for the local population. Accordingly, it is
important to provide the necessary training in areas
such as cooperation between the military and civilians
and sensitive areas concerning respect for culture,
customs and traditions of the host country, as well as
conduct and discipline in relation to gender matters and
other related issues.
Finally, we would like to take this opportunity
provided by having all of the Force Commanders here in
the Council today in order to ask how we in the Council
can better integrate the opinions of the personnel
serving in the field and the feedback provided by Force
Commanders.
Mr. Vinay Kumar (India): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Force Commanders of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti for their statements. I
also thank Mr. Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for arranging to introduce
them to us. We have carefully noted their views and
think that their perspectives, which are based on
experience gained on the ground while implementing
the Council’s resolutions, are important and will help
the Council in its work.
As threats to international peace and security have
changed over the decades, so have the challenges facing
peacekeeping missions. Three of today’s briefers head
missions that were not deployed to keep peace between
States, but within States. They must keep peace not
between two conventional armies, but rather must deal
with threats posed by armed groups in cases where it is
not easy to distinguish a combatant from a civilian. They
have to neutralize threats not to an easily identifiable
boundary, but to State institutions and civilians.
Moreover, they are called upon not only to keep
peace but to help to build national institutions and carry
out functions normally within the purview of national
Governments. For their operations to be effective, they
must gain the confidence not only of host Governments
but also of the communities in which they are deployed.
Under those circumstances, the rules of engagement
and concepts of operations have to be adjusted to suit
the particular circumstances of the host country. As
it is said, one size cannot fit all situations. The need

18

to maintain objectivity, neutrality, impartiality and
fairness assumes even greater importance. With
respect to the missions, standardization should aim at
achieving optimum performance rather than acquiring
the same equipment.
In that connection, it is important to keep in
mind that several United Nations peacekeeping
mandates have included tasks that raise questions
on the fundamental tenet of consent. They can place
peacekeepers in difficult legal circumstances, as the
UNMISS Force Commander has mentioned, thereby
sometimes hampering their effectiveness. The principle
of national ownership must inform all of our tasks
under the peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities of
the United Nations.
Today’s peacekeeping missions are tasked with
mandates that have been compared to Christmas trees.
Peacekeepers are asked to achieve what many of our
States have struggled for decades, if not centuries, to
achieve, while the gap in resources continues to be the
singular reality constraining the reach and ambit of
peacekeeping operations.
We must therefore keep in mind that providing
human and material resources commensurate with
the mandate is necessary not only for the operational
effectiveness of peacekeeping missions, but also has
a direct bearing on the credibility of the Council’s
mandates. Today, UNMISS Force Commanders gave a
concrete example of the resource constraints during the
Jonglei crisis in December 2011.
Peacekeeping missions of today form part of the
overall composite efforts of the international community
to pool the resources of its various institutions and
organizations in order to mount the operations. As the
Force Commanders have underscored, the vastness of
their job requires the coherence of all efforts, and the
success of the missions will depend not only on the
peacekeepers’ performance, but on the collaborative
nature of the venture. Therefore, an assessment of the
peacekeepers’ performance cannot be isolated from the
efficacy of the overall peace process.
Leadership at Headquarters and in the field and
coherent objectives among various stakeholders will
therefore determine the overall performance and
achievement of the tasks mandated to peacekeeping
missions. In that connection, we have noted the idea of
composite force formations. Although it appears to be
a logical option, the need for contingents to function as

12-38202

S/PV.6789

coherent units must be borne in mind. Our policies in
that regard must evolve gradually, with reality checks
at each step.
Preserving and supervising peace agreements,
restoring basic governance and establishing the
skeleton for a national institutional framework are
peacekeeping’s chief accomplishments. The larger
peace process must contribute to and capitalize on the
stabilization achieved by the military components.
Tasks ranging from establishing law and order and
the rule of law to national institution-building cannot
be entrusted to military components alone. Strategies
must be devised with sufficient details, resources and
implementation plans to address each phase of the
peace process.
United Nations peacekeeping is truly a unique
enterprise, involving global burden-sharing. The
partnership between the Secretariat, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Security Council
underpins that exercise. It derives its sustenance from
our respective abilities to contribute positively to this
venture. It requires a great deal of willingness to take
account of and accommodate the views and concerns
of all. The protection of civilians in order to assure
them a life of dignity, security and opportunity is
unquestionably a task that deserves much more than
the international community has committed to thus
far. Leaving it in the hands of peacekeepers alone is
a half-measure at best. Our efforts in that regard must
begin from where we have faltered rather than by
attempting to create universal thematic constructs.
As the largest contributor of peacekeepers in
United Nations history, India is conscious that much
has changed since the first peacekeeping missions were
launched more than five decades ago. The challenge
before us is to build on the legacy of peacekeeping and
ensure its relevance to current realities. We must remind
ourselves that it is a small cost in the face of the noble
goals we have set ourselves to achieve. Our capacity to
effectively implement the mandates of United Nations
missions will depend on providing adequate resources,
generating rational mandates and sourcing expertise
from countries that have the most relevant experience
for the conditions in which peacekeepers are deployed.
We must keep this in mind and act accordingly.
Before I conclude, I would like to pay homage to the
peacekeepers, including those from my own country,

who have laid down their lives while serving in United
Nations missions.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to begin
by thanking the President for giving us the opportunity
today to hear thought-provoking presentations from
the Force Commanders, whom we warmly welcome.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his
participation and briefing.
Peacekeeping operations are a unique mechanism
and an indispensable tool for our collective actions
aimed at maintaining international peace and security.
As it is gradually transformed into a more complex
institution, peacekeeping is encountering a number of
challenges that have a negative impact on its ability
to effectively carry out its tasks. Matters related to
increasing the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations,
and to their conceptual and operational evolution
and adaptation to a constantly changing political and
security environment, have been on our agenda for
a long time and constitute an area that continues to
require innovative ideas.
In that regard, I would like to underline the
importance of interactions such as today’s with the
commanders of military components, which inform
Council members of the challenges and problems that
the Blue Helmets currently face in the field and lay out
their vision for the parameters and indicators involved
in the effective fulfilment of their mandates. In our
view, such useful practices should become a frequent
tradition.
For the sake of brevity, I would like to confine
myself to sharing our perspectives on some aspects
of peacekeeping. First, it is mandates that guide
peacekeepers and give them a clear vision of their tasks.
Mandates must be realistic, achievable and tailored to
the logistical and operational capabilities with which
peacekeepers are provided. At the same time, depending
on security developments on the ground, mandates
could envisage a certain amount of flexibility aimed at
achieving broader inter-mission cooperation and rapid
operational adjustments.
Secondly, the importance of continued trilateral
cooperation among the Council, the Secretariat and
the troop- and police-contribution countries has been
stressed. Indeed, it is vital for effective United Nations
peacekeeping, as is peacekeepers’ cooperation with
host countries. Needless to say, coordinating action
and cooperating closely with host countries, especially

12-3820219

S/PV.6789

on the military side, is a prerequisite for the successful
implementation of mandates.
Thirdly, apart from the political and security
conditions on the ground, cultural and religious nuances
in host societies have an impact on peacekeeping’s
success. The parties to a conflict and the public should
have trust in peacekeepers’ efforts. In that regard, I
would like to emphasize the importance of a correct
public perception of the roles and responsibilities
of peacekeepers and of the strengthening of the
relationship between military peacekeepers and the
local population. To that end, military mandates should
prioritize the protection of civilians from the start.
Fourthly, United Nations peacekeeping is
dependent not only on the willingness of Member States
to contribute but also on their ability to do so. When
it comes to equipment and funding distribution by
Member States for military, police and civilian forces,
the current situation is obviously not flawless. Special
emphasis could be placed on developing the military
and police peacekeeping capacities of individual
Member States, not only by the United Nations, but
also through bilateral assistance programmes between
Member States. However, such assistance should not
be predicated on States’ subsequent involvement in
particular operations, which is undoubtedly a matter
to be decided at the national level. At the same time,
the United Nations can be instrumental in encouraging
and supporting the development of the peacekeeping
capacities of relevant mandated regional organizations.
Finally, in discussing United Nations peacekeeping,
we cannot pass over in silence the recent attacks on
peacekeepers that occurred in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Côte d’Ivoire. An attack on the Blue
Helmets is an attack on the United Nations, and thus
constitutes a grave violation of international law. We
pay tribute to all our peacekeepers for the enormous
sacrifices they make for the noble goal of peace and
security throughout the world. The safety and security
of all of them must be respected, guaranteed and
ensured by all and in all circumstances.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank and commend the Force Commanders
from the various peacekeeping missions who are here,
not only for their very useful briefings but also for the
work they are doing on the ground, often in difficult
circumstances.

20

The issue of peacekeeping operations is very
important both to Security Council members and to
the countries hosting missions. Such operations have
evolved since the first was launched in 1948, in terms
of both their composition and their mandates. The
nature and proliferation of conflicts have required
peacekeeping operations to adapt in order to become
more operational and efficient.
The briefings we have just heard basically confirm
the genuine necessity of adapting missions to the context
on the ground and of enabling peacekeeping to evolve
into peacebuilding, using troops with proven skills.
Togo welcomes the fact that for a number of years now
analyses have been made of peacekeeping missions’
operationalization and their actual contribution to the
development of countries where they are deployed. In
view of the complex nature of such missions today,
due to the multiplicity of stakeholders and the nature
of conflicts, peacekeeping operations must seek to
combine effectiveness, independence and success.
Togo shares the views expressed by the briefers and
by a number of speakers before me on the agenda item
for this meeting. However, we would like to reiterate
that peacekeeping operations must have adequate
and predictable resources in order for missions to be
undertaken. As a contributing country, we are aware
of the difficulties that can arise as a result of delayed
reimbursements to troop- and equipment-contributing
countries. We therefore urge donor countries to continue
to support peacekeeping missions so that financing
issues do not hamper their smooth functioning.
Standardizing the training of peacekeeping personnel
also remains of great importance to troop-contributing
countries. Providing such standardized training should
enable all personnel to have the same level of training
and to avoid different practices in the field. Similarly,
a clearly defined mandate is needed in order to prevent
any difference in interpretation, as is sometimes the
case when peacekeepers are accused of not responding
in the face of acts of violence against civilians. We
believe that a clear mandate should make it possible to
identify stakeholders’ level of responsibility.
Moreover, we welcome inter-mission cooperation,
as is currently the case between the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the United Nations
Mission in Liberia. We encourage such cooperation,
which can contribute to effectively combating
cross-border armed groups in particular.

12-38202

S/PV.6789

Effective and successful peacekeeping operations
require ongoing constructive cooperation between
missions and host Governments. Such participation
should therefore be a significant element of the mandate
of missions, whose success is their raison d’être.
We welcome initiatives undertaken in that regard,
particularly in areas such as police training and national
capacity-building, especially in the fields of justice,
human rights, in particular the protection of women and
children, and the establishment of the rule of law.
In conclusion, once again on behalf of the Togolese
Government, I wish to commend the commitment of
peacekeepers and civilians who work selflessly and
tirelessly in order to promote international peace and
security, in particular in Africa.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): We wish to join others in
thanking Under-Secretary-General Ladsous, as well as
the Force Commanders present with us today, for their
respective briefings. The themes that were identified for
today’s meeting clearly reflect the diverse challenges
that confront modern United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
We always speak of United Nations peacekeeping
as the flagship activity of the United Nations — and
rightfully so. We therefore find it very appropriate for
the Council to set aside time each year for an exchange
of views with the heads of the military components
of United Nations-mandated peacekeeping missions.
We know that peacekeepers are often the first United
Nations presence on the ground to bolster post-conflict
situations, in most cases following delicate and fragile
peace agreements. Therefore, the expectations of the
military in such cases are, indeed, high.
While recognizing that, we must remain cognizant
that peacekeeping is only a supportive mechanism, not an
alternative to political strategies adopted by the Council
to address post-conflict situations. Therefore, while
peacekeeping missions, of which the military aspect is
but one component, are being made to take on complex
and multidimensional tasks, there remains a tendency to
associate most tasks of the peacekeeping mission with
the military component. We must be mindful of such
pitfalls and ensure that multidimensional peacekeeping
operations live up to what they are designed for, that
is, an integrated, cohesive and coordinated unit that is
able to meet the common objective mandated for it by
the Council.

We therefore welcome this opportunity for the
Council to hear directly from the leadership in the field,
and would urge that such a practice, now being held for
the third consecutive year, become an institutionalized
and annual practice of the Council.
From the briefings that we have received, we
recognize the imperative for us in the Council,
together with the United Nations political and military
leadership on the ground, to be continuously seized
with mobilizing and maintaining the political support
of all stakeholders in a post-conflict situation. While
peacekeepers must preserve the window of stability
that has been secured through a peace agreement, we
note the additional challenges that they must endure
in balancing operational effectiveness with political
and developmental coherence. Needless to say, we
must safeguard the military component from being
overstretched and burdened with tasks that are not
normally within their military ambit.
The Council also has a particularly important
role, throughout a mission’s life, to support efforts to
improve cooperation and coordination with regional
and subregional organizations and other partners. The
African Union and the United Nations have been working
closely together in Darfur and Somalia, which is a clear
manifestation of innovative and smart partnerships.
As the Secretary-General put it earlier this year at the
International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers, such
partnerships help give United Nations peacekeeping the
flexibility that it needs to address today’s wide-ranging
challenges to international peace and security.
We should also not miss this opportunity to reflect
on issues that are pertinent to, and impact upon, troops
on the ground. Among others, such issues include our
ability to optimally leverage the security umbrella
provided by peacekeeping operations in the field in
order to find political solutions to conflicts. The Council
must adopt coherent and comprehensive strategies that
effectively translate peacekeeping operation mandates
into clear, credible and achievable outcomes.
In addition, it is necessary to ensure that operations
are sufficiently matched with appropriate resources,
and that the United Nations is adequately prepared and
capable of timely deployment at the desired operational
strength and capacity. It is also necessary to ensure
adequate monitoring and evaluation mechanisms
for peacekeeping operations, and that the Council is

12-3820221

S/PV.6789

sufficiently aware of the resource and field support
implications of its decisions.
Many of those issues were highlighted in the
briefings that we received today from the Force
Commanders. The high expectations that come with
United Nations peacekeeping deployments were
sufficiently stressed, as was the need for greater
standardization. Also highlighted was the need for
sufficient resources and a good and cooperative working
relationship with the host Government. We listened,
with great interest, to how peacekeepers could play
a practical role as peacebuilders, as illustrated in the
case of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example.
The importance of early-warning systems and
cooperation with host Government security forces was
further highlighted in the case of the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan. Lastly, the
need for United Nations missions to invest in building
national security in order to avoid a security vacuum
upon their withdrawal was also amplified as an
important contribution to the protection of civilians.
It is important that, in its future deliberations, the
Council consider those and other challenges highlighted
by the Force Commanders today. More important, we
must consider most carefully the recommendations that
emanate from their briefings.
In conclusion, we recognize that United Nations
peacekeepers are often sent to some of the world’s
most dangerous and unstable environments. As a
consequence, those brave men and women come face to
face with life-threatening situations and put their lives
at risk so that others may be saved. We therefore pay
tribute to those fallen peacekeepers.
Mr. Berger (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Force Commanders for their thorough
briefings. I strongly welcome their presence here today.
Such annual consultations are always an excellent
opportunity for greater insight. The face-to-face
exchange with those on the ground is highly important
to our work here in New York. I would like to express
my gratitude to them for their work, and through them I
would like to thank all those serving, often under very
difficult circumstances, in peacekeeping operations.
In recent years, much has been achieved in terms
of reforming United Nations peacekeeping, including

22

shaping doctrine and reviewing capabilities. Building
on those efforts, we need to continue to adapt and
strengthen peacekeeping in order to make it more
effective. Missions, as has been said here before by
colleagues, must have the resources needed to do their
jobs, but in times of financial constraints it will be
necessary to make full use of the potential for higher
efficiency and increased performance.
In the area of mandates and mandate reviews, we
should focus our attention on formulating clear, realistic
and achievable mandates, on reviewing and adapting
those mandates in the light of changing circumstances
on the ground, and on preparing transitions and crafting
exit strategies. In terms of mandate implementation
and mission management, we need to continue to
work towards faster mission deployment and build-up,
and towards streamlining all aspects of field support.
Continuous dialogue among all relevant stakeholders is
crucial in that regard.
I would like to take the opportunity to interact
directly with the Force Commanders present and ask
them the following questions.
The Security Council has stressed the need for
inter-mission cooperation in various cases. In that
context, the cooperation between the United Nations
Mission in Liberia and the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire has been mentioned here. I would like to
ask the Force Commanders to communicate their views
with regard to sharing scarce assets. Which practical
problems have arisen? Which approaches proved
successful? What lessons can be learned? Would they
have any proposals to share with the Security Council?
With regard to the use of modern technology,
situational awareness is crucial in theatre. A better
operational picture might assist in more safely
coping with the challenges faced by a mission. How
do the Force Commanders assess the use of modern
technology? I believe it was Major General Obi who
mentioned the case of Jonglei. In our view, that would
be a good example of a place where modern technology
could have been of great help.
With regard to common operational military
standards, contemporary peacekeeping operations
are more and more complex and multidimensional.
Common operational military standards could
facilitate the process of expanding the base of troopand police-contributing countries and at the same time
enhance the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.

12-38202

S/PV.6789

What is the Force Commanders’ experience? What are
the areas in which those standards are most needed?
Finally, with regard to coordination within a
mission, coordination is one of the challenges of a
composite force. Common standards, training and
the interoperability of equipment are prerequisites for
effective coordination. In that regard, I understood
Lieutenant General Prakash’s suggestions when he
commented on his experience. The question, apart from
what he said, is whether there are other experiences in
that regard that the Force Commanders could share with
the Council. Would they have any recommendations to
make in that area?
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for your initiative to convene today’s important
debate on peacekeeping, a pillar of the work of the United
Nations. I also thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and the Force Commanders
for giving us a direct insight into their work on the
ground.
In recent years, peacekeeping operations
have changed greatly. Their deployment level is
unprecedented, and mandates are broad. Sixteen
operations are currently under way; some, such as the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
and the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
are multidimensional.
I would like first to reiterate the deep and
long-standing commitment of France to enhancing
United Nations peacekeeping capacities. My country
participates in nine of the 16 peacekeeping operations
and contributes to peacekeeping operations under
United Nations auspices through the European Union,
NATO or in its national capacity. France is present in
numerous foreign theatres, including Somalia, Kosovo,
Afghanistan and Côte d’Ivoire. It actively supports
the participation of African States in peacekeeping
operations through the African Capacity-Building for
Peace Operations programme. It has created national
schools with a regional outlook in order to provide
technical and operational know-how adapted to the
needs of African armies.
Since the Franco-British initiative of 2009 on
operational follow-up, we have continued to advocate
for enhanced military expertise, improved cooperation
of the Council with troop- and police-contributing
countries, and better budgeting for peacekeeping
operations. While many recommendations from the

Brahimi report (S/2000/809), published over 10 years
ago, remain valid, I should like to highlight three vital
elements: inter-mission cooperation, the protection of
civilians and establishing strategies for transitioning
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
First, inter-mission cooperation allows the
optimization of the use of resources devoted to
peacekeeping operations by facilitating the sharing
of resources, equipment or units belonging to
neighbouring missions. When unforeseen events
threaten the stability of a country, inter-mission
cooperation between missions is an adaptive, effective
response that can swiftly strengthen missions in need
in terms of manpower and equipment. That cooperation
has proven its worth in West Africa, where cooperation
between the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
and the United Nations Mission in Liberia was vital
in pooling the use of helicopters in the context of the
crisis in Côte d’Ivoire. It has also been useful in East
Africa, where helicopters from the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo were temporarily deployed to
South Sudan.
Inter-mission cooperation allows economies
of scale to be achieved in response to the need for
good management and budgetary constraints, which
are more present than ever. It must be encouraged
and even rendered systematic both to pool
capacities — particularly of scarce air assets, such
as helicopters, and of logistical support structures,
which allows substantial rationalization of mission
support — and to share situation analysis and
assessment, particularly when missions find themselves
on either side of a border. In those three areas, there is
still much room for improvement. Cooperation must be
facilitated while respecting mandates assigned by the
Security Council to each mission and ensuring good
coordination with the troop-contributing countries.
Secondly, civilian protection must remain one of
the main goals of peacekeeping operation mandates.
Peacekeepers must be trained to that end and conduct
themselves impeccably on the ground. Moreover,
it is vital for the chain of command of operations
to be respected. Peacekeepers must establish a
safe environment conducive to the resumption of
political process, which requires the implementation
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, including for children affected by conflict,

12-3820223

S/PV.6789

security sector reform programmes, and programmes
that strengthen the rule of law.
As my colleague from the United States said, women
are one of the main levers for reforming a society. It is
vital to enhance their participation in decision-making.
The integration of women into the police force and
the army helps us to better combat sexual and sexist
violence and to promote human rights within those
institutions. Advisers for the protection of women and
children must play an increasingly significant role in
missions.
Thirdly, we need to create crisis exit strategies
that guarantee a lasting return to peace. We need to
draw operational conclusions from the absence of
division between peacekeeping and peacebuilding
so that each stage of a United Nations mission can
better prepare for the following stage in order to better
anticipate and foresee exit strategies. In that respect,
it is crucial for peacekeeping operations to cooperate
closely with United Nations country team agencies
so that peacekeeping and peacebuilding functions are
properly distributed and duplication is avoided. We
look to the Peacebuilding Commission to provide better
coherence to the action of the international community
in post-conflict phases. There is a need also to take into
account as soon as possible cross-cutting threats such
as the traffic in drugs and human beings, organized
crime and corruption, which have strong destabilizing
potential in fragile countries.
Allow me here to touch on the issue of
multilingualism, as raised by my Moroccan colleague.
When I refer to multilingualism, I am not talking about
the status of languages in the United Nations but to the
basic need for United Nations missions to be able to
communicate with the peoples of the countries where
they are deployed. I believe that the Secretariat’s efforts
in that respect are greatly lacking. The French-speaking
capacity of many missions in francophone countries
is very limited, owing in particular to recruitment
modalities.
During the three years that I have been in the
Organization, I have been trying to make the point
that it is more important for staff to be able to speak
French in a francophone country than to be able to write
a report in English for transmittal to New York. Too
often we recruit staff on the basis of their ability to
write a report for New York, while completely ignoring
the issue of whether they will be able to converse in

24

French in a francophone country. I could give you many
such examples, including for staff who are at a very
average level. I think that this leads to inefficiency.
Once again, I am not speaking of the status of French
within the Organization, but of the effectiveness of
our resources. Every time I have visited missions in
francophone countries, I have found that most mission
staff, especially at a higher level, did not speak French.
I find this deeply regrettable, and I wish to stress once
again to the Secretariat the need to put an end to this
practice and for recruitment boards on the ground
to give priority to French over English, especially in
French-speaking areas.
I know that what I said was a waste of breath and
that the Secretariat will do nothing, but sometimes it is
good to say what we think.
We would like to reiterate that the success of a
peacekeeping mission is the result of joint efforts by
the States members of the Council, the countries that
contribute financially, the TCCs and PCCs, and the
Secretariat. However, such efforts will be futile in the
absence of a strong commitment on the part of the host
country. Here I wish to stress the need for cooperation
with the host country, which needs to work both ways:
we must, of course, cooperate with the host country, but
that country must also respond to our appeals and offer
its own perspective on the problem.
I will conclude by paying high tribute to the
commitment of peacekeepers of all nationalities — which
sometimes costs them their lives, as in the case of the
seven Nigerian Blue Helmets — to the cause of peace.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes this opportunity to have a
productive dialogue with Force Commanders, and I
thank you, Mr. President, for sustaining this valuable
initiative for the third year in succession. I thank also
the Force Commanders for having provided us with
very important and insightful perspectives from the
field.
The Security Council should focus on delivering
mandates that empower peacekeepers to do their jobs,
primarily in support of the restoration of peace and
the protection of civilians. We recognize and deeply
appreciate the valuable role of peacekeepers and the
risks that they are exposed to, as evidenced by the recent
tragic deaths in Côte d’Ivoire. We pay the sincerest
tribute to peacekeepers and their work, to their bravery
and their commitment.

12-38202

S/PV.6789

I would like to echo a point made by several
colleagues. As a Council we need to be acutely aware
of our responsibility to give missions clear, focused and
realistic mandates. We need to keep a careful eye on
any temptation to bridge Council differences through
blurred or unclear mandate language. The constructive
ambiguity of a drafting fix in the Council can sometimes
solve problems in New York but create them in the field.
I am speaking near to the end of this debate, and
I am conscious that there have been many questions. I
do not want to pile on many more, but there are a few
points on which I would welcome the views of the Force
Commanders.
There can always be improvement in the Council’s
access to military advice, particularly the insight
provided by Force Commanders today and in meetings
with troop-contributing countries in advance of
mandate renewals, to help strengthen the Security
Council’s deliberations. We need to consider if more
can be done to improve the Council’s understanding of
the operational demands placed on troops and police
by the peacekeeping resolutions that we draft. I would
therefore welcome views from Force Commanders on
what steps could be taken to better incorporate military
advice into mission planning and ensure that such
information is fed to the Council in a sustained rather
than episodic manner.
In order to be effective in complex peacekeeping
environments, United Nations missions must have
the capacity and will to deter those who would derail
the peace process or threaten civilians and United
Nations peacekeepers. The Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations has previously expressed its
support for peacekeepers to demonstrate a deterrent
posture in defence of themselves and their mandates.
The Secretary-General has often set out the benefits
of a robust approach in his reporting to the Council
on particular missions. We have seen how effectively
this has worked in, for example, Abyei. We have also
heard this morning from General Obi about the valuable
proactive and upstream work carried out by the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan during very difficult
circumstances in Jonglei several months ago. I was
struck by how this latter example highlighted the
importance of robust early-warning systems.
I would be interested to hear to what degree Force
Commanders see the need to adopt a robust approach in
their missions, and to what level they feel empowered

to take this kind of approach. Do they, for example, see
national caveats constraining the response by certain
contingents?
Better inter-mission cooperation is key to
improvements in peacekeeping and, as some colleagues
have pointed out, to the greater efficiency that helps
reconcile the pressures for peacekeeping resources on
the one hand and budgetary rigour on the other. The
Council was able to see first-hand the benefits of this
during its recent visit to West Africa. That cooperation
related to the temporary sharing of resources and some
intelligence-sharing between the political teams of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia and the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire. What we did not
see so clearly was local-level cooperation between
those peacekeeping missions’ military components and
national security forces designed to prevent incursions
across borders and share intelligence. I would therefore
like to ask Force Commanders if there is more that
missions can do to track the movement of armed groups
over borders and improve local capacity to monitor and
act on such movements, working coherently with all
local actors.
We have heard from Force Commanders about the
challenge of the protection of civilians and the fact that
in order to fulfil their mandate to protect civilians,
forces need more agility and more mobility, but at the
same time face a shortage of air assets and problems
over freedom of movement. I agree with those Council
members who have emphasized the importance of
mobility and flexibility.
In that context, I was interested by the point made
by General Prakash, who made the case for basing
contributions on the standard battalion of infantry. I
would like to ask Force Commanders how they see the
balance between flexibility and mobility on the one
hand and the need for consistency and standardization
on the other.
One final point: with the push for integrated
missions and an increasing focus on peacebuilding,
it is important that we do not neglect the centrality
and mandates of both protection of civilians and
maintaining and supporting security. Security, after all,
provides the foundation for successful peacebuilding.
It is important, too, not to lose sight of the fact that the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
lies with the host States and that Force Commanders

12-3820225

S/PV.6789

engage closely with hosts in order to build national
capacity.
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for this valuable
and timely briefing. I look forward to the forthcoming
interactive discussion.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.
I should like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous and the four Force Commanders for their
briefings. The four Force Commanders of United
Nations peacekeeping operations make important
contributions to the maintenance of international peace
and security by implementing the mandates given by
the Security Council. I wish to pay tribute to all the
Force Commanders and chief military observers, and,
through them, to all United Nations peacekeepers
around the world.
As the international situation undergoes complex
changes, United Nations peacekeeping operations also
face many challenges. To respond to those challenges,
we need to better coordinate, better make use of the
resources available and better manage peacekeeping
operations around the globe. In that regard, I appreciate
the efforts made and the progress achieved by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations under the
leadership of Under-Secretary-General Ladsous.
Having heard this morning’s briefings, I shall focus
on three points in my statement. First, peacekeeping
operations should always adhere to the principle of
objectivity and neutrality. Host countries and regions
in which there are peacekeeping operations often find
themselves in a complicated political environment.
Peacekeeping operations should abide strictly with
the mandates of the Security Council, respect the will
and choice of the people of host countries and become
promoters and mediators in the political process and
national reconciliation of host countries. While carrying
out their mandate, peacekeeping operations should pay
great attention to the views of the parties concerned in
the host countries, respect the local culture and have
the trust and support of the people of the host countries.
Secondly, mandate planning for integrated missions
should be strengthened. Peacekeeping operation
mandates have become increasingly complex and
multidimensional. In the course of carrying out their
mandates, peacekeeping operations should have clear

26

priorities. The relationship between long-term and
short-term objectives should be addressed properly.
When formulating mandates for peacekeeping
operations, the Security Council should take into full
consideration the particular situation of host countries
and take a pragmatic approach. Once mandates are
given, the necessary resources and instruments should
be guaranteed.
Thirdly, different components of peacekeeping
operations should strengthen their coordination to
generate synergy to foster the achievement of stability
and strengthen institution-building in host countries.
Military and civilian components of peacekeeping
operations should have a clear division of labour and
utilize their respective advantages with a view to
achieving a seamless transition between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Council members have raised some questions
in their statements. I shall now give the floor to
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous, Major General Obi
and Lieutenant General to respond to the questions
raised.
I now give the floor to Major General Obi to respond
to the questions raised by the Council members.
Major General Obi: I will first attempt to address
the issue of inter-mission cooperation. I will also touch
on the issue of the use of technology in early-warning
situations and perhaps also comment on robustness.
With regard to the issue of inter-mission cooperation, I
would like to give examples of how we are going about
it and also highlight some problems that I have been
asked to cover.
With regard to the issue of inter-mission cooperation,
I want to start with the Jonglei crisis. In that regard,
I must thank the Under-Secretary-General and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
which came to our rescue through their support with
military helicopters, which we did not have. Those
helicopters were available and we used them for the
movement of dangerous cargo. That was a very clear
example of inter-mission cooperation.
I also want to say, with regard to the other areas
in which we cooperated, that we wished we could

12-38202

S/PV.6789

have done even more. In that regard, let me cite an
unfortunate incident involving the troops of United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei who went into
a mine and lost persons. That was a very clear-cut case
where helicopters from the south were placed on standby
to move in to transport out the casualties. Of course,
we were in communication to share information. There
was also the possibility of helicopters coming from
the north to also move the casualties. In that regard,
I also want to say that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General was very involved in her
communication with Khartoum to see how we could
move in to facilitate that process. But I also want to say
that there was a challenge of access to helicopters from
the south. That is where I think the Council would be
very helpful to us. When lives are involved, I think it
is important that helicopters move in from whichever
direction possible to save lives.
With regard to the issue of border verification, let
me give an instance where we had to cooperate with
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) to cover the area bordering South
Darfur and Northern Bahr Al-Ghazal. There we were
able to work together on verifying bombings and, at
times, on troop cooperation. We also went as far as
to the disputed areas to verify incidents of bombings,
and we were able to report effectively to DPKO and,
subsequently, to the Council.
I also want to say that there will be a lot of need
for cooperation between the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and UNAMID in the area
of border monitoring. The Sudan and South Sudan
share a border that is very extensive — about 2,200
kilometres — and we also know that we must share access
with UNAMID, which we have been doing in terms of
logistics. As UNAMID deploys, UNMISS is already
cooperating and stands by to cooperate even more in
the areas of logistic support and information-sharing.
We have also benefitted from Mi-26 helicopters
deployed on 6 June from UNAMID for our deployment
in South Sudan. We think that has been very helpful.
All of that has been possible through the system of
the global field support strategy, which allows support
elements to move across missions.

We also have the issue of the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA), where we are mandated to protect
civilians as it relates to the LRA. UNMISS works
very closely with the missions — UNAMID and
MONUSCO — we also share information with the
United Nations mission in Khartoum and recently
we have had to have meetings together. We have had
conferences, including in Entebbe, and we are engaging
right now. I have been to the African Union Regional
Task Force, with which we have established a liaison.
Together with the LRA-affected countries, the Uganda
People’s Defence Force and other stakeholders, we are
sharing information and are able to focus on the issue
of the LRA as it affects civilian protection in South
Sudan. That has been helpful to us in UNMISS.
With regard to the issue of technology, I also want
to say I think that would have been very useful to us
in Jonglei, which is a large expanse of land without
access. It is waterlogged and people moving on foot to
attack other communities can hide under shrubs and
so on. The helicopters available to us, especially the
civilian helicopters, are cumbersome for one to observe
through the windows to be able to locate people.
They are limited in range, visibility and the ability to
carry out operations at night and in different types of
weather. Therefore, there are a lot of challenges. Those
also have to do with monitoring instruments not being
available. In that regard, therefore, we think that the
use of technology will assist us in identifying the
movement of persons who may want to attack others,
cattle rustlers and the rest of them. In that regard, I
also want to say, as I have long said, that in order to
effectively monitor the border between the Sudan and
South Sudan with a mission that does not have much
manpower and a limited range of helicopter movement,
the mission will need everything it can get in terms of
technology to be able to support its ability to monitor
cross-border movements between the two countries. I
think that will be very important.
As to robustness, I think that we demonstrated in
Jonglei that even when we were not fully staffed we
held out, and our troops had very clear instructions
to protect. That is exactly what we did in the case of
Jonglei. I therefore wish to say that we are committed
to being robust and, of course, we appreciate all the

12-3820227

S/PV.6789

support we have been getting. We hope that our
demands will receive the support that we are asking
for in terms of helicopters and riverine capability. Of
course, manpower is always limited and the area of
coverage is very wide.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the floor to
Lieutenant General Prakash.
Lieutenant General Prakash: I shall first answer
the question posed by the representative of Guatemala
about what can be done with the feedback provided by
the Force Commanders.
I think that the Council can do a lot. There are a
number of players who have a role to play in the feedback
that is provided by the Force Commanders. Because
there are a number of players to act on the feedback
that is provided, the chain is long. In the military
component, the frequency with which it changes is very
high; it is somewhere between six and 12 months. Thus,
unless that time gap is cut down, the feedback provided
by the Force Commander is of no use. My request for
the support that the Council can give is to reduce that
time gap, which will help the Force Commander.
As to the question that was raised regarding the
flexibility or rigidity of standards, when one has real
standards there is definitely a tendency for rigidity to
creep in. But my request is that it not be considered in
that light. It should be considered from the viewpoint
that standards provide us with capability, and that
flexibility is the state of mind with which these standards
should be used to one’s own advantage. If there are no
national caveats, there is an inbuilt flexibility in the
memorandum of understandings. The standards that
are laid down by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations can only help us to perform better.
There was another question about the issues to which
common military standards can apply. In fact, there is
a wide range of facets to be addressed in that regard.
First and foremost, I would say, are force protection
measures. Various contingents come with varied types
of equipment and varied perceptions concerning force
protection. That is one issue that can be addressed. Even
with a small tactical activity like patrolling, different
nations have different ways and means of undertaking
it; even that is an area that could be addressed.
Some or most military contingents, having been
trained to fight wars and not to keep peace, do not
understand the implications of joint assessment teams

28

and joint protection teams, or what kind of role the
military has to play in them. That is another area where
standardization can be undertaken. Another area is
the gathering of analyses of information. That, I feel,
is a major facet where the standardization of military
contingents can be brought in.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the floor
to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous: In view of the time, Mr. President, I
will be brief.
On international cooperation, I want to mention a
very recent example. I was in Abidjan a week ago for
the ceremony to commemorate the seven soldiers killed
in the western part of Côte d’Ivoire. Precisely on that
occasion, a very important quadripartite meeting took
place. It included the Governments of Côte d’Ivoire and
Liberia and both United Nations Missions. Together, in
the course of a single day, they reached a number of
agreements on very specific activities — for instance,
on not just joint patrolling but also parallel patrolling
on both sides of the border, completely coordinated
on both sides of the river that demarcates the border.
That is just one example of a very solid programme of
joint work. I understand that it will now be possible for
the tactical helicopters to be used on both sides of the
border without differentiation. I thank that that should
provide our two Commanders with a very effective tool
to step up, by one or several notches, the fight against
the spoilers who were responsible for that lamentable
attack.
On the question of the standards, I would like to
recall that we have thus far devised a policy of standards
in three categories, namely, for infantry battalions,
staff officers and medical units. In the case of infantry
battalions we have gone one step further. It just happens
that, two days ago, we finalized internally the manual
for infantry battalions, which will actually strengthen
the standards. When we talk of standards we are talking,
of course, about flexibility. But standards also have the
advantage of setting the level of expectation in terms
of preparation, training and professional behaviour. I
think this is all part of the policy that we are trying to
develop of enhancing the quality of the troops that we
take on board and use.
The issue of caveats was mentioned. Of course,
Mr. President, you will realize that caveats are totally
unacceptable. It is a matter of faith and trust in the
Secretary-General and our force commanders. I know

12-38202

S/PV.6789

that it happens, but that does not mean that we accept it.
As we go for more quality and as our splendid generals
do their jobs, I think we must no longer accept this as
a fact of life.
Finally, I notice that the Ambassador of France
has left. But to his colleagues I would say that
multilingualism is indeed a concern. I was very
surprised to see what I saw in Haiti, for instance. While
I would not have expected anybody to speak Creole, I
would have expected that the vast majority could speak
French. But no, only about 30 per cent of the Mission’s
staff speaks French. I find that very strange. Let me say
that, to my mind at least, the fact that one can write a
report in Chinese or in American is not a problem. The
fact is that in francophone countries people should be
able to speak French. That takes time. There are also
sometimes difficulties in getting candidates. But I think
this is simply common sense. I do take that on board.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his additional
clarifications and the information he has provided.
Today’s meeting has been a fruitful one. We had a
useful discussion with the Force Commanders and the
chief military observers on the state and experience
and improvement of peacekeeping operations. This is
of positive significance for improving the effectiveness
and efficiency of peacekeeping operations.

Peacekeeping operations are among the most
important means at the disposal of the United Nations
for carrying out its responsibilities for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Blue Helmets have
become the symbol of the United Nations. Moreover, for
people in conflict areas, Blue Helmets signify security
and hope. Peacekeepers work in harsh, complicated and
dangerous conditions. They have overcome enormous
difficulties to carry out the mandates of the Security
Council and to provide peace and a future for peoples
in conflict zones. Their achievements are extraordinary
and they are the embodiment of the spirit of the Charter
of the United Nations.
Before I conclude, allow me once again, on behalf
of the Security Council, to express our heartfelt
gratitude to all the Force Commanders, the senior
military observers present and all peacekeepers around
the world. I pay the highest tribute to them for their
courage, perseverance and dedication. I wish them all
the best.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

12-3820229
