A/57/PV.83

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-seventh session

83rd plenary meeting
Tuesday, 15 April 2003, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kavan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Czech Republic)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency the
Honourable Bernard Dowiyogo, President of the
Republic of Nauru
The President: This morning, it is my sad duty to
pay tribute to the memory of the late President of the
Republic of Nauru, His Excellency the Honourable
Bernard Dowiyogo, who passed away on Sunday,
9 March 2003.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I request the
representative of Nauru to convey our condolences to
the Government and the people of Nauru and to the
bereaved family of His Excellency the Honourable
Bernard Dowiyogo.
I invite representatives to stand and observe a
minute of silence in tribute to the memory of His
Excellency the Honourable Bernard Dowiyogo.

President Dowiyogo was a dedicated statesman of
Nauru for more than three decades. He came to the
office of the presidency nine times and steadfastly
advocated the causes of Nauru. Throughout his
political life, President Dowiyogo also displayed an
exceptional intellect and vision on a range of issues in
international affairs. With a deep and abiding belief in
multilateralism and cognizant of the challenges faced
by small island developing States, such as Nauru,
President Dowiyogo worked to strengthen international
cooperation to achieve the goal of sustainable
development.
The world community will always remember
President Dowiyogo’s noble contributions to the
betterment of all humanity.
The President: I call on the representative of
Bulgaria, who will speak on behalf of the Group of
Eastern European States.

The President: I call on the representative of the
Republic of Korea, who will speak on behalf of the
Group of Asian States.

Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria): On behalf of the Eastern
European Group of States Members of the United
Nations, I would like to extend to the people and the
Government of the Republic of Nauru our deepest and
most sincere condolences for the demise of President
Bernard Dowiyogo.

Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): On
behalf of the States members of the Asian Group, I take
the floor to express our deep condolences to the
bereaved family of President Bernard Dowiyogo and to
the Government and the people of Nauru in their time
of sorrow.

Since the beginning of his political career in
1973, when he was elected as a member of Parliament,
until his ninth and final term as President of the
Republic Nauru, the late Bernard Dowiyogo served in
an exemplary manner the interests of his people and his
country. The fact that, before his election to the highest

The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

03-32453 (E)

*0332453*

A/57/PV.83

political post in the Republic of Nauru, he was a longterm member of cabinet as Minister of Health, Minister
of Justice and Minister for Island Development and
Industry is evidence of his outstandingly high
competence and expertise.
The late President Dowiyogo was a person of
principle and stature and a politician of unswerving
belief who worked relentlessly for democracy and his
country. As Head of State and Government of the
Republic of Nauru, Bernard Dowiyogo led the Nauru
delegations to such landmark United Nations summits
as the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 and the
United Nations Millenium Assembly. He joined world
leaders in adopting the historic Agenda 21 and the
Millennium Declaration Goals.
We are convinced that the political legacy of
Bernard Dowiyogo, who dedicated his life to the
prosperity and well-being of his people, will be
cherished and built upon by future generations in
Nauru.
The President: I call on the representative of
Barbados, who will speak on behalf of the Group of
Latin American and Caribbean States.
Ms. Russell
(Barbados):
The
Barbados
delegation, on behalf of the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States, has the honour to pay tribute to
the memory of the late President Bernard Dowiyogo of
the Republic of Nauru. The States members of the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States would
like to take this opportunity to express their profound
sympathy to the people of Nauru on the loss of its great
leader and patriot and to the family of the late
President.
Even a brief review of the late President’s life
will attest to the fact that he was totally committed to
public life and to the service of his country. He was
active in public life for 32 long years and served as
President of Nauru as many as nine times. His great
contribution to the achievement of the independence
and development of his country should not go
unnoticed, while, throughout his many years of service,
he played a key diplomatic role in the international
affairs of his country.
The Latin American and Caribbean Group
sincerely joins the international community in paying
tribute to this great son and patriot of the Republic of
Nauru.

2

The President: I call on the representative of
Mauritania, who will speak on behalf of the Group of
African States.
Mr. Ould Deddach (Mauritania) (spoke in
French): I have the sad privilege today, on behalf of the
African Group, of conveying to the friendly delegation,
Government and people of Nauru our condolences on
the loss of the President of the Republic of Nauru. It is
clearly a heavy burden in such circumstances to
express to our friends in Nauru the extent to which the
African Group in its entirety shares their sorrow.
The Republic of Nauru lost its President, the late
Bernard Dowiyogo, during the course of extremely
complicated heart surgery. President Dowiyogo died at
the young age of 57 and had just begun his ninth and
final term as President of Nauru. Obviously, having
been re-elected nine times to that office, the late
Bernard Dowiyogo can truly be considered a major
personality in his country and beyond.
We need only recall Bernard Dowiyogo’s career
to note the great role he played in the political life of
his country and on the international scene. Having
studied law in Australia and in his own country,
Bernard Dowiyogo launched his political career by
being elected to Parliament in 1971 for the district
which he represented continuously for 32 years, right
up to his death. He was a member of several
Governments in Nauru and occupied a variety of
important ministerial posts. He was elected President
for the first time in 1976, at the age of 30, thereby
becoming Nauru’s youngest President ever. Bernard
Dowiyogo was a man of principle and conviction,
committed to human rights and to protecting the
environment. He was a man of law and order who won
the respect of all in Nauru and abroad.
For those who have lost him — his wife, his eight
children and his 29 grandchildren — I would recall
Massillon’s beautiful funeral oration for Louis XIV.
With respect to one who called himself Louis the
Great, the orator said what the muezzin, in his
incomparable voice, reminds us Muslims five times a
day: God alone is great, my brothers. God alone is
great; every one else is mortal.
The President: I call on the representative of
Andorra, who will speak on behalf of the Group of
Western European and other States.

A/57/PV.83

Ms. Pià Comella (Andorra) (spoke in French):
We are meeting today under very sad circumstances. It
is my honour to take the floor on behalf of the Group
of Western European and other States to convey our
condolences to the Government and the people of
Nauru.
The late President Dowiyogo served his country
for many years, guiding it with passion towards
membership into the United Nations community — an
event that will clearly be marked as a milestone in
Nauru’s history. We pay tribute to him and commend
his memory.
We share the pain of the people of Nauru on the
sudden passing of their President. The delegations of
the Group of Western European and other States stand
by the people of Nauru and assure them of their
cooperation.
The President: I call on the representative of the
United States, the host country.
Mr. Siv (United States of America): The United
States, as host country, salutes the great life of
President Dowiyogo. His passing, last month, was a
loss not only to the people of Nauru but also the wider
Pacific community, including the United States. For
three decades, President Dowiyogo was a towering
figure in Nauru’s public life. He was well known in
Washington and was admired for his calm
determination to speak his mind in the service of his
countrymen.
When he took office in January — one of his
many terms as President — there were only three
months left before the next elections. One might have
thought that an ordinary politician would have stayed
at home building alliances in advance of his next run
for office. But President Dowiyogo was no ordinary
politician; he was a statesman. He knew the importance
of travelling abroad to represent his country at the
highest level in order to advance the interests of his
people. He led Nauru’s delegations to the Earth
Summit and to the Millennium Assembly.
In March, despite delicate health, he once again
led a delegation of top officials, this time to
Washington, for a series of important talks. In those
talks President Dowiyogo made a bold decision to
counter money laundering and the purchase of
passports, limiting the vulnerability of his nation to
international crimes. Those were moves for which the

United States and the entire international community
owe a debt of thanks. They mark a final display of the
President’s trademark courage and statesmanship.
The United States and the American people feel a
special loss at the passing of President Dowiyogo, both
because he ended his life on our soil and because of his
long-standing friendship with my country. Our
thoughts and prayers go to his family, to our colleague
Ambassador Clodumar here in New York and to all the
people of Nauru.
The President: I call on the representative of
Nauru.
Mr. Clodumar (Nauru): It is an honour and a
privilege for me to deliver this statement in tribute to
the life and leadership of the late President Bernard
Dowiyogo of the People of Nauru, for and on behalf of
the Government and the people of Nauru.
At the outset, let me thank you, Mr. President, for
arranging this special event this morning as part of a
United Nations mark of respect for our fallen leader,
and for the kind words you have spoken. I also wish to
thank each of the Chairpersons of the five regional
groups and the representative of the host country for
their kind words. I would also like to take this
opportunity to express the deepest appreciation of my
Government and of the family of the late President
Bernard Dowiyogo to all the Member States that sent
letters of condolence or signed the condolence book at
the Mission — or both — as well as to the many
institutions and personal friends of Nauru who did
likewise. Those messages have been conveyed to the
Government and to the family of the late President
Bernard Dowiyogo, as appropriate. I personally
delivered the condolence book to the family of the
President while I was in Nauru for the funeral.
Bernard Dowiyogo served his country and the
people of Nauru for over 30 years, until his death on 9
March 2003 in Washington, D.C., following major
heart surgery five days earlier. He was 57 years old. In
the 30 years of his public life he was elected President
of Nauru nine times, beginning in 1976 at the age of
30. His longest term as President was from December
1989 to December 1995, having been elected President
following general elections in December 1989 and
November 1992. I had the privilege of being a minister
in his Government during that period, and therefore
have a close and personal understanding of the

3

A/57/PV.83

aspirations he had for his country and for the people of
Nauru.
It is not easy to take the measure of Bernard
Dowiyogo’s contribution to the global community —
first because of the fact that Nauru is not well known to
the international audience and, secondly, because
Nauru’s politics have had negligible influence in the
international arena. However, if one analyses either
periods during which Bernard Dowiyogo held the
presidency of Nauru or those during which he held a
ministerial portfolio, one realizes that they coincided
with some important United Nations events that
required the political will of leaders to push through
what were then tough political decisions. On most of
those occasions Nauru was there to be counted on. I
will cite just a few instances for the record: the London
Convention against the dumping of nuclear waste into
the oceans; the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea; the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development, held in Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil; the Barbados Plan of Action; the Millennium
Declaration Goals; and the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. Therefore, in our eyes, he
ranks among the greatest statesmen of the twentieth
century, because of his wisdom and his courage in
standing up for the things that he believed would make
the planet a safer and more equitable place for future
generations of mankind.
In the Oceania region Bernard Dowiyogo is better
known for his tenacious stance against French nuclear
testing in French Polynesia, which at one point resulted
in the breaking off of diplomatic ties between Nauru
and France; against the Marshall Islands proposal to
accept the storage of nuclear waste in islets within its
territories; and against the shipment of nuclear waste
on ships traversing the Pacific Ocean from Europe to
Japan.
On the issue of human rights and the right of
peoples to self-determination Bernard Dowiyogo was
forthright in his stance against the abuse of citizens
committed by those in authority. One will recall the
statement he made during the Millennium Assembly
with regard to the people of Papua to selfdetermination and with regard to the violation of the
human rights of the Papuan people at the hands of the
Indonesian junta.
On the home front, we in Nauru are also aware of
his many contributions to the nation. During his

4

longest term as President, he undertook the biggest
infrastructure development programme of any Nauruan
Government to date, which proved to be a timely
decision, for soon thereafter the economy took a
downturn.
His mettle was tested during the proceedings
against Australia in the International Court of Justice
for damages arising from breach of trust while Nauru
was under a League of Nations mandate and, after the
Second World War, under the Trusteeship Council of
the United Nations. The new Dowiyogo Government
was placed under intense pressure by Australia to
withdraw the case, but he refused to do so. Nauru was
successful at the first stage of the proceedings, but
accepted Australia’s request to settle the matter out of
court.
When the economy of Nauru continued to spiral
downward in the mid-1990s, Bernard Dowiyogo had
the courage and political will to seek the assistance of
the Asian Development Bank (ADB) to help his
Government restructure the imbalances in the Nauruan
economy that were affecting the standard of living and
the ability of the Government to meet its internal and
external obligations. He knew that the menu that the
ADB would prescribe would be politically unpopular,
but this did not discourage him from implementing the
programme.
As it turned out, he lost the presidency following
the general election in 1995, and in ensuing years he
regained and lost the presidency three times. Bernard
Dowiyogo regained the presidency for the ninth and
last time in January 2003. Despite his declining health,
he fought hard to take charge of the Government,
because he realized that the future of Nauru would
depend on a leader who was willing to make hard
decisions that might not be popular with his
parliamentary colleagues or the electors. That was his
aspiration.
Bernard Dowiyogo was a consummate politician
and a person of great principle. He never wavered in
his belief in democracy and the rule of law. When his
doctor spoke to him about surgery, he told him that he
came to the United Nations to take part in very
important discussions with the United States
Government, and he made it very clear that he had no
intention of allowing any medical intervention until he
had completed what he came to do.

A/57/PV.83

He was true to what he told his wife, Christina,
when he became President in 1976: that his priorities
were first and foremost the Government and the nation,
then his colleagues and friends, and then his family, in
that order. This is the measure of the man. The late
President Bernard Dowiyogo was the first President to
die in office. May his soul rest in peace.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (Article 19 of the
Charter) (A/57/705/Add.10)
The President: I should like to draw the attention
of
the
General
Assembly
to
document
A/57/705/Add.10, by which the Secretary-General
informs the General Assembly that, since the issuance
of its communications contained in document A/57/705
and addenda 1 to 9, Uzbekistan has made the necessary
payment to reduce its arrears below the amount
specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in the
document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 17 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(g) Appointment of members of the Committee on
Conferences
The President: Members will recall that, at its
79th plenary meeting on 20 December 2002, the
General Assembly took note of the appointment by its
President of the Congo, France, India, Japan, the
Russian Federation and Zambia as members of the
Committee on Conferences for a period of three years
beginning on 1 January 2003.
Members will further recall that there remains
one seat to be filled from among the Latin American
and Caribbean States.
After consultations with the Chairman of the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, I have
appointed Bolivia as a member of the Committee on
Conferences for a term of office beginning on 15 April
2003 and ending on 31 December 2005.

May I take it that the Assembly takes note of this
appointment?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (g) of agenda item 17?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 17 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(i) Confirmation of the appointment of the
Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme (A/57/110)
The President: I invite the Assembly to turn its
attention to the note by the Secretary-General
contained in document A/57/110 relating to the
confirmation of the appointment of the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme.
In paragraph 22 of part B of its resolution 1240
(XIII) of 14 October 1958 on the establishment of the
Special Fund, the General Assembly provided that the
Secretary-General, after having consulted the
Governing Council of the Special Fund, would appoint
the Managing Director, subject to confirmation by the
Assembly. This procedure has been construed as
applying also to the appointment of the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme.
By its decision 53/323 of 23 April 1999, the
General Assembly confirmed the appointment by the
Secretary-General of Mr. Mark Malloch Brown as
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme for a four-year term of office beginning on
1 July 1999.
Following consultations with members of the
Executive Board of the United Nations Development
Programme, the Secretary-General now requests the
General Assembly to confirm the appointment of Mr.
Mark Malloch Brown as Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme for a further fouryear term of office beginning on 1 July 2003.
May I take it that the General Assembly approves
this proposal?
It was so decided.

5

A/57/PV.83

Mr. Bennouna (Morocco): It is for me a great
pleasure to congratulate, on behalf of the Group of 77
and China, Mr. Malloch Brown on his appointment for
a second term as Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP).

well as coordination among funds and programmes,
will continue to be enhanced. Finally, I wish to
reiterate our full support and cooperation to Mr. Brown
and to wish him success in his renewed role as
Administrator.

I would like to express the full satisfaction of the
G-77 and China at his confirmation by the SecretaryGeneral in this very important post and to assure Mr.
Malloch Brown of our full support and friendship.

Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): On
behalf of the States members of the Asian Group, it is a
great pleasure for me to extend our sincere
congratulations to Mr. Mark Malloch Brown on his
appointment as Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) for a second term,
commencing 1 July 2003. For its part, the Asian Group
will continue to extend its full cooperation and support
to him in the discharge of his responsibilities.

Over the past four years, Mr. Malloch Brown has
been fully dedicated to development goals, sharing
with the Group of 77 the same concerns and
challenges. This period has been marked by a real
transformation in development and by a shared vision
and a commitment to work together with the United
Nations system in seeking our common goals in the
area of development.
Our Group continues to believe in the crucial role
that the UNDP is playing to help developing countries
to reach their national development policy objectives.
In that regard, the Group stands ready to work
together with the Administrator for the implementation
of our common development goals by translating them
into operational activities and concrete actions in the
field. The Group of 77 is convinced that the
implementation of internationally agreed development
goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
will help set out the terms of a world in which
globalization is not only driven by the interests of the
strong but is also managed for the benefit of the weak.
That constitutes the framework in which the
Group of 77 and China hope to work with Mark
Malloch Brown, Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, over the next four years. Our
objective in this period should be the implementation
of what we have agreed on in the major United Nations
conferences and summits to help the poor in the
struggle against poverty. That is a challenge that we
have to face hand in hand with Mr. Mark Malloch
Brown. I thank him very much, and I wish the best for
him and his family.
Ms. Pià Comella (Andorra): On behalf of the
Group of Western European and other States, I would
like to congratulate Mr. Mark Malloch Brown on his
reappointment as Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP). We are convinced
that under his leadership, the work of the UNDP, as

6

Mr. Malloch Brown’s reappointment is a fitting
tribute to his commitment to promoting development
globally and reflects the confidence of Member States
in his ability to guide the UNDP at this crucial juncture
in overall United Nations reform. In that respect, Mr.
Malloch Brown has provided invaluable leadership in
making the UNDP a service- and results-oriented
organization, especially by effectively providing advice
and expertise where it is needed most. In particular, we
commend his initiative of utilizing information
technology to the fullest extent in the service of
development.
Given that the Millennium Development Goals
are central to the global development agenda, the focus
of the work of the UNDP is now to translate the vision
into action. We remain convinced that Mr. Malloch
Brown’s extended tenure will facilitate the United
Nations strategy to meet the Millennium Development
Goals and to assist countries all over the world in
achieving their development targets.
The States members of the Asian Group have
enjoyed a close and cooperative working relationship
with the UNDP. In fact, that dynamic relationship has
been strengthened over the years despite the evolving
changes and budgetary constraints. The Asian Group
acknowledges the UNDP’s constructive endeavours in
the region, in particular in such areas as poverty
reduction, good governance, HIV/AIDS and gender
equality. We particularly commend the UNDP’s role
under the leadership of Mr. Malloch Brown in
formulating and implementing programmes for the
recovery and reconstruction of Afghanistan. We look
forward to seeing an ever-increasing role and

A/57/PV.83

contribution of the UNDP under the outstanding
leadership of Mr. Malloch Brown in the years to come.
Mr. Laurin (Canada): In addition to associating
Canada fully with the statement made by the
representative of Andorra, we wish to make a few
additional remarks with respect to this very important
appointment. Canada is very pleased to support the
appointment of Mr. Mark Malloch Brown as
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) for a further four years.
We recall the challenges Mr. Malloch Brown took
up when he joined in 1999. Under his leadership, the
UNDP has effected a transformation that has been
remarkable in its speed and breadth. That
transformation has seen the introduction of a focus on
governance and its programmes, as well as a strong
emphasis on results and — particularly difficult — on
demonstrating results. The transformation has
encompassed dimensions of strategic reorientation,
downsizing and staff renewal, all the while maintaining
a determined focus on poverty reduction and
sustainable human development.
Canada has enjoyed a strong working partnership
with Mr. Malloch Brown during the first four years,
and we look forward to continuing in that vein. Canada
wishes to extend its sincere congratulations to Mr.
Malloch Brown on this occasion.
Mr. Wardono (Indonesia): On behalf of the
Government of the Republic of Indonesia, I would like
to extend my warm congratulations to Mr. Mark
Malloch Brown upon his confirmation of his
appointment as Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP). That confirmation
reflects his capable leadership in fulfilling United
Nations operational activities for development, which
are critically needed to achieve our goals for
sustainable development.
We live in a world that requires a sustained
and
nuanced
commitment
to
socio-economic
development — an integrated approach that both
reflects an understanding of material needs, culture and
history, and takes account of the complicated issues
that face developing countries today. Mr. Malloch
Brown has amply shown such a commitment. We are
fully confident that he will guide the UNDP well
during the years to come. The challenge for the United
Nations over the next decade and, very likely, the next
century, is to achieve the Millennium Development

Goals. Under the leadership of Mr. Malloch Brown,
UNDP efforts in formulating and articulating those
goals, which place development in its global context,
are already being appreciated.
Mr. Malloch Brown serves UNDP in particular,
and the United Nations more broadly, by placing those
goals at the forefront of his agenda. UNDP’s efforts to
bring together policy experts, scholars and fundraisers
to work towards common goals and to advocate
publicly for their being seen as global concerns have
placed development efforts in a new light in the eyes of
the world.
We can struggle together with how to keep our
efforts streamlined without losing the human touch;
how to reduce poverty and eliminate HIV/AIDS
without being swamped in onerous deliberation; and
how to manage a global network of country offices and
policy projects without forgetting the realities of life of
people in need. UNDP’s leadership role in the
Millennium Campaign and the Millennium Project
have shown the world its innovation and commitment.
We are confident that we have seen just the beginning.
We look forward to many years of mutual learning,
productive partnership and, we trust, better and more
humane living conditions for people in all parts of the
world.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to add
Pakistan’s voice to those of the Ambassador of
Morocco, as the Chairman of the Group of 77, and the
Ambassador of the Republic of Korea, as the Chairman
of the Asian Group.
I would like to welcome the reappointment of
Mark Malloch Brown as Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), knowing
full well his great qualities of energy, effervescence
and effectiveness, which have transformed UNDP into
a central player on the international economic scene.
We value the comprehensive role which UNDP, under
Mark Malloch Brown, is playing in the promotion of
the Millennium Development Goals. We value no less
the contributions which UNDP and Mark Malloch
Brown have made to thinking with regard to the
situation in Afghanistan and the region as a whole, and
to the promotion of cooperation in the context of
regional development in that crucial part of the world
— inhabited by Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran and other
countries — to which Mr. Malloch Brown has given so
much attention and time.

7

A/57/PV.83

We heartily welcome his reappointment, and I
would like to extend my felicitations to him.
Mr. Ould Deddach (Mauritania) (spoke in
French): It is my honour to congratulate, on behalf of
the African Group, Mr. Mark Malloch Brown on his
reappointment as Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP). I should like to add
that we of course associate ourselves with the
statement made by the representative of the Kingdom
of Morocco on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
The African Group greatly appreciates the efforts
made by Mr. Mark Malloch Brown in the service of
development and of UNDP during his previous term of
office. We have noted the new impetus given to the
work of UNDP and the major improvements to the new
development policies. Those efforts lead us to believe
that we can expect the work done by that body to
further development and combat poverty to be
intensified during Mr. Malloch Brown’s coming term.
Our group is ready to make a full contribution, and to
cooperate effectively with Mr. Malloch Brown, to
whom we wish every success in carrying out his
mission.
The President: I should like to join all previous
speakers in congratulating Mark Malloch Brown on his
appointment as Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) for a further fouryear term. I an personally very pleased that we have
just approved his reappointment, because I believe that
he has done an outstanding job during his first term.
Under his leadership, UNDP has completed a process
of reform and revitalization in a timely and very
effective manner and, as a result, has established itself
in a pivotal role within the United Nations
development system.
When he took up office in 1999, UNDP was in a
difficult situation. Core resources had fallen to an alltime low of $630 million, and there were expectations
that that drop would continue. In four short years the
funding situation has been turned around and
confidence in the organization has increased
dramatically. The core budget is growing, and so is
UNDP’s
contribution
to
world
development.
Confidence in the organization has grown largely
because of Mark Malloch Brown’s bold reforms. From
a dispersed organization that funded a variety of areas
of technical assistance, UNDP has been turned into a
networked,
practice-based
and
results-oriented

8

organization. The speed with which UNDP has
responded to post-conflict situations, such as
Afghanistan and East Timor, and to new developmental
challenges in Africa and elsewhere, reflect the new
agility and relevance of the organization.
Mark Malloch Brown has worked hard to bring
the United Nations development perspective, and that
of the Bretton Woods institutions, much closer. He
relentlessly built partnerships between UNDP and the
Bretton Woods institutions that have increased
understanding of the United Nations in Washington and
of the Bretton Woods perspective here in New York.
The growing support in the United Nations for Poverty
Reduction Strategy Papers and the rallying of the
Bretton Woods institutions around the Millennium
Development Goals are, to a certain extent, his
achievements. He has also steadily fostered greater
coherence of United Nations development operations
through his chairmanship of the United Nations
Development Group and through the resident
coordinator system.
Today, if UNDP is a strong voice for the United
Nations in development and if it has become an
efficient, results-driven and increasingly better-funded
organization, it is to Mark Malloch Brown’s credit. His
talented, highly motivated staff shares with him the
credit for that turnaround.
Personally, I have had the opportunity to meet
Mark Malloch Brown several times, on a variety of
occasions. First, I met him shortly after he had
assumed the post of Administrator of UNDP. At that
time, in an attempt to reverse the negative trend in
financing, he had initiated a ministerial meeting that I
had the honour to chair as President of the UNDP
Executive Board in 2000. I also met with him in
Monterrey at the World Summit on Sustainable
Development, where he was actively participating and
vigorously pushing forward the development agenda
and partnerships. On those and other occasions, I have
always witnessed a determined, eloquent and dedicated
advocate of development and a firm supporter of
development cooperation. I feel privileged to have met
him.
I wish Mark Malloch Brown a successful term in
the UNDP. On behalf of the entire General Assembly, I
should like once again to congratulate him on his
appointment.

A/57/PV.83

We have thus concluded our consideration of subitem (i) of agenda item 17.

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/57/L.76/Rev.1.

Ms. Jarbussynova (Kazakhstan), Vice-President,
took the Chair.

The Assembly will take a decision on draft
resolution A/57/L.76/Rev.1, entitled “The role of
diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the link
between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds and
armed conflict as a contribution to prevention and
settlement of conflicts”. I should like to announce that,
since
the
introduction
of
draft
resolution
A/57/L.76/Rev.1, the following countries have become
sponsors: Luxembourg and Madagascar.

Dates of the two-day High-Level Dialogue on
financing for development
The Acting President: Before turning to the next
item, I should like to make an announcement
concerning the fifty-eighth session of the General
Assembly.
Members will recall that, in operative paragraph 4
of its resolution 57/250 of 20 December 2002, the
General Assembly agreed to hold the High-Level
Dialogue on financing for development at the end of
October 2003 on a specific date to be determined by
the President of the General Assembly after
consultations with relevant stakeholders, so as to
facilitate ministerial participation and the participation
of heads of international financial and trade institutions
and of other relevant organizations. In paragraph 6, the
General Assembly also decided that the duration of the
High-Level Dialogue would be two days.
Members will also recall that, in paragraph 7, the
General Assembly also decided to hold, prior to the
High-Level Dialogue, one day of informal hearings
with representatives of civil society and the business
sector accredited to the Dialogue.
In the course of the necessary consultations that
the President of the General Assembly has held, no
objection has been raised to the dates he has proposed:
29 and 30 October 2003 for the High-Level Dialogue
and 28 October 2003 for the one day of informal
hearings. The dates of 29 and 30 October 2003 are
therefore earmarked for the High-Level Dialogue on
financing for development and the date of 28 October
for the one day of informal hearings.
Agenda item 27 (continued)
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict
Draft resolution (A/57/L.76/Rev.1)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held the debate on this item at
its 82nd plenary meeting, on Friday, 11 April 2003.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/57/L.76/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/57/L.76/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 57/302).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 27?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now consider the reports of the Fifth Committee
on agenda items 17 (j), 111, 112, 116, 117, 118, 122
and 123.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Haile Selassie Getachew of Ethiopia, to introduce
the reports of the Fifth Committee in one intervention.
Mr. Getachew (Ethiopia), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee: I have the honour to present to the General
Assembly the reports of the Fifth Committee on its
work during the first part of its resumed session, held
from 3 to 28 March 2003 on items 17 (j), 111, 112, 116,
117, 118, 122 and 123. During the resumed session, the
Fifth Committee held seven formal meetings and
numerous informal meetings.
The recommendations of the Fifth Committee
under those agenda items are as follows.
Concerning agenda item 17 (j), “Appointment to
fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other
appointments: appointment of a member of the United
Nations Staff Pension Committee”, in paragraph 4 of
its report contained in document A/57/610/Add.1, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
appointment of Mr. Mustafizur Rahman of Bangladesh

9

A/57/PV.83

as a member of the United Nations Staff Pension
Committee for a term of office beginning on 15 April
2003 and ending on 31 December 2004.
In paragraph 5 of its report contained in
document A/57/648/Add.1 on item 111, entitled
“Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations”, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft decision entitled “Action taken on
certain items”, which was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
In paragraph 9 of its report in document
A/57/649/Add.1 on item 112, entitled “Programme
budget for the biennium 2002-2003”, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of
two draft resolutions. Draft resolution I, entitled
“Report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the results
approach in the United Nations: implementing the
United Nations Millennium Declaration”, and draft
resolution II, entitled “Information and communication
technology strategy”, were both adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
In paragraph 7 of its report contained in
document A/57/651/Add.1 on item 116, entitled
“Pattern of conferences,” the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly the adoption of a draft
resolution entitled “Pattern of conferences,” which was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
The report of the Fifth Committee on item 118,
entitled “Human resources management”, is contained
in document A/57/771. In paragraph 8 of the report, the
Fifth Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of a draft resolution entitled “Human
resources management”, which the Committee adopted
without a vote.
In paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/57/429/Add.1 on item 117, entitled “Scale
of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses
of the United Nations”, the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution
entitled “Scale of assessments for the apportionment of
the expenses of the United Nations”, which was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
In paragraph 10 of its report contained in
document A/57/604/Add.l on item 122, entitled
“Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services”, the

10

Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of two draft resolutions. Draft resolution I,
entitled “Report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services”,
and draft resolution II, entitled “Investigation into
sexual exploitation of refugees by aid workers in West
Africa”, were both adopted by the Committee without a
vote.
With regard to item 123, entitled “Administration
of justice at the United Nations”, in paragraph 7 of its
report contained in document A/57/768 the Fifth
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution entitled “Administration
of justice in the Secretariat”, which was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
Before concluding, I wish to take this opportunity
to express my appreciation to all representatives for
their cooperation and the members of the Secretariat
for their valuable contributions and of Conference
Services for their dedication, which enabled us once
again to conclude the first part of the resumed session
of the Fifth Committee on schedule.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
reports of the Fifth Committee which are before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting unless that
delegation's vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations

A/57/PV.83

of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance.
I therefore hope that we may proceed to adopt
without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Fifth Committee.
Agenda item 111 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee
(A/57/648/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft decision recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 5 of its report. The
draft decision is entitled “Action taken on certain
items”.

The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution
57/303).

I

was

adopted

(resolution

The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Information and communication technology
strategy”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
57/304).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
112.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Pattern of conferences
Report of the Fifth Committee
(A/57/651/Add.1)

The Fifth Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.

The draft decision was adopted (decision 57/556).

The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
111.
Agenda item 112 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2002-2003
Report of the Fifth Committee
(A/57/649/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the two draft resolutions
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 9
of its report.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Report
of the Joint Inspection Unit on the results approach in
the United Nations: implementing the United Nations
Millennium Declaration”.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
57/283 B).
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Mexico, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Ascencio (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico has gone along with the adoption of the draft
resolution contained in document A/57/651/Add.1
because we believe that it contains valuable elements
that will help to achieve the objective of the effective
use of resources available to the United Nations. My
delegation has asked to take the floor solely to state for
the record its interpretation of operative paragraph 3 of
part B, section III. As can be seen in this paragraph, the
proposal to integrate the functions of the technical
servicing secretariats of the Fifth and Sixth

11

A/57/PV.83

Committees of the Department of General Assembly
Affairs and Conference Services has not been
authorized and will continue to be considered in the
framework of the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2005-2005. My delegation still has some
doubts about the usefulness of such an integration.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
116.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee
(A/57/429/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

Agenda item 122 (continued)
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services
Report of the Fifth Committee
(A/57/604/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the two draft resolutions
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 10
of its report.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Report
of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution
57/287 C).

I

was

adopted

(resolution

The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Investigation into sexual exploitation of
refugees by aid workers in West Africa”.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
57/4 C).

The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
117.

Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
57/306).

Agenda item 118 (continued)

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
122.

Human resources management
Agenda item 123 (continued)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/57/771)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
57/305).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of agenda item 118.

12

Administration of justice at the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/57/768)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The draft resolution is entitled “Administration of
justice in the Secretariat”. The Fifth Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft
resolution?

A/57/PV.83

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
57/307).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
123.
Agenda item 17 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(j) Appointment of a member of the United
Nations Staff Pension Committee
Report of the Fifth Committee
(A/57/610/Add.1)

The Acting President: The Fifth Committee
recommends in paragraph 4 of its report that the
General Assembly appoint Mr. Mustafizur Rahman
(Bangladesh) as a member of the United Nations Staff
Pension Committee for a term of office beginning on
15 April 2003 and ending on 31 December 2004.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides
to appoint this person?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (j) of agenda item 17.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

13
