A/RES/68/247 B

United Nations

Distr.: General
23 April 2014

General Assembly
Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 134

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 9 April 2014
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/689/Add.1)]

68/247. Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the
biennium 2014–2015
B1
The General Assembly,
I
Subvention to the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the request for a
subvention to the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia 2 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,3
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;2

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,3 subject to the
provisions of the present resolution;
3.
Affirms the high priority accorded to the work of the Extraordinary Chambers
in the Courts of Cambodia;
4.
Notes with concern the adverse cash position of the Extraordinary Chambers
and its difficult financial situation;
5.
Recalls article 15 of the Agreement between the United Nations and the Royal
Government of Cambodia concerning the Prosecution under Cambodian Law of Crimes
Committed during the Period of Democratic Kampuchea of 6 June 2003;4

_______________
1

Resolution 68/247, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 49 (A/68/49), vol. I, becomes resolution 68/247 A.
2
A/68/532.
3
A/68/7/Add.12.
4
Resolution 57/228 B, annex.

14-29631

*1429631*

Please recycle

A/RES/68/247 B

6.
Takes note of paragraphs 33, 34 (a) and 35 of the report of the Advisory
Committee;
7.
Authorizes the Secretary-General, as an exceptional measure, to enter into
commitments in an amount not to exceed 15,540,000 United States dollars to supplement
the voluntary financial resources of the international component of the Extraordinary
Chambers for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2014;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at the main
part of its sixty-ninth session a report on the use of the commitment authority as well as
information on a comprehensive examination of the future financing of the Extraordinary
Chambers for 2015 and beyond;
9.
Encourages all Member States to provide voluntary support for both the
international and national components of the Extraordinary Chambers, and requests the
Secretary-General to intensify his efforts to obtain additional voluntary contributions,
including by broadening the donor base, for funding the future activities of the
Extraordinary Chambers;
10. Recalls paragraph 36 (e) of the report of the Advisory Committee, and in this
regard requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Extraordinary Chambers, in
consultation with the key actors, prepare a completion strategy with a clear road map and
to report to the General Assembly thereon by no later than at the main part of its sixtyninth session;
II
Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices
and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly
and/or the Security Council: thematic cluster II – Panel of Experts
on the Central African Republic
Recalling section VI of its resolution 68/247 A and its resolution 68/248 A both of
27 December 2013,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on estimates in respect of
special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the
General Assembly and/or the Security Council, 5 as well as the related report of the
Advisory Committee,6
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;5

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee,6 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3.

Takes note of paragraph 8 of the report of the Advisory Committee;

4.
Welcomes the efforts made by the Secretary-General to improve efficiency
under thematic cluster II (sanctions monitoring teams, groups and panels) of the special
political missions, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to make efforts to
improve the efficiency of the Panel of Experts on the Central African Republic;
5.
Approves the budget for the Panel of Experts on the Central African Republic
in the amount of 1,476,100 dollars net, as proposed by the Secretary-General in his report;

_______________
5
6

2/12

A/68/327/Add.9 and Corr.1.
A/68/7/Add.25.

A/RES/68/247 B

6.
Also approves a charge totalling 1,476,100 dollars net against the provision
appropriated for special political missions under section 3, Political affairs, of the
programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015;
III
Progress in the implementation of the organizational
resilience management system and of the recommendations
from the after-action review of storm Sandy
Recalling section II of its resolution 64/260 of 29 March 2010, section I of its
resolution 66/247 of 24 December 2011 and sections II and IV of its resolution 67/254 A of
12 April 2013,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on progress in the
implementation of the organizational resilience management system7 and on progress in
the implementation of the recommendations from the after-action review of storm Sandy,8
as well as the related report of the Advisory Committee,9
1.

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;7,8

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee,9 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
A.

Progress in the implementation of the organizational resilience
management system

3.
Welcomes the progress achieved so far in the implementation of the
organizational resilience management system, and looks forward to receiving information
on the next phases of implementation;
4.
Underlines the importance of the full implementation of the organizational
resilience management system in the offices away from Headquarters, regional
commissions, field missions of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat and the participating specialized
agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system in the next step of its
implementation;
5.
Emphasizes the importance of the organizational resilience management
system in managing operational risks to the United Nations under an all-hazards approach;
6.
Recalls paragraphs 19 and 46 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and in
this regard requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide a detailed accounting of
the cost of the organizational resilience management system initiative in the context of
future progress reports;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, not later
than at its seventieth session, a progress report on the implementation of the organizational
resilience management system, including information on the steps taken to expand the
system to include offices away from Headquarters, regional commissions, field missions of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Political Affairs and
the participating specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations
system;

_______________
7

A/68/715.
A/68/732.
9
A/68/780.
8

3/12

A/RES/68/247 B

B.

Progress in the implementation of the recommendations from the after-action
review of storm Sandy

8.
Requests the Secretary-General to complete the implementation of the
recommendations emanating from the after-action review of storm Sandy, to finalize the
global information technology disaster recovery plan and assessment and to
comprehensively address the weaknesses identified in the area of business continuity
during the storm and to report thereon in the context of the next progress report;
9.
Welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General with respect to the tracking,
monitoring and settlement of insurance claims for work related to the storm that was
covered by insurance policies;
10. Encourages the Secretary-General to ensure that the post-storm remediation
and mitigation work is completed in a timely manner;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to provide, during the main part of the sixtyninth session of the General Assembly, a comprehensive briefing to Member States on the
status of the remediation and mitigation work undertaken as a result of the damage caused
by the storm, including a full accounting of the related expenditures and infrastructure
recovered;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to consider all means of risk mitigation,
including through the insurance market and/or self-insurance mechanisms, with a view
to securing adequate coverage at a reasonable cost for all United Nations installations
and premises exposed to natural hazards and emergencies and to report thereon in the
next progress report;
IV
Implementation of a flexible workplace at United Nations Headquarters
Recalling section V of its resolution 67/246 of 24 December 2012 and section III of
its resolution 67/254 A,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of a
flexible workplace at United Nations Headquarters,10 as well as the related report of the
Advisory Committee,11
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;10

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee,11 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3.
Notes that flexible workplace strategies in the United Nations should be aimed
at improving the overall productivity and efficiency of the Organization, as well as the staff
workplace environment;
4.
Encourages the Secretary-General to keep under review the functioning of
the interdisciplinary working group on flexible workplace strategies to ensure that all
relevant stakeholders, including staff representatives, are appropriately engaged;
5.
Takes note of paragraph 5 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and in this
regard requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly no later than at
its sixty-ninth session a report containing a comprehensive business case for the
application of flexible workplace strategies at the United Nations;
_______________
10
11

4/12

A/68/387.
A/68/583.

A/RES/68/247 B

6.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the comprehensive business case
includes linkages to ongoing reform initiatives, such as the Umoja enterprise resource
planning project;
V
Strategic capital review
Recalling section III of its resolution 65/259 of 24 December 2010,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the strategic capital
review12 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,13
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;12

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee,13 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3.
Emphasizes the technical nature of the subject matter and the need for a shared
understanding and consistent application of terms, moving towards the development of a
long-term capital programme and a prioritization strategy for the global premises of the
United Nations Secretariat, and requests the Secretary-General to set out precise
definitions and to provide additional information on the scope, content and nature of the
strategic capital review;
4.
Also emphasizes the importance of ensuring the compliance of all United
Nations premises with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,14 and
considers that this should be given due weight in the prioritization strategy;
5.
Takes note of paragraphs 15 to 18 of the report of the Advisory Committee,
decides that the review should include all premises owned and managed by the United
Nations that are managed by the Office of Central Support Services of the Department of
Management of the Secretariat, and further decides to assess the feasibility of
disseminating the best practices learned from this process to all locations owned and/or
managed by the Organization that have permanent long-term capital requirements;
6.
Recalls paragraph 22 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and further
recalls that any potential proposals stemming from the strategic capital review with
budgetary implications should follow the procedure set out in the Financial Regulations
and Rules of the United Nations;15
VI
Revised estimates, under section 22, Economic and social development
in Western Asia, and section 33, Construction, alteration, improvement
and major maintenance, of the programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on revised estimates, under
section 22, Economic and social development in Western Asia, and section 33,
Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance, of the programme budget
for the biennium 2014–201516 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,17

_______________
12

A/68/733.
A/68/796.
14
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
15
ST/SGB/2013/4.
16
A/68/748.
17
A/68/808.
13

5/12

A/RES/68/247 B

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;16

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee;17
3.
Decides to appropriate an additional non-recurrent amount of 5,722,400
dollars, representing a charge against the contingency fund, comprising, under section 22,
Economic and social development in Western Asia, 281,800 dollars, section 33,
Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance, 5,440,600 dollars and the
amount of 29,000 dollars under section 36, Staff assessment, to be offset by a
corresponding amount under income section 1, Income from staff assessment, of the
programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015;
VII
Capital master plan
Recalling its resolutions 54/249 of 23 December 1999, 55/238 of 23 December 2000,
56/234 and 56/236 of 24 December 2001, 56/286 of 27 June 2002, section II of its
resolution 57/292 of 20 December 2002, its resolution 59/295 of 22 June 2005, section II
of its resolution 60/248 of 23 December 2005, its resolutions 60/256 of 8 May 2006,
60/282 of 30 June 2006, 61/251 of 22 December 2006, 62/87 of 10 December 2007,
63/270 of 7 April 2009, 64/228 of 22 December 2009, 65/269 of 4 April 2011, section III
of its resolution 66/258 of 9 April 2012, section V of its resolution 67/246 and section IV
of its resolution 68/247 A and its decisions 58/566 of 8 April 2004, 65/543 of 24 December
2010 and 66/555 of 24 December 2011,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the update of the eleventh
annual progress report on the implementation of the capital master plan18 and on updated
information on final expenditure for associated costs for the period from 2008 to 201319
and the related report of the Advisory Committee,20
1.

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;18,19

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee,20 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
A.

Update of the eleventh annual progress report

3.
Welcomes with appreciation the donations from Member States that are
contributing to the capital master plan project;
4.
Notes that as at 28 March 2014 an amount of 678,214 dollars in assessments
remained unpaid to the capital master plan for 2013 and prior periods, and urges the
Member States concerned to arrange for the disbursement of those contributions
expeditiously;
5.
Stresses the special role of the host country Government with regard to support
for United Nations Headquarters in New York;
6.
Notes the benefits, including economic ones, accruing to host countries from
the presence of the United Nations, and the costs incurred;
7.
Recalls paragraphs 7 and 8 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and urges
the Secretary-General to make every effort to reduce the delay in the schedule for the
completion of the project, to confirm the timing of the closure for the Office of the Capital
_______________
18

A/68/352/Add.2.
A/68/352/Add.3.
20
A/68/797.
19

6/12

A/RES/68/247 B

Master Plan and to report, in the context of the twelfth annual progress report on the
implementation of the capital master plan, on the plans for the management and
supervision of the work remaining after the closure of the Office, including the
accountability mechanisms that will be put in place;
8.
Also recalls paragraphs 7 and 12 of section IV of its resolution 68/247 A, and
requests the Secretary-General to report thereon in the context of the twelfth annual
progress report;
9.
Reaffirms the scope of the capital master plan project in accordance with
paragraph 10 of its resolution 61/251 and as affirmed in subsequent resolutions;
10. Notes that the Secretary-General refers in his report18 to the funding shortfall as
an unfunded portion of the project scope, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General
to take fully into account the provisions of paragraph 6 of section IV of its resolution
68/247 A in the context of the twelfth annual progress report;
11. Invites the Secretary-General to provide, from within existing resources,
adequate office space for the Group of 77 and China in the Secretariat Building, with at
least the same square footage as it had before the initiation of the capital master plan
project and with due regard paid to its functional needs;
B.

Funding of the project

12. Recognizes the need to fund the budget shortfalls, including those related to
associated costs, on the basis of project costs provided by the Secretary-General in the
twelfth annual progress report and that a decision on the final appropriation will be
required at the main part of the sixty-ninth session;
13. Authorizes the Secretary-General, on an exceptional basis, to make use of the
Working Capital Fund and the Special Account established by the General Assembly in its
resolution 3049 A (XXVII) of 19 December 1972 as a bridging mechanism to address
possible cash flow challenges of the project during the time remaining until its completion,
and requests the Secretary-General to submit a report thereon to the Assembly at the main
part of its sixty-ninth session;
14. Decides, in this context, that the bridging mechanism will be replenished at the
main part of the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly through the established
budget assessment in order to maintain the robust liquidity of the Organization;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member States informed with regard to
the liquidity of the Organization, as appropriate;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to make every effort to find
savings to offset the budget shortfall, including through value engineering and other
exercises;
17. Further requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to solicit
additional voluntary contributions to help finance the budget shortfall;

7/12

A/RES/68/247 B

VIII
Terms of reference for the representative of the Secretary-General
for the investment of the assets of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund
Recalling paragraphs 7 and 8 of section VII of its resolution 68/247 A,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on proposed terms of
reference for the representative of the Secretary-General for the investment of the assets of
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund 21 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee,22
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;21

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee,22 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3.
Decides to establish the post of a full-time representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the investment of the assets of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund at
the Assistant Secretary-General level;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure broad dissemination of the vacancy
announcement for the post of his representative for the investment of the assets of the
Fund, including by circulating notes verbales to Member States and targeting industry
publications and relevant institutions to allow for a competitive pool of candidates, and to
report thereon in the context of the report on the investments of the Fund;
5.
Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the process of the
recruitment of his representative for the investment of the assets of the Fund is undertaken
in strict adherence to the relevant provisions governing recruitment in the United
Nations, subject to the terms of reference annexed to the present resolution;
6.
Decides that the terms of reference for the representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the investment of the assets of the Fund shall be as annexed to the present
resolution;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General, in the context of future reports on the
investments of the Fund, to provide information on the performance of his representative
in discharging his or her responsibilities.
81st plenary meeting
9 April 2014

Annex
Terms of reference of the representative of the Secretary-General
(Assistant Secretary-General) for the investment of the assets of the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
1.
Article 19 (a) of the regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
provides that the investment of the assets of the Fund shall be decided upon by the
Secretary-General after consultation with an Investments Committee and in the light of
observations and suggestions made from time to time by the United Nations Joint Staff
_______________
21
22

8/12

A/68/753.
A/68/805.

A/RES/68/247 B

Pension Board on the investments policy. The General Assembly, in its resolution 35/216 B
of 17 December 1980, reaffirmed the fiduciary responsibility of the Secretary-General for
the interests of the participants and beneficiaries of the Fund under the Regulations and
Rules of the Fund. In addition, on numerous occasions, the Assembly has emphasized that
the Secretary-General’s decisions concerning the investment of the assets of the Fund
should be guided by the key criteria of safety, profitability, liquidity and convertibility.
2.
In order to assist the Secretary-General in carrying out the fiduciary responsibilities
for the investment of the assets of the Fund, the Secretary-General shall appoint a
representative for the investment of the assets of the Fund. The representative shall oversee
the Investment Management Division of the Fund.
Responsibilities
3.
The representative of the Secretary-General, reporting to the Secretary-General and
in consultation with the Investments Committee of the Fund and in the light of
observations and suggestions made from time to time by the Board on investments policy,
will exercise discretionary authority over the investment of the assets of the Fund and will
be responsible for the overall investment policy and for oversight and management of the
investments of the Fund.
4.
The representative of the Secretary-General will lead the investment operations in
terms of strategy and policy analysis, asset allocation, portfolio management and
investment decision-making; risk management and compliance and monitoring; and backoffice accounting, trade settlement, cash management and systems and information
technology requirements. The representative, supervising the Director of the Investment
Management Division, will ensure that all the operations and functions of the Division are
properly coordinated and coherent, are aligned to safeguard fiduciary responsibilities,
support the goals of the office and enhance the long-term sustainability of the Fund. He or
she will work closely with the Chief Executive Officer of the Fund. The representative is
responsible for investment policy, strategic and tactical asset allocation and the appropriate
investment strategy in consultation with the Investments Committee and in the light of
observations and suggestions made from time to time by the Board on investment policy.
He or she will oversee the implementation of investment decisions and ensure that the
approved investment policy and asset allocation are followed. He or she will be
responsible for carrying out the responsibilities of the Secretary-General under
article 19 (b) of the regulations of the Fund, including to ensure that detailed accounts of
all investments and other transactions relating to the Fund are maintained and to report to
the Board, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the
General Assembly on the Fund’s investments.
5.
Within delegated authority, the representative of the Secretary-General will provide
overall oversight and management of the investment of the Fund, involving the following:
(a) Investments. In consultation with the Investments Committee established in
accordance with article 20 of the regulations of the Fund, and in the light of observations
and suggestions made from time to time by the Board on investment policy, the
representative will be responsible for an investment strategy and a coherent framework of
investment operations aimed at meeting and exceeding the long-term real rate of return
goal. In consultation with the Investments Committee, he or she will define the Investment
Management Division’s globally diversified portfolio and the strategic and tactical asset
allocation of the Fund; define the main investment strategies for diversified portfolios to
generate investment returns corresponding to the long-term real rate of return issued in the
Fund’s actuarial assumptions to meet its long-term obligations of maintaining the solvency
of the Fund; ensure adherence to the investment criteria established by the General
Assembly (i.e., safety, profitability, liquidity and convertibility) and to the objectives of
preserving the principal of the Fund and of obtaining optimal investment return without
undue risk; ensure consistency between investments and overall established risk tolerance;
9/12

A/RES/68/247 B

ensure the implementation of the established investment strategy and asset allocation; and
conduct general monitoring and management of the investments and portfolio
management;
(b) Risk and compliance. The representative will ensure the establishment and
maintenance of appropriate internal controls and risk management systems;
(c) Operations. The representative will ensure the alignment of the operations and
information systems technology with the Fund’s investment strategy and policy;
(d) Accounting. The representative will be responsible for carrying out the
responsibilities of the Secretary-General under article 19 (b) of the regulations of the Fund
to maintain detailed accounts of all investments and other transactions relating to the Fund
and ensure the integrity and reliability of investment data reflected in the financial
statements of the Fund, as well as to implement risk management and adequate financial
controls on investments;
(e) Intergovernmental bodies. The representative will liaise with the Board, the
Advisory Committee and the General Assembly on the performance of the Fund’s
investments, providing answers and explanations to questions on performance, structure of
the portfolio, investment policies and strategies, custodial arrangements, global economic
and market conditions, investment forecast/outlook and requirements for the financing of
operations; present proposals on the financing and servicing of the Investment
Management Division; and liaise and work closely with the Board and its committees;
(f) Oversight bodies. The representative will liaise and consult with the Fund’s
oversight bodies (the United Nations Board of Auditors, the Audit Committee of the Fund
and the Office of Internal Oversight Services of the Secretariat) and ensure the
implementation of the accepted recommendations of such oversight bodies as appropriate.
6.
The representative of the Secretary-General must also work closely and effectively
with the Chief Executive Officer of the Fund with regard to the performance of their
respective functions. The representative must collaborate closely with the Chief Executive
Officer to ensure optimum results with respect to the Fund’s asset/liability management.
Competencies
7.

The competencies are as follows:

(a) Professionalism. Demonstrated competence in and adherence to the standards
of conduct of the profession and in the application of best practices; strong conceptual and
analytical skills; proven conscientiousness and efficiency in meeting commitments,
observing deadlines and achieving results; ability to direct, review and guide the work of
others, particularly in terms of substantive soundness;
(b) Vision. Demonstrated ability to identify strategic issues, opportunities and risks
and to generate and communicate broad and compelling organizational direction and
objectives to all stakeholders;
(c) Leadership. Proven track record of excellent management and technical
leadership skills; proven ability to develop clear goals that are consistent with agreed
strategies and to establish good relationships and build team spirit with a broad range of
people; demonstrated competence for incorporating gender perspectives and ensuring the
equal participation of women and men in all areas of work; demonstrated knowledge of
strategies and commitment to the goal of gender balance in staffing;
(d) Planning and organizing. Demonstrated excellence in successful planning with
strong managerial skills; proven ability to plan and establish priorities and to ensure
effective work structure to maximize productivity and achieve goals;

10/12

A/RES/68/247 B

(e) Judgement/decision-making. Mature judgement and initiative, imagination and
resourcefulness, energy and tact; demonstrated ability to provide strategic direction;
proven ability to identify key issues in complex situations and to take adequate decisions
while being aware of their impact on others and on the Organization;
(f) Communication. Excellent oral and written communication and negotiation
skills with proven ability to defend and explain difficult issues with respect to key
decisions and positions to intergovernmental bodies, senior officials and staff; proven
ability to communicate complex concepts orally; ability to prepare written reports that are
clear, concise and meaningful;
(g) Teamwork. Good interpersonal skills; demonstrated ability to work in a
multicultural, multi-ethnic environment and to maintain effective working relations; ability
to lead and gain the assistance of others in a team endeavour.
Qualifications
8.

The qualifications are as follows:

(a) Education. Advanced university degree (master’s degree or equivalent) in
business management, economics, finance, banking and portfolio investment management
or related fields;
(b) Work experience. Over 20 years of proven progressively responsible
experience in the management of economic, social security and/or financial policies and
activities for governmental or intergovernmental organizations or for substantial private
concerns, including a proven track record of extensive relevant experience in the
management of the investment of complex portfolios of assets of various classes, such as
pension funds, including their risk management, and in financial markets. Demonstrated
direct knowledge of and experience in managing financial, economic and investment
policies, including:
(i) Defining and overseeing investment policy for substantial and diversified
investment portfolios having long-term return objectives, including policies for
investment objectives, risk appetite and tolerance, the risk framework, the investment
milieu, restrictions on investments and social responsibility considerations;
(ii) Developing strategic asset allocation for portfolios aiming for long-term rates
of return, particularly for defined-benefit pension or other similar long-term social
security and similar benefit schemes where long-term asset/liability management
considerations are paramount;
(iii) Developing, implementing and monitoring investment strategies and
overseeing research on economic and other trends affecting financial markets;
(iv) Managing interdisciplinary and internationally diverse teams of financial
professionals;
(v) Reporting to and coordinating with governing organs (e.g., legislative bodies,
boards and committees) on investment, financial and/or technical matters;
(c)

Appointment and terms of service:

(i) The representative of the Secretary-General shall be appointed for a term of up
to 5 years, with the possibility of reappointment(s) up to a total maximum service of
10 years;
(ii) The representative may be removed by the Secretary-General, in accordance
with existing procedures, for unsatisfactory performance in discharging his or her
responsibilities;

11/12

A/RES/68/247 B

(d) Languages. English and French are the working languages of the United
Nations Secretariat. For the post, fluency in oral and written English is required.
Knowledge of other official languages is desirable.

12/12
