S/PV.7916

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7916th meeting

Wednesday, 5 April 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Sison. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Moustafa
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia
(S/2017/252)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-09098 (E)
*1709098*

S/PV.7916

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Colombia (S/2017/252)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Colombia to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean Arnault,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Mission in Colombia, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/252, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission
in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Arnault.
Mr. Arnault: I would like to thank the Security
Council for allowing me to provide an update on
developments in the implementation of the Colombia
Final Peace Agreement and the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Colombia since the period covered
by the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/252).
At the outset, however, I would like to convey to
Ambassador María Emma Mejía Vélez the deepest
sympathy of the United Nations in the wake of the
tragedy in Mocoa, in the Putumayo department. I
would also like to commend the quick and effective
response of the national disaster management system,
under the leadership of President Santos Calderón, and
to reaffirm the willingness of the United Nations to
support the national efforts to rescue and rebuild.
Several significant developments have taken place
in the past two weeks. On 22 March the legislation on
an integral justice, truth, reparation and non-repetition
2/16

05/04/2017

system was passed. It is of course a critical part of the
Peace Agreement and at the core of efforts to reconcile
the rights of the victims with the requirements of the
transition from war to peace. A ceremony took place
in Bogotá today at which the President signed decrees
establishing a Truth Commission, a special unit to
search for persons who disappeared as a result of the
conflict and a selection committee for designating
the magistrates of the Special Peace Jurisdiction, the
members of the Truth Commission and the head of the
special unit. The day before yesterday, a law intended
to contribute to the legal security and stability of the
implementation process was also passed. It commits
Government officials to complying effectively with the
provisions of the Peace Agreement.
A number of other steps that are provided for
in the Agreement were also taken, including the
transmittal of the Final Peace Agreement to the Council
and the appointment of Felipe González Márquez,
former Prime Minister of Spain, and José Mujica,
former President of Uruguay, who will constitute the
international verification component of the Peace
Implementation Commission. They are supported by a
secretariat made up of two very competent Colombian
non-governmental organizations and backed by the
Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies of the
University of Notre Dame.
There has been some progress, which we expect will
continue, on the separation of minors from the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC). As
of 2 April, according to the International Committee
of the Red Cross, 57 minors had been separated, in
compliance with the commitment made by the group
in May 2016. Yesterday the Government announced
that the FARC had formally presented it with a list of
its armed members gathered in the zones, who number
6,804, as well as a first list of 1,541 militia members.
I should make special mention of developments
relating to the agreement concluded between the
Government of Colombia and the FARC on the control
of illegal drugs. I should recall here that the drug
economy helped to sustain the Colombia conflict for
decades, and that in turn the peace process has real
potential for helping to combat it. In that context,
the Colombian Government and the FARC agreed
in January on a package of incentives to farmers
willing to proceed with voluntary eradication. To date,
through negotiations with communities, more than
55,000 families have volunteered to enter the crop17-09098

05/04/2017

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

substitution programme. The Government is currently
working on putting together the two-year package of
incentives, including monthly payments to farmers;
food security; productive projects; and technical
support and monitoring. Delivery of the package is to
begin in June.
Another significant development is the assumption
of the vice-presidency by retired National Police of
Colombia General Óscar Naranjo, who was also a
member of the Government’s peace negotiating team.
His stated focus will be on the implementation of the
peace agreement, security, counter-narcotics and the
protection of community leaders and human rights
defenders who have been victims of a pattern of killings
and threats — a trend that has seen an increase in recent
months. All of these issues are clearly interlinked and
deserve this kind of sustained attention at the highest
level of Government.
In direct relation to the Mission’s mandate, the
weapons laydown process has moved forward in
the past 15 days. Since 24 March, the Mission has
identified, marked and registered the weapons that
FARC combatants brought to the camps. This exercise
is nearly completed. In addition, we expect to store
very shortly in the Mission’s containers the weapons
of all those FARC members that will participate in the
implementation of the peace agreement. Numbering
about 1,000, those members are involved in the tripartite
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism, training for
security functions, crop substitution, humanitarian
demining, and peace education.
The next step for the Mission is the collection of
weapons and the destruction of unstable armaments in
a considerable number of arms and ammunition caches
spread throughout vast, difficult-to-access areas.
Several such caches have already been visited, and
some explosives have been destroyed. However, now
that FARC combatants are assembled in the 26 zones,
that operation can be carried out at full scale. The
Mission met with the FARC today in Bogotá to work on
a detailed plan for systematic access to the caches, and
in meetings this week the Colombian army has pledged
its full support for this endeavour.
While these developments confirm that the
implementation of the peace agreement is a very
dynamic process, there have been concerns with
regard to the slow pace of implementation in a number
of sensitive areas mentioned in the report of the

S/PV.7916

Secretary-General. These concerns relate in particular
to the construction and equipment of FARC camps, the
implementation of the amnesty law, the implementation
of security guarantees and the plans for the reintegration
of FARC combatants.
In that respect, at a meeting on 25 and 26 March
in Cartagena to take stock of implementation 100
days after the signing of the peace agreement, the
parties made important and detailed commitments to
accelerating implementation precisely in those areas
and in the adoption of the legislative agenda of the
peace agreement. We welcome those commitments.
Like the parties themselves, we believe that while the
consolidation of peace will be a long-term process, there
is a relatively small window of opportunity to establish
solid foundations for it through the laying down of
weapons, the reintegration of FARC combatants, and
the delivery of peace dividends to the most affected
people and areas.
Let me end by expressing our full support for the
planned visit of the Security Council to Colombia
next month. Since the beginning of its involvement
in January of last year, the unanimous support of the
Security Council has been perceived in Colombia as
a guarantee of success. Its visit will provide further
assurance to that effect. Indeed, this is precisely the
juncture at which the international community, and
this Council in particular, should voice its interest, its
encouragement, and its support for the efforts of the
parties and all those involved in the building of peace
in Colombia.
The President: I thank Mr. Arnault for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Arnault
for his briefing, his recent report (S/2017/252) and the
hard work he has done on our collective behalf.
At the outset, I would like to express my condolences
to Ms. Mejía Vélez following the tragic loss of life in
the Mocoa landslides at the weekend. It was such an
awful tragedy, and the people of Mocoa and Colombia
as a whole are in our thoughts. The disaster has cast a
shadow over what has been a very positive few months
for Colombia. And yet, despite the terrible loss of
life, I have been struck by the resilience and resolve
shown in response. I am pleased that it is a shared
resolve, with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de

17-090983/16

S/PV.7916

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

Colombia (FARC) offering to work side by side with
the Government to help rebuild the town. That is the
same shared commitment that will be needed from
the Colombian Government, the FARC and the United
Nations Mission in Colombia as we write a new chapter
in the country’s history.
I am very pleased to see the progress already being
made. The Government has committed to making
peace a reality for all Colombians. The FARC have
moved over 6,800 of its members into the transition
zones to begin the process of laying down arms, as
Mr. Arnault has just updated us. And I am reassured
by his commitment, and that of his staff, as they move
as swiftly as possible to meet the tough time frames
ahead. We recognize that the scale of the Mission’s
work is ambitious and challenging, and he has our full
support in those efforts.
As with all post-conflict situations, sustained
implementation is vital. We have learned from our
own experiences in Northern Ireland that building
peace requires a comprehensive, sustained and joinedup effort. There is no quick fix. Establishing and
maintaining momentum in the early stages, though, is
critical. There has been steady progress, including on
the legislative track with the amnesty law and special
jurisprudence for peace, passed by Congress. I also
welcome the report that 1,000 FARC weapons have
already been taken off the battlefield. That has been
made possible by the continued commitment of both
the Government and the FARC to meeting the 180-day
time frame.
I recognize that this has been an ambitious timeline
and encourage both sides to continue to work towards the
final goal of complete disarmament. In the meantime,
it is important that visible steps be taken to deliver
implementation in the transition zones, including the
provision of health facilities. Amid the progress, we are
concerned by the activity of non-State armed groups,
including the National Liberation Army and criminal
attacks against community leaders and human rights
defenders, as verified by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights reports in March.
These attacks are a threat to public confidence in the
peace agreement, especially in isolated and vulnerable
communities. A robust, coordinated response from the
Government is needed to ensure security in all areas
vacated by the FARC, and I welcome efforts taken so
far, including the establishment of the commission
4/16

05/04/2017

on security guarantees, which I very much hope will
cooperate effectively with civil society.
In the coming months, politics in Colombia will
increasingly focus on next year’s presidential and
legislative elections. No one doubts the commitments
of both parties to achieve peace but, during the election
period, it will be crucial that work continue on the
structures and mechanisms needed for the long-term
reintegration of the FARC and the development of areas
affected by the conflict. The Colombian Government
should feel assured that the international community is
ready to assist in any way it can with these efforts. As
the penholder in the Security Council and as a witness
to the handing over of the peace agreement to the
Secretary-General two weeks ago, the United Kingdom
stands ready to play our part.
We also look forward to the Council’s visit in
May, which will give us a clear sense of progress
and demonstrate our continued support for peace
in Colombia.
Finally, before giving up the floor, I would like to
say that, as we meet today, we should reflect not just
on the positive developments that Colombia has seen
in recent months, but also on the positive role that the
Council has played in bringing that progress about. That
is a role that we do not play with respect to every single
issue on our agenda. I hope that Colombia gives us all
in this chamber increased hope and belief in the power
of the Security Council to deliver peace and security.
Furthermore, I hope that we can channel this spirit into
the other difficult issues that we face.
Mr. Skau (Sweden) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset I wish, on behalf of the Government of Sweden,
to express our sincerest condolences to the Government
and people of Colombia with respect to the tragic loss
of life in Putumayo. We stand with Ambassador Mejía
Vélez at this difficult time. Our embassy in Bogotá and
the Swedish Government are ready to assist in every
way possible. I also want to extend my most sincere
personal condolences.
Almost 20 years ago, I lived in Putumayo working
for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
I have spent a great deal of time in the city of Mocoa and
have dear friends there. Consequently, I know that the
people will face this tremendous challenge with their
incomparable human spirit — the Colombian spirit.
17-09098

05/04/2017

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

(spoke in English)
Turning to the topic of today’s meeting, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2017/252) and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jean Arnault for his briefing.
Sweden has a long-standing commitment to peace in
Colombia and strongly supports the work of the United
Nations Mission in Colombia.
We commend the firm commitment of the
Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo
to the peace process, and their continuous efforts
to overcome challenges to the full implementation
of the peace agreement. In that regard, we welcome
the recent adoption by the Colombian senate on the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace in Colombia, which will
be crucial to the further implementation of the Final
Peace Agreement. Those historic steps forward are a
testament to the resilience of the peace process and the
commitment of the parties.
We particularly welcome the strong focus on
child protection and the full engagement of women
in the peace agreement in Colombia. It serves as a
model for other peace processes. The agreement sets
child-centred guiding principles, with a focus on the
treatment of separated children as victims, a gendersensitive approach and family and community-based
reintegration. The full and active inclusion of women in
the peace process and the inclusion of women’s groups
in its implementation, will also help ensure that this
gender-sensitive approach is maintained.
The peace agreement marked a new beginning for
Colombia. The international community must stand
behind a committed and sustained effort to support the
peace process, so that it can rapidly deliver tangible
peace dividends for the people of Colombia. Now
is a unique moment for peace in Colombia and an
opportunity that must not be missed.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by once again conveying our deep
solidarity with Colombia following the tragic events
in the Mocoa region. The death toll now stands at
almost 300. President Hollande immediately offered
his condolences to President Santos and the people of
Colombia. We have indicated our readiness to provide
any assistance upon the request of the Colombian
Government. I remind my Colombian colleague, who
has acted commendably, that we stand by the people

S/PV.7916

of Colombia now, more than ever, in the face of this
terrible ordeal.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his illuminating briefing
and his exemplary commitment, as well as that of his
teams. Naturally, he can count on the full support of
France and the other members of the Security Council,
I would venture.
France fully supports the courageous peace
process led by President Santos. That is the central
message that President Hollande conveyed when he
was in Colombia in January. During that trip, he and
his Colombian counterpart visited one of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) demobilization zone. We once again
welcome the parties’ unshakeable desire to bring about
peace and their full compliance with the ceasefire since
the signing of the peace agreement. Their determination
to close that chapter after more than 50 years of conflict
shows that peace is always possible, regardless of what
obstacles must be overcome.
For all of us in the Security Council, which has
dealt with numerous crises all over the world, this is
a source of hope and encouragement. France will do
its part in working for the consolidation of peace in
Colombia. French aid stands at around €820 million
in gifts and loans linked to post-conflict initiatives,
primarily in the areas of rural development, land
governance and demining. We also directly contributed
€3 million to the European Union Trust Fund. We are
encouraged by the measures taken by the parties with
regard to the implementation of the peace agreement.
The FARC-EP’s movement to demobilization zones and
the surrender of the first weapons to the United Nations
are major steps in the establishment of lasting peace
in Colombia. We warmly welcome those developments.
We hope that, with the commitment and will of all,
the 180-day deadline for the full surrender of FARCEP weapons to the United Nations will be met. With
the effective launching of the demobilization process,
the implementation of the peace agreement is entering
a critical phase. In that regard, it is essential not to
underestimate the challenges that will be encountered
in the transition to lasting peace and to create as soon
as possible the necessary conditions for peacefully
reintegrating those who are demobilized. Specifically,
that will require the ability to offer prospects of
socioeconomic reintegration to ex-combattants through

17-090985/16

S/PV.7916

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

development of zones affected by the conflict and
the expeditious implementation of legal and security
guarantees stipulated in the peace agreement.
The noted trend of attacks and intimidation during
the past few months against community leaders and
human rights activists is a cause for concern. We know
that the Colombian authorities are committed to take all
necessary measures to respond to that situation.
Finally, we are pleased to see that the United Nations
is doing its part in supporting the process, at the request
of the parties. The deployment of the Mission on time
is good news. It will enable the Mission to participate
actively in the work of the tripartite Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism as it relates to the ceasefire, and
to coordinate the process of the FARC-EP surrendering
their weapons. It shows that the United Nations can live
up to those expectations. We are only too pleased.
The Security Council’s upcoming visit to
Colombia next week will be yet another example of our
mobilization on that issue and of our unanimous will
to doing whatever is necessary to meet the needs of the
parties by providing them effective support along their
path towards lasting peace.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I want to echo the sentiments of my
colleagues by conveying the solidarity of Bolivia
with the Government and the people of the Republic
of Colombia for the hundreds of people killed, injured
or affected by flooding, overflowing of rivers and
landslides in Mocoa, Putumayo.
As my Government has expressed, we are naturally
at the disposal of our brothers and sisters in Colombia
to provide needed help in this difficult time. We
welcome the distinguished Permanent Representative
of Colombia, Ambassador Mariana Mejía. I also wish
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Mission in
Colombia, Mr. Jean Arnault, for having shared the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/252) with the
Security Council, as well as for his efforts and capable
leadership in this delicate matter.
In the period Mr. Arnault spoke of, we witnessed
historic moments for the world and particularly for
Latin America and the Caribbean, in the framework
of the peace process between the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP).
6/16

05/04/2017

The first days of February, we saw more than 6,000
FARC-EP guerillas mobilizing towards the zones and
points — when we witnessed the imminent beginning
of the path towards peace, which Colombia has sought
for almost five decades.
One month later, the FARC-EP began to surrender
their weapons. To date, one thousand weapons have been
turned in and nearly all of the weapons in the zones have
been registered and marked by the United Nations. We
are currently in one of the most complicated phases of
the peace process — which requires the understanding
of the parties in addressing unforeseen problems that
may arise — but there is no doubt that the Colombian
Government and the FARC-EP are committed to the
peace process. I recall the words of President Evo
Morales, who stated that,
“everyone knows that this peace process has not
been easy and maintaining it will require just as
much effort as it took to achieve it”.
In that regard, we welcome the communiqué issued by
the Government and the FARC-EP, following the joint
meeting held on 26 March, during which the first 100
days following the implementation of the Final Peace
Agreement were assessed. Six key points, which should
be highlighted here today, were raised at that meeting.
First, with regard to prioritizing the standards
required for the implementation of the final agreement,
we would like to highlight efforts to promote the
enactment of a comprehensive rural development
law, which would address one of the root causes of
conflict by eradicating abject poverty in rural areas,
ensuring the protection of land and property rights and
promoting quality, inter alia. The second point refers
to the implementation of a national political pact that
would ban the use of weapons in the political arena.
The third point relates to transforming the FARC-EP
into a legal political party, including militias. The
fourth point covers the implementation of an amnesty
law, which is a key issue, as well as reintegration with
a view to providing economic and social security for
members of the FARC, once the legalization process
has been concluded. We believe that that is a vital point
in the peace process. We encourage the implementation
of projects that would allow FARC members to return to
civilian life. The fifth point relates to the Government’s
commitment to ensuring the return of all infrastructure
to the veredas by the end of this month, such as basic
services, medical equipment and ambulances for each
17-09098

05/04/2017

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

area. The sixth and final point references adhering to
the timeline for the laying down of weapons.
We welcome the establishment of the national
commission on security guarantees. We hope that it
will greatly assist in reducing the number of violent acts
committed against civil society and community leaders
in affected areas. We call for the redoubling of efforts
to ensure their personal safety and the full enjoyment
of their civil and political rights. Similarly, we welcome
the signature of decrees to establish a committee for
truth and unity in the quest for missing persons.
We also welcome the appointment of former
Presidents José Alberto “Pepe” Mujica Cordano
and Felipe González Márquez as supervisors of the
international component of the Commission for
the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement. In line with
those parameters, we would like to convey to the
Security Council and the United Nations Mission in
Colombia our ongoing support for the commitments
made by the parties. We would like to highlight the
support provided by the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States to the sister Republic of Colombia
and to the United Nations Mission, which Bolivia
proudly assists with a large number of observers.
We note the observations made by the SecretaryGeneral in his report. We acknowledge the important
work the United Nations conducts in the country.
As mentioned earlier, there are some logistical and
administrative challenges, which we are sure will
be overcome gradually. In that regard, we thank the
United Nations Mission team for its support, as well
as the United Nations Development Programme in
Colombia. We eagerly await the Security Council’s visit
to Colombia in May.
Once again, as has been done so often in the
Chamber while addressing this very important topic,
I would like to pay tribute to a man who described
himself as someone who conspired for peace in
Colombia — renowned author Gabriel García Márquez.
As he received the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1982,
he stated that neither floods nor plagues, famines
nor cataclysms, nor even the eternal wars of century
upon century, have been able to subdue the persistent
advantage of life over death.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Although the Government of Uruguay has already
conveyed its sympathy directly to the Government of

S/PV.7916

Colombia, once again, it extends the solidarity and
condolences of the people of Uruguay to Ambassador
María Mejía Vélez, following the tragedy in Putumayo.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Mr. Jean Arnault for his comprehensive
briefing and, above all, for the work he and his team are
conducting in Colombia.
Our statement today aims to reiterate Uruguay’s
encouragement to and support of the peace process
in Colombia and its principal protagonists — the
Government, the people of Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército del
Pueblo. We continue to reiterate that for us, they have
shown and continue to show a commitment to peace
and are persistent in conveying a message of hope
to the international community — where there is a
will, objectives can be achieved in spite of the many
difficulties that may be encountered along the way.
That is why we are taking the initiative, during our
presidency of the Security Council next month, to have
the members of the Security Council visit Colombia
from 3 to 5 May as a demonstration of our direct
support to all those taking part in the peace process and
trust in their work. It also serves to send a clear signal
about the importance that the Council has given to its
commitment to support the peace process and provide
monitoring through the establishment of the United
Nations Mission in Colombia.
Some months ago, we said that the peace talks and
the signing of the Final Peace Agreement were the easy
part of the process; the hard part started the day after the
agreement was signed. We are guided on the path ahead
by the resolute will of the parties and by our support
of and commitment to the peace process. We would
like to point out that we believe that both the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2017/252) and Mr. Arnault’s
briefing are very encouraging. They show that, in
spite of the challenges in various areas, considerable
progress has been made in implementing the peace
agreement. We believe that the role of the Commission
for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement, which is
made up of three Government representatives and
three FARC-EP representatives, is to supervise the
implementation of the agreement within the deadlines
set. We believe that progress should be achieved
simultaneously in all sections of the agreement. It is
therefore important to identify delays or flaws early in
the implementation process.

17-090987/16

S/PV.7916

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

We stress the vital importance of the promulgation
of the amnesty law on 30 December 2016 and the decree
for its enforcement on 17 February, the submission to
Parliament on 1 February of a draft bill on the political
reintegration of the FARC-EP and the adoption by
Congress of the legislative bill on the Comprehensive
System of Truth, Justice, Reparations and Non-repetition,
including a Special Jurisdiction for Peace. That system
of transitional justice is a fundamental component of
the peace agreement and that is why we stress the need
for ongoing legislative adjustment.
The Mission has continued to make progress in its
work. We have been informed that during the reporting
period, the Government, the FARC-EP and the Mission
have cooperated effectively at the national, regional and
local levels. We note, inter alia, that communication
strategies have improved and there has been progress in
finding solutions to logistical problems and in providing
medical care. We call on the parties to redouble their
efforts to solve the logistical challenges that remain a
source of concern, such as insecurity in rural areas,
which are greatly affected by the conflict due to their
links to the illegal economy, violence against human
rights defenders and the reintegration of members of
the FARC-EP into the civilian, economic, social and
political life of the country.
Uruguay pays particular attention to the rights of
women, children and vulnerable social groups. We
welcome the implementation of the protocol for the
separation of minors from the ranks of the FARC-EP
and the launch of a reintegration programme, with the
support of the Red Cross, UNICEF, the International
Organization for Migration and Colombia’s Presidential
Council for Human Rights.
Lastly, we welcome the joint communiqué issued
on 26 March by the Government of Colombia and the
FARC, in which they reported on the meeting held to
evaluate the 100 days of the implementation of the Peace
Agreement, especially as it relates to the laying down
of weapons and the status of gathering areas for FARCEP members, including their reintegration into civilian
life. That exercise in assessing the implementation
of reciprocal obligations contributes to building
confidence between the parties and to cohesion within
the FARC-EP, as well as reassuring those who might
feel threatened or whose expectations are diminished.
To all those involved, we are confident that their
perseverance will result in the successful conclusion of
the peace process.
8/16

05/04/2017

Mr. Bessho (Japan): First of all, I would like to
welcome Ambassador María Emma Mejía Vélez to
the Chamber. Japan offers its deep condolences to the
people of Colombia on the tragedy caused by the terrible
landslide and flooding. As a nation that often suffers
from such tragedies, we express our deep sympathy and
solidarity with the people of Colombia.
I thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Colombia, for his informative
updates. Japan is very encouraged that under his
leadership the United Nations Mission in Colombia is
laying a solid foundation for a successful peace process.
Japan appreciates his commitment and dedication.
In reiterating Japan’s full support to the people of
Colombia, I will focus on three points today.
First, we welcome the fact that the peace process
is largely on track. We commend the efforts and firm
commitment of all parties, which constitute the most
important part of the peace process. Keeping in mind
the result of the referendum held in October 2016, we
hope that the overall success of these early stages will
contribute to a firm national consensus towards the
Peace Agreement.
Secondly, it is important that the Council be
united in its commitment to this issue. In that regard,
the Security Council’s visit next month will be an
important opportunity to convey to the parties the
Council’s strong commitment to the peace process in
Colombia and its support for the implementation of the
Final Peace Agreement.
Thirdly, the presence and the role of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General is vital in
bridging gaps between the parties and in reducing
mistrust. We fully support the work of Special
Representative Arnault, and particularly urge him to
ensure the successful completion of the laying down of
arms. It is important that this effort succeed in order to
secure ustained peace in Colombia.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Japan’s
firm commitment to supporting Colombia’s efforts
towards peace.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Colombia, for his briefing.
On behalf of China, I would like to express our
sincere condolences to Colombia with regard to the
17-09098

05/04/2017

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

landslide that resulted in major casualties and loss of
property. China immediately provided humanitarian
assistance to the Government of Colombia, and we
believe that the Colombian Government and its people
will overcome this disaster and rebuild their homes.
With the joint efforts of the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia (FARC), the implementation of the Peace
Agreement has been proceeding smoothly in general.
First, about 7,000 FARC members have reached the
transitory normalization zones smoothly and they are
beginning to lay down their arms.
Secondly, the Government of Colombia and FARC
are firmly committed to the ceasefire and no violations
have been observed.
Thirdly, both parties have committed to completing
the process of surrendering their weapons in the next
three months. Once again, that demonstrates the
determination of the Government of Colombia and the
FARC to jointly take forward the peace process. That
has a lot to do with the robust assistance provided
by the United Nations Mission in Colombia, led by
Special Representative Arnault. China appreciates
the efforts by the Government of Colombia and all
the other parties concerned. The internal domestic
war in Colombia lasted for half a century. Healing
the traumas of war is not an easy task. The leaders of
the FARC have committed to transforming the FARC
into a political party and to laying down arms within a
specific timeline. At the same time, FARC hopes that
the Government will provide concrete assurances in
terms of justice, security, logistics and reintegration.
We hope that the Government of Colombia and the
FARC will strengthen their cooperation to ensure the
comprehensive implementation of the Peace Agreement.
China hopes that the international community,
especially countries in the region, will continue to
provide support to the peace process in Colombia, help
increase mutual trust between the Government and the
FARC, strengthen their coordination and accelerate the
early completion of the surrender of weapons. We hope
that the United Nations Mission in Colombia and other
United Nations agencies will, on the basis of respect for
the sovereignty and the independent territorial integrity
of Colombia, exhibit impartiality — the principle of
equity — to enhance cooperation with the Government
of Colombia and the FARC and to facilitate the peace
process. China supports the efforts of the Government

S/PV.7916

of Colombia in taking forward the peace process and
supports the United Nations Mission in Colombia in the
continued implementation of its mandate.
The Security Council is to visit Colombia in early
May, which China welcomes. We expect to learn about
the situation there through this field visit. We believe
it will help take forward the peace process towards
greater development and the achievement an lasting
peace in Colombia at an early date.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, as others have
done, on behalf of the Government of Italy, I would
like to express, through Ambassador María Emma
Mejía Vélez, my deepest condolences to the people
and the Government of Colombia for the victims of the
landslide in the city of Mocoa, which left more than
260 dead and many more missing or injured. Italy
immediately activated emergency funding to contribute
to international assistance efforts.
I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Colombia and the
Secretary-General himself for their report (S/2017/252)
and for their efforts in fulfilling the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Colombia. Allow me to
make three brief remarks.
First, we strongly support the Final Peace Agreement
and commend the firm commitment of the parties to
finally bring to an end to the decades-long conflict. The
historical process we are witnessing would have been
unthinkable without the ownership and leadership of
the Colombian parties. We look forward to the Security
Council mission in May to directly convey this message
to the authorities and the people of Colombia.
Secondly, we encourage the parties to intensify
their efforts to implement the Peace Agreement
within the agreed deadline. It is important not to
lose the momentum. In that respect, we welcome the
commitment of the parties to complete the surrender
and registration of weapons within the agreed timeline.
We also welcome the measures established by the Peace
Agreement on legal, security and socioeconomic issues
related to reintegration.
Thirdly, reconciliation and reintegration are the
cornerstones of a durable and sustainable settlement.
They are a precondition to build confidence, to
generate an inclusive political dialogue and to bring the
concrete dividends of peace to the populations in terms
of security and improved living conditions. We are

17-090989/16

S/PV.7916

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

aware of the challenges ahead and stand ready to assist
the Government and the parties in this endeavour, both
bilaterally and at the international level.
In that regard, Italy firmly supports the European
Union action for post-conflict stabilization and
development in Colombia, including through the
European Union Trust Fund for Colombia, to which
we have contributed €3 million. I also recall our longstanding contribution to United Nations Mine Action
Service programmes on humanitarian de-mining
and peacebuilding and to Organization of American
States activities on mine-risk education, psychological
assistance and rehabilitation of the victims.
I would like to conclude by commending the efforts
made by the authorities for protecting and assisting
women and children involved in the conflict, as also
recognized by the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict in its recently adopted conclusions on
the situation of children and armed conflict in Colombia.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to begin
by expressing my heartfelt condolences to the families
of the victims of the devastating flood and landslide
in Mocoa, which left hundreds of people dead, injured
or missing.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Mission in
Colombia, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his update.
Ukraine reiterates its support for Colombia’s
efforts in implementing the Final Peace Agreement
in accordance with resolutions 2261 (2016) and 2307
(2016). We recognize the challenges the country faces
in making the transition from a conflict to a postconflict environment. It is now essential that the open
dialogue that led to the Agreement continue.
In February, we observed historic images as
thousands of members of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias the Colombia moved into transition
zones where they are starting their reintegration into
new lives. Moving nearly 7,000 fighters to such zones
was not an easy task; indeed, it constitutes an example
of the real commitment of the parties to tackling
outstanding difficulties head-on.
In the light of that, we encourage the parties to
maintain their positive cooperation and momentum
for the benefit of all Colombians. All political forces
and all sectors of Colombian society should be actively
engaged in this crucial endeavour. Broader unity around
10/16

05/04/2017

the Peace Agreement is indispensable to achieving the
Agreement’s goals with regard to ceasefire and the
laying down of arms, as well as rural reform, combating
illicit drugs and expanding political participation.
While moving ahead with the peace process in all its
complexity, it is also important to keep in focus the
needs and best interests of children affected by conflict,
as well as a gender perspective.
The cases of violence against human rights
defenders mentioned in the Secretary-General’s recent
report (S/2017/252) are of concern. We believe that the
end of impunity is crucial to ensuring comprehensive
peace in the country. In that regard, we take positive
note of the recent legislation, including the amnesty
law passed last December and the law establishing the
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparations
and Non-repetition, approved by Congress on 13 March.
We commend international efforts in support of
implementation of the Peace Agreement, in particular
those States Members of the United Nations that have
provided observers for the United Nations Mission, as
well as the role played by the guarantors and supporting
countries during the peace process. The Security
Council should continue to back parties as they
advance in implementing the provisions of the Final
Peace Agreement.
We look forward to the Security Council’s visit
to Colombia next month so as to better appreciate the
aspirations and concerns of the parties. On the other
hand, such a visit will demonstrate the Council’s full
commitment to long-lasting peace in Colombia. We
hope that the Colombian experience of engaging the
United Nations as the international component of
the tripartite mechanism will become an illustrative
success story for the region and beyond.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for having convened today’s
meeting. and especially for having invited our
colleague Ms. María Emma Mejía Vélez, which gives
me an opportunity to renew the sincere condolences
of the Senegalese people to the people of Colombia
after the catastrophic natural disaster in the form of
the earthquake and mudslides that took place in Mocoa
on 2 April, leading to the loss of many lives and much
property damage.
I would also like to thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Mission in Colombia, for the clarity
17-09098

05/04/2017

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

S/PV.7916

of his presentation and his tireless efforts. Under
Mr. Arnault’s leadership, the Mission has already
proved to be effective and productive, especially when
it comes to the coordination of the tripartite Monitoring
and Verification Mechanism and the provision of
support for the demilitarization of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias the Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP).

human rights defenders. We denounce and condemn
those practices.

Senegal is pleased at the major progress made,
despite delays, in the implementation of the Final Peace
Agreement between the Government of Colombia and
the FARC, which put an end to an armed conflict that
lasted over 50 years. The Colombian people owes this
progress to both the Government and the FARC as a
result of their efforts to accelerate the implementation
of commitments made in the framework of the Peace
Agreement. The list of clear-minded, courageous
constitutional, legislative, institutional and other
measures taken and implemented since the beginning
of the peace process, the most recent of which the
Special Representative mentioned in his briefing, is a
long one. I will therefore not dwell on them, but rather
go directly to my point.

The progress I just referred to must be accompanied
by constant support for the Commission for the Followup, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of
the Final Agreement, made up of the High Commissioner
for Peace, the Minister of the Interior and the Minister
Counsellor for Post-Conflict, as well as three high-level
members of FARC-EP. It is also true that at this stage
of the process of implementation of the agreements, in
order to overcome the delay previously noted, efforts
need to be redoubled and concentrated in terms of
building FARC-EP camps, together with the necessary
communities, the security of FARC ex-combatants and
their reintegration into society as a political party and
as participants in the economic fabric of the country.

Senegal commends the fact that the ceasefire and
the cessation of hostilities are still holding and that
no casualties have been reported, which eloquently
reflects the parties’ strong determination to keep to the
180-day timeline established by the Peace Agreement,
despite the delay, for completing the laying down of
arms. In addition, we welcome the FARC-EP’s renewed
commitment to transform itself into a political party,
as well as the commitment of its leader, Rodrigo
Londoño, that the group will not field candidates
in the 2018 presidential election, in order to foster
national consensus around a candidate that guarantees
the continued implementation of the Final Peace
Agreement. That is important.
The process of the laying down of arms, which began
on 1 March, is an important step in the implementation
of the Peace Agreement. As of 11 March, the commission
for the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism reported
a number of weapons handed over. However, we remain
concerned about the actions of certain non-State armed
groups that have taken over some of the areas evacuated
by the FARC and are competing for control of illegal
activities, including illegal mining, drug trafficking
or other activities, thereby establishing a climate of
insecurity marked by attacks and acts of intimidation
that unfortunately target members of civil society and

It is important that the security gap created by the
departure of FARC combatants be rapidly filled. The
desertion of several FARC fighters in the south-eastern
and Pacific coast regions, some 2 to 5 per cent of their
former membership, is also a matter of deep concern.

In conclusion, Senegal wishes to reaffirm its
support for and commitment to peace in Colombia,
with the reasonable hope that the Peace Agreement and
the support of the international community will make
it possible to put an end to a conflict that has lasted
all too long. Mr. Arnault was correct in saying that the
upcoming visit of the Security Council to Colombia
that is planned for May under the South American
presidency of Uruguay is a very timely one.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to echo the words of condolence
expressed by other speakers and convey them to the
people and the Government of Colombia in the wake of
the natural disaster in Mocoa. We extend our sympathy
to the families of those who died, and we hope that the
joint efforts of the Government and the Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) in order to address
the consequences of the flood and the landslide will
translate into the process of national reconciliation and
advancement of the peace process.
We are grateful to Mr. Jean Arnault for his briefing.
We note that progress has been made in the peace
process in Colombia and hope that both sides will fulfil
their commitments faithfully and in a timely manner,
which is particularly important in this case.

17-0909811/16

S/PV.7916

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

We support the activities of the United Nations
Mission in Colombia, which oversees the disarmament
and reintegration processes. We welcome the guerrillas’
political confirmation of their intent to disarm in line
with the timeline. We believe that the incentive that
guides the FARC in this process is the possibility of
achieving their political ambitions in the upcoming
2018 election campaign.
We take a positive view of the Colombian
Parliament’s speedy passage of laws aimed at creating a
legal basis for the peace process, including the laws on
amnesty and the transitional justice system. This step
and future ones to be taken within the framework of
the peace process should provide a solid foundation for
national reconciliation and future post-conflict changes
in Colombia.
We are, however, concerned by indications that
certain difficulties exist in terms of the Government’s
discharging its obligations, a situation that could have
a negative impact on the disarmament process. The
deterioration of the guerrillas’ socioeconomic situation
owing to shortcomings on the part of the Government
could result in uncontrolled desertions from FARC. As
the Council is aware, to date already about 500 people
have stated that they will not follow the orders of the
guerrilla leadership. These people are highly trained
armed fighters and will inevitably join different criminal
groups, which could lead to a new spiral of violence
in the country. We hope that the current difficulties
are only temporary and that the Government will do
everything in its power to overcome them.
In that regard, we welcome the decision taken
by the President of the country, Mr. Santos, to send
members of his cabinet to FARC camps in order to
assess the arrangements made there for FARC members
who support the peace process. Future steps to be taken
by the United Nations to promote the peace process can
be undertaken once the relevant parameters have been
agreed with the Government of Colombia and FARC.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/252)
does not contain any recommendations on an eventual
second mission in Colombia. Neither Bogotá or the
guerrillas have taken a position on this issue. In general,
our view is that we should avoid endowing the mission
with excessive powers and thereby turning it into an
external watchdog with respect to the activities of the
sovereign Colombian Government.
12/16

05/04/2017

We still need to determine whether the parties
and the United Nations will be able to conclude the
disarmament and demobilization process within the set
timeline and what the security conditions will be when
the mandate of the current Mission expires. Obviously,
at that time we will be discussing reductions in the
military and police components. However, when we
take that decision, we must ensure that the withdrawal
of all observers does not lead to a security vacuum. We
in turn intend to continue to fully support the peace
process in Colombia.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I wish to greet the
Permanent Representative of Colombia in this Chamber
and also to join others in expressing our heartfelt
condolences to the people of Colombia on the tragic
landslide in Mocoa.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his briefing and for the
effective contribution made by the United Nations
Mission in Colombia to the peace process in the
country. We welcome the many positive developments
that have been witnessed. My delegation wishes to
make the following observations and recommendations
with a view to furthering the peace process.
The Colombian Constitutional Court will need
to improve the revised peace agreement adopted by
the Congress for it to take effect as soon as possible.
We commend the formation of the transitional justice
tribunal, the truth commission and the missing persons
search unit to redress the grievances of the 8 million
victims. The amnesty law ratified by President Santos
should result in further bills and pardons, with measures
for the demobilization and disarmament of some 7,000
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia-People’s
Army (FARC-EP) rebels.
The process of the laying down of weapons must
be rigorously carried out in the 26 demobilization
camps. Thus the active coordination of the tripartite
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism, consisting of
the United Nations, the Government and FARC, will
accelerate the process of full and effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. Equally important
is the peaceful reintegration of former FARC rebels
into society. At the same time, we must ensure that all
parties to the peace process strictly comply not only
with the provisions of the peace agreement but also
with international humanitarian law.
17-09098

05/04/2017

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

We encourage the Government to continue
negotiations with the largest left-wing rebel group,
the National Liberation Army, with a view to ending
the confrontation. We are concerned that the National
Liberation Army is continuing to commit acts of
violence that destabilize the country, hence we urge
that a bilateral ceasefire agreement be concluded at the
very earliest.
We need a vision of peace that is truly bottomup, one that endeavours to break the vicious circle of
violence and leads to a true institutional strengthening
and the protection of peoples’ rights. The country has
lost years of potential progress, and it is thus critical to
create an adequate socioeconomic structure that is able
to support this young democracy. The private sector has
inputs to make and must unite with the public sector to
move Colombia forward.
It is clear that a post-conflict Colombia will pose
challenges and offer opportunities. Job creation and the
establishment of infrastructure and State services such
as schools and hospitals in former guerrilla strongholds
will narrow the wide gap between rural and urban areas.
In addition, dismantling organized-crime networks will
have to remain a priority.
Achieving peace in Colombia is critical to achieving
a more stable world. Such a commitment is necessary,
together with that of the United Nations system and
regional organizations, especially the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States, in assisting
Colombia with the reform process.
Finally, the ceasefire is still fragile, but the future
of Colombia holds the promise of progress. Kazakhstan
will work with the United Nations and other Member
States to overcome challenges and to build a peace that
lives up to the aspirations of the Colombian nation and
the world. We look forward to visiting Columbia in May
to attest to our strong support for the peace process in
the country.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to begin
by offering the sincere condolences of Ethiopia to
Ambassador María Mejía Vélez following the death and
destruction caused by the landslide in Colombia this
past weekend. We are in sympathy and solidarity with
the families of the victims as well as with the people
and the Government of Colombia.
Let me also join others in expressing our thanks
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General

S/PV.7916

Arnault for his briefing on the latest report of the
Secretary-General on Colombia (S/2017/252) and the
activities of the United Nations Mission in Colombia
over the past three months.
The significant developments that have taken
place in the process of the implementation of the
peace agreement, including the disarmament of former
combatants of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia (FARC), which started recently, is very
encouraging, as is the bilateral ceasefire and the
cessation of hostilities between the Government and
the FARC, which has been holding with no casualties
registered. Of course, we understand that this is only
the beginning of a long and arduous process, and we
take note of some of the difficult and sensitive issues
involved which need to be handled carefully, including
the amnesty law, reintegration and the transformation
of FARC into a political party, as highlighted in the
report of the Secretary-General. We also recognize
the potential complications ahead in relation to the
upcoming general elections due to take place in
May 2018.
This notwithstanding, the progress made recently
has been remarkable, leading to a renewed sense of
hope and optimism for lasting peace in Colombia.
Both parties deserve to be commended for reaffirming
their political will and commitment to advancing the
implementation the Peace Agreement. It is imperative
that the parties continue to stay the course and that the
positive momentum generated recently be sustained
so as to achieve the difficult transition to peace. The
parties certainly need the continued support of the
international community, with full respect for the
peace process by the parties and by the Colombian
people in general. In that regard, we reiterate our
appreciation to the countries of the region and other
international partners that continue to closely support
the implementation of the Peace Agreement.
The role of the United Nations Mission in Colombia
continues to be very important, and we are pleased to
note that the Mission has reached its full operational
capacity. We express our appreciation to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Arnault as
well as the United Nations personnel in Colombia for
all their efforts to supporting the Peace Agreement.
Finally, we look forward to our visit to Colombia
next month, which will afford us an opportunity to
express support for, and solidarity with, Colombia

17-0909813/16

S/PV.7916

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

05/04/2017

and to convey a strong message of encouragement to
the parties for their commitment to implement to the
Peace Agreement.

this past weekend. We express our heartfelt condolences
to the people of Colombia who were affected by
that tragedy.

Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to join my colleagues in expressing
our condolences to the Government and the people of
Colombia on the hundreds of Colombian lives claimed
by the landslide.

Special Representative Arnault is playing a critical
role in supporting the implementation of the historic
Final Peace Agreement.

I would like also to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing. I have three brief points to make.
First, my delegation commends the efforts of the
two parties to the Final Peace Agreement and the
reaffirmation of their commitment to abide by the
timelines specified by the Agreement, despite the
logistical issues that have led to relative delays. In in
that regard, we welcome the successful cantonment of
combatants in the agreed-upon zones. We believe that
the next phase should focus on efforts to reintegrate
members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia into Colombian society.
Secondly, we commend the efforts and positive and
effective steps taken by the Government of Colombia
in implementing the Peace Agreement, in particular
with regard to legislation aimed at prosecuting the
perpetrators of crimes committed during the conflict,
as well as the establishment of other entities, including
the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism to follow
up on the implementation of the Peace Agreement and,
in particular the special electoral mission that will
monitor ensuring participation in political life.
Thirdly, and lastly, we hope that the two parties
will overcome their differences with regard to the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. That includes
committedly respecting the agreed timelines. In
that regard, we hope that the Security Council’s visit
during Uruguay’s presidency in May will provide
impetus for the Peace Agreement in Colombia and
its implementation. That would reflect international
support for the Agreement.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Arnault for his briefing.
Americans are grieving today along with
Colombians for the lives lost in the terrible mudslides
14/16

As my colleagues know, we have begun a review
of United Nations peacekeeping missions. Although
the Colombia Mission is not a peacekeeping mission,
the same principles of effectiveness and accountability
apply. To be effective, missions must have a solid
political foundation on which to build. They must enjoy
the cooperation of the host countries. They must have
clear realistic goals with identifiable exit strategies.
And we as a body must be able to adjust those missions
to fit new realities.
I want to congratulate the Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism in Colombia for meeting
those and additional criteria. The Mission has all
the pieces in place for a successful outcome. It has a
carefully designed mandate to support a clear and
established peace process. It also has a clear deadline
for the demobilization and disarmament of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC). In
that regard, I was pleased to hear that both sides are
working together towards the implementation of
the Peace Agreement as quickly as possible. We are
thankful for both the process that they have established
and the cooperation that they have achieved. We urge
both sides to build on that momentum so as to move
forward more quickly.
As the Security Council looks forward to
continuing its support for Colombia through monitoring
the next stage of the peace process, we must keep in
mind the principles of effectiveness that the Council
has developed. I believe that those are the building
blocks of continued success in achieving lasting peace.
Lasting peace in Colombia means that the Government
will need to extend its authority throughout the entire
State. All parties must now work with the Government
to make that happen. It is no secret that, as the FARC
move into demobilization zones, they leave behind
remote, lawless areas that have been largely untouched
by the Colombian Government. The political vacuum
that that has created is a dangerous threat to long-term
peace. It must be filled before other armed groups,
including drug traffickers, step in.
17-09098

05/04/2017

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

To that end, the United States continues to enjoy
strong cooperation with Colombia in combating
drug trafficking. We are providing assistance to the
Government in fulfilling the Peace Agreement so
as to end Colombia’s illicit drug problem. We hope
and expect that progress will continue. As we have
discussed today, much good has been done, but much
more remains to be done.
During the time during which I have been here,
I have learned that moments of hope and promise are
truly moments to be savoured. For Colombia, this is
one of those moments. The United States stands with
Colombia in building lasting peace for its citizens.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Madam President, and all
the members of the Security Council for the expression
of solidarity made on behalf of the people of Macoa, a
very harsh jungle region that has suffered a tragedy that
none of us could have anticipated to befall them.
I would like to congratulate you, Madam President,
and your country on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council, and I wish you great success in
conducting the work of the Council this month. I also
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Jean Arnault, and his entire team, because as
members of the Council have indicated and have seen
first-hand, we have established a level of coordination
that, I believe, is very valuable and essential for the
work being done.
I would like to read out something of great interest
to us Colombians that the Secretary-General indicated
in his report,
“Colombia’s remarkable journey towards peace
has continued. The images witnessed in February
of thousands of FARC-EP members making their
final march into the zones where they will begin
their reintegration into civilian life and FARC-EP
will transform into a political organization were
images of peace that many Colombians thought
they would never see. These historic steps forward,
as part of a comprehensive peace agreement, are
testament to the resilience of the peace process and
the commitment of the parties.” ( S/2017/252, para.
75)

S/PV.7916

And the numbers are proof of this. The past
seven months have seen violence de-escalating at
unprecedented rates in a nation that for more than
50 years dealt with a brutal internal conflict with
enormous human costs. Those numbers include 1,546
days without any attacks on communities, 580 without
kidnappings, 375 without assaults on public law
enforcement and 307 without any incidents attributed
to the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC). The homicide rate for the first quarter of this
year is 12 per cent below last year’s.
There is no question that there have been some
worrying events, which we will have to address going
forward, but as of today, we have fully registered 8,345
FARC-Ejército del Pueblo guerrillas and militias and
more than 7,000 weapons that have been registered by the
United Nations. Fifty-seven minors have been separated
from the FARC so far, and the process is continuing. As
the Special Representative said, on the legislative front
we have also made progress on transitional justice, and
yesterday President Santos Calderón signed decrees on
the establishment of the Truth Commission and a special
unit to search for persons who have disappeared, as
part of the development of an integral system of justice,
truth and reparation.
I would like to highlight two elements that I
believe are important for the United Nations Mission
in Colombia, because they could serve as examples for
other missions in future. The first is that it has achieved
a 20 per cent rate of participation of women, both
military and civilian — currently the highest of any
mission. That, together with the presence of a woman
as Deputy Special Representative, Ms. Tania Patriota
of Brazil, reinforces the strong gender dimension that
has been present throughout the peace process and
now in its implementation, where women are a strong
presence in the ex-combatant component. The second
is the regional component, where the members of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
have shown the extraordinarily important part that the
presence of regional mechanisms has played in settling
the last remaining conflict in the American hemisphere.
I should like to highlight the confidence of the
national authorities and the international community in
the ceasefire and disarmament process, thanks in large
part to the work of the highly innovative Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism, composed of the Government,
the FARC and the United Nations. My Government
believes that, in order to guarantee the legitimacy and

17-0909815/16

S/PV.7916

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Colombia

credibility of the Mechanism, permanent and effective
coordination among its members is indispensable, in
compliance with the protocols governing the ceasefire,
the laying down of arms and the preparatory activities
of the reintegration and transition to legality, which
we hope will be swift. It will also be necessary, in
conformity with the scheduled programme, for the
Mission to expedite the procedures for registration,
identification and collection of weapons, as well
as procedures for locating and destroying unstable
weapons and explosives, concerning which Mr. Arnault
spoke earlier. The Government is ready to provide
logistical and legal means to contribute to this work.
Lastly, with respect to the killings of recent months
that are referred to in the report and have been cited
by a number of Council members, the Colombian
Government wishes to reiterate that it is premature to
affirm that all such killings are associated with the work
of defending human rights or the handiwork of criminal
organizations that have succeeded paramilitary groups.

16/16

05/04/2017

The authorities have been able to observe that, although
in some cases this is so, it is not possible at this time to
generalize about the origin of these criminal actions,
which shall not prevent our Government, aware of the
harmful presence of outlaw actors, to move forward
with relevant public safety actions.
I conclude by reiterating our appreciation and
by saying that the commitment of Colombia to
implementing the mandate of the United Nations
Mission is producing concrete results, which the
Council will have the opportunity to see first-hand
on its trip in May. We strongly hope and trust that the
progress will be obvious.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. Given that all Council members
have spoken in the Chamber, and with their agreement,
we will forgo moving to consultations this afternoon.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

17-09098
