General Assembly--Fifteenth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIRST COMMITI'EE

CONTENTS
Pa_qe

1573
1576

1577
1578

(XV). Question of Algeria ( 19 December 1960) ( item 71 )
(XV). Prevention of the wider dissemination of nuclear weapons
(20 December 1960) (item 73).
(XV). Suspension of nuclear and thermo-nuclear tests (20 December 1960)
(item 69)
(XV). Suspension of nuclear and thermo-nuclear tests (20 De,cember 19fi0)
(item 69) ..

3
3
4
4

basis of respect for the unity and territorial integrity
of Algeria;
3. Recognizes further that the United Nations has a
responsibility to contribute towards the successful and
just implementation of this right.
956th plenary meeting.
19 December 1960.

1573 (XV). Question of Algeria

The General Assembly,
Having discussed the question of Algeria,
Recalling its resolution 1012 (XI) of 15 February 1957
by which the General Assembly expressed the hope that
a peaceful, democratic and just solution would be found
through appropriate means, in conformity with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recaliing further its resolution 1184 (XII) of 10
December 1957 by which the General Assembly expressed the wish that pourparlers would be entered into,
and other appropriate means utilized, with a view to a
solution, in conformity with the purposes and principles
of the Charter,
Noting wi,th regret that the pourparlers contemplated
in resolution 1184 (XII) did not materialize,
Recalling Article 1, paragraph 2, of the Charter,
Deeply concerned with the continuance of hostilities
in Algeria,
Considering that the present situation in Algeria also
constitutes a threat to international peace and security,
Recalling its resolution 1495 ( XV ) of 17 October
1960 by which the General Assembly urges that immediate and constructive steps should be adopted in
regard to the urgent problems concerning the peace of
the world,
TakiAg note of the fact that the two parties concerned
have accepted the right of self-determination as the basis
for the solution of the Algerian problem,
Recognizing the passionate yearning for freedom of
all dependent peoples and the decisive role of such
peoples in the attainment of their independence,
Convinced that all peoples have an inalienable right
to complete freedom, the exercise of their sovereignty
and the integrity of their national territory,
l. Recognizes the right of the Algerian people to
self-determination and independence ;
2. Recognizes the imperative need for adequate and
effective guarantees to ensure the successful and just
implementation of the right of self-determination on the

1576 (XV). Prevention of the wider
dissemination of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1380 (XIV) of 20 N ovember 1959,
Recognizing the urgent danger that now exists that
an increase in the number of States possessing nuclear
weapons may occur, aggravating international tension
and the difficulty of maintaining world peace, and thus
rendering more difficult the attainment of general di.sarmament agreement,
Noting with regret that the Ten-Nation Committee
on Disarmament did not find it possible to consider this
problem, which was referred to it by General Assembly
resolution 1380, (XIV),
Believing in the necessity of an internatiunal agreement, subject to inspection and control, whereby the
Powers producing nuclear weapons would refrain from
relinquishing control of such weapons to any nation not
possessing them and whereby Powers not possessing
such weapons would refrain from manufacturing them,
Believing further that, pending the conclusion of
such an international agreement, it is desirable that temporary and voluntary measures be taken to avoid the
aggravation of this danger,
1. Calls upon all Governments to make every effort to
achieve permanent agreement on the prevention of the
wider dissemination of nuclear weapons;
2. Calls upon Powers producing such weapons, as a
temporary and voluntary measure pending the negotiation of such a permanent agreement, to refrain from
relinquishing control of such weapons to any nation
3

4

General Assembly -

not possessing them and from transmitting to it the
information necessary for their manufacture ;
3. Calls upon Powers not possessing such weapons,
on a similar temporary and voluntary basis, to refrain
from manufacturing these weapons am! from otherwise
attempting to acquire them.
960th plenary meeting,
20 December 1960.
1577 (XV). Suspension of nuclear and
thermo-nuclear tests

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1252 R (Xl1I) of 4 November 1958 and 1402 (XIV) of 21 Kovember 1959,
Considering the importance and urgency of an agreement on the prohibition of nuclear and thermo-nuclear
weapons tests, with effective international control,
Noting ·with satisfaction that further progress with
regard to such an agreement has been achieved at the
negotiations in Geneva since the fourteenth session of
the General Assembly and that the States concerned have
voluntarily suspended such tests since the autumn of
1958,
1. Urges the States concerned to seek a solution for
the few remaining questions, so that the conclusion of
the agreement will be achieved at an early date;
2. Urges the States concerned in these negotiations
to continue their present voluntary suspension of the
testing of nuclear weapons;
3. Requests the parties concerned to report the results of their negotiations to the Disarmament Commission and to the General Assembly.
960th plenary meeting,
20 December 1960.

Fifteenth session

1578 (XV). Suspension of nuclear ancl
thermo-nuclear tests

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 137Q (XIV) of 20 November
1959 and 14-02 (XIV) of 21 November 1959,
Continuing to bear in mind the profound concern
evinced hy the peoples of all countries regarding the
testing of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons and the
consequences thereof,
Recogni::in_rJ that, as a result of the endeavours at
Geneva of the parties concerned, substantial progress
has been made towards reaching agreement on the
cessation of the testing of nuclear and thermo-nuclear
weapons, under appropriate international control.
Recogni::ing further that agreement on the ce.-;sation
of tests of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons is not
only imperative but urgent,
l. Urges the States concerned to make every effort
to reach agreement as soon as possible on the cessation
of tests of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons, under
appropriate international control;
2. Urges the States concerned in the Geneva negotiations to continue their present voluntary suspension
of the testing of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons,
and requests other States to n;frain from undertaking
such tests;
3. Requests the States concerned in the Geneva negotiations:
(a) To keep the Disarmament Commission periodically informed of the progress of their negotiations;
( b) To report the results of their negotiations to the
Disarmament Commission and to the General Assembly.
960th plenary meetinp,
20 December 1960.

General Assembly -- Fifteenth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SPECIAL
POLITICAL COMMITTEE

CONTENTS

1497
1574

(XV). The status of the German-speaking element in the Province of
Bolzano (Bozen); implementation of the Paris agreement of 5 September
1946 (31 October 1960) (item 68).
(XV). Report of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of
Atomic Radiation (20 December 1960) (item 24).
.

1497 (XV). The status of the German-speaking
element in the Province of Bolzano
(Bozen); implementation of the Paris
agreement of 5 September 1946

5

of Tustice or any other peaceful means of their own
choice;
3. Likeu>ise recommends that the countries in question should refrain from any action which might impair
their friendly relations.
·
909th p!rnary meeting.
31 October 196().

The General Assembly,
Having considered item 68 of its agenda,
Considering that the status of the German-speaking
element in the Province of Balzano ( Bozen) has been
regulated by an international agreement between Austria
and Italy, signed in Paris on 5 September 1946, 1
Considering that the said agreement establishes a
system designed to guarantee the German-speaking inhabitants of that Province "complete equality of rights
with the Italian-speaking inhabitants, within the framework of special provisions to safeguard the ethnical
character and the cultural and economic development
of the German-speaking element",
Bearing in mind that a dispute has arisen b~_tween
Austria and Italy in regard to the implementation of
the said agreement,
Desirous of preventing the situation created by the
dispute from impairing the friendly relations between
the two countries,
1. Urges the two parties concerned to resume negotiations with a view to finding a solution for all differences relating to the implementation of the Paris agreement of 5 September 1946;
2. Recommends that, in the event of the negotiations
referred to in paragraph 1 above not leading to satisfactory results within a reasonable _perio~ of time, both
parties should give favou:able cons_1der:at10n to the possibility of seeking a solut10n of their differences by '.'my
of the means provided in the Charter of _the Umted
Nations, including recourse to the Internat1011al Court
1 United

5

1574 (XV). Report of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic
Radiation
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1376 (XIV) of 17 November

1959,
Noting u>ith appreciation the co-operation which the
United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of
Atomic Radiation continues to receive in its work from
Member States, specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, international non-governmental
and national scientific organizations, and indiviclual
scientists,
1. Takes note of the annual progress report of the
United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of
Atomic Radiation for 1960 ;2
2. W cl comes the report prepared by the Committee in
response to General Assembly resolution JJ76 (XI\') ;3
3. Notes with approz-al, in particular, the Committee's proposals contained in paragraphs 14 and 1<) of
its annual report, which carry financial implications
additional to those for which arrangements have already
been made.
960th plenary mcctini;,
20 f)crember 1960.
2 Official Records of the General Assrmbly, Fifteenth Sl'Ssion, Annexes, agenda item 24, document A/4528.
3 Jbid., document A/452R, annex l.

Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 49 (1950), No. 747,

annex IV.

5
