RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE AD HOC POLITICAL COMMITTEE

CONTENTS
Page

718 (VIII). Admission of new Members (23 October 1953) (item 22)........
719 (VIII). Treatment of people of Indian origin in the Union of South Africa
(11 November 1953) (item 20) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .. .. . . . .. .. . .. . .. .. . .. .
720 (VIII). Report of the Director of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East ( 27 November 1953)
(item 19) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
721 (VIII). The question of race conflict in the South Africa resulting from the
policies of apartheid of the Government of the Union of South Africa
(8 December 1953) (item 21) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

718 (Vlll).

5
5
6
6

in the Union of South Africa should be in conformity with the international obligations under the agreements concluded between the Governments of India
and the Union of South Africa and the relevant provisions of the Charter and requested the two Governments to report to the General Assembly on the measures adopted to this effect;
(b) That resolution 265 (III) of 14 May 1949 invited the Governments of India, Pakistan and the Union
of South Africa to enter into discussion at a round
table conference, taking into consideration the Purposes and Principles of the Charter and the Declaration of Human Rights;
(c) That resolution 395 (V) of 2 December 1950
held that a policy of "racial segregation" ( apartheid)
was necessarily based on doctrines of racial discrimination; repeated its recommendation that a round
table conference be held; and further recommended
that, in the event of failure to hold a conference or
reach agreement thereat, a commission of three members be set up to assist the parties in carrying through
appropriate negotiations ;
(d) That resolution 511 (VI) of 12 January 1952
reaffirmed the recommendation of resolution 395 (V)
that a three-member commission be established and
further requested the Secretary-General, in the event
of failure to establish such a commission, to lend his
assistance to the Governments concerned and if necessary to appoint an individual who would render any
additional assistance deemed advisable;
(e) That resolution 615 (VII) of 5 December 1952
established a three-member United Nations Good Offices Commission to arrange and assist in negotiations
between the Governments concerned in order that a
satisfactory solution in accordance with the Purposes
and Principles of the Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights might be achieved;
3. Also recalls that resolutions 395 (V), 511 (VI)
and 615 (VII) successively called on the Government
of the Union of South Africa to refrain from implementing .or enforcing the provisions of the Group
Areas Act;

AdmiHio.o of new Members

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report 1 of the Special Committee on Admission of New Members,
Considering that universality of membership in the
United Nations is subject only to the provisions of
the Charter,
Considering that the aims of the Charter of the
United Nations would be furthered through the cooperation of all peace-loving States,
Believing that a new effort to find a solution to this
problem should be without prejudice to the juridical
positions maintained by individual Members of the
United Nations and to any further consideration of the
subject by the General Assembly,
1. Decides to establish a Committee of Good Offices, consisting of the representatives of Egypt, the
Netherlands and Peru, empowered to consult with
members of the Security Council with the object of
exploring the possibilities of reaching an understanding
which would facilitate the admission of new Members
in accordance with Article 4 of the Charter ;
2. Requests the Committee of Good Offices to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly at
its eighth or, at the latest, at its ninth session.
453rd plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.

719 (Vlll). Treatment of people of Indian
origin in the Union of South Africa
The General Assembly
1. Recalls that at its first, second, third, fifth, sixth
and seventh sessions it has given consideration to the
question of the treatment of people of Indian origin in
the Union of South Africa;
2. Further recalls:
(a) That resolution 44 (I) of 8 December 1946
expressed the opinion that the treatment of Indians
1 See document A/'2400.

5

6

General Assembly-Eighth Session

4. Takes note of the report 2 of the United Nations
Good Offices Commission, and in particular its conclusion that "in view of the response of the Government of the Union of South Africa, it has been unable
to carry out its task to arrange and assist in negotiations between the Governments concerned" ;
5. Expresses its regret that the Government of the
Union of South Africa:
(a) Has refused to make use of the Commission's
good offices or to utilize any of the alternative procedures for the settlement of the problem recommended
by the four previous resolutions of the General Assembly;
( b) Has continued to implement the provisions of
the Group Areas Act in spite of the provisions of three
previous resolutions;
( c) Is proceeding with further legislation contrary
to the Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, including the Immigrants Regulation Amendment Bill which seeks to prohibit the entry into South
Africa of wives and children of South African nationals
of Indian origin ;
6. Considers that these actions of the Government
of the Union of South Africa are not in keeping with
its obligations and responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations;
7. Decides to continue the United Nations Good
Offices Commission and urges the Government of the
Union of South Africa to co-operate with that Commission;
8. Requests the Commission to report to the General Assembly at its next regular session the extent
of progress achieved, together with its own views on
the problem and any proposals which, in its opinion,
may lead to a peaceful settlement of it;
9. Again calls upon the Government of the Union
of South Africa to refrain from implementing the
provisions of the Group Areas Act;
10. Decides to include this item in the provisional
agenda of the ninth session of the General Assembly.
457th plenary meeting,
11 November 1953.

720 (VIIl). Report of the Director of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

A
The General Assembly,
Recal,ling its resolutions 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949, 393 (V)
of 2 December 1950, 513 (VI) of 26 January 1952 and
614 (VII) of 6 November 1952,
Having examined the report 3 of the Director of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the special report 4
of the Director and the Advisory Commission of that
Agency,
Noting that programme agreements envisaging the
commitment of approximately $120 million have been
signed by UNRWA with the governments of several
Near Eastern countries, pursuant to the plan endorsed
See document A/2473.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth
Session, Supplement No. 12.
4 See document A/2470/ Add. 1.
2

3

by the General Assembly in resolution 513 (VI), but
that expectations as regards the execution of the projects programme have not bee1:1 realized,
Noting also that the situation of the refugees continues to be a matter of grave concern,
I. Decides, without prejudice to the provisions of
paragraph 11 of resolution 194 (III), or to the provisions of paragraph 4 of resolution 393 (V), that the
mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East shall
be extended until 30 June 1955, and that its programme
shall be again subject to review at the ninth session
of the General Assembly;
2. Authorizes the Agency to adopt a budget for
relief amounting to $24.8 million for the fiscal year
ending 30 June 1954, subject to such adjustments as
may be attributable to refugee employment on projects,
or as may be necessary to maintain adequate standards,
and to adopt a provisional budget for relief of $18
million for the fiscal year ending 30 June 1955;
3. Considers that the projects fund previously authorized by the General Assembly in paragraph 2 of
resolution 513 (VI) should be maintained at $200 million until 30 June 1955, and urges UNRWA and the
governments of the Near Eastern countries concerned
to continue to seek acceptable projects to enable the
fund to be utilized for the purposes for which it is
intended;
4. Requests the Negotiating Committee for ExtraBudgetary Funds to seek the funds required to meet
the current needs of the relief programmes and to
invite governments to take into account the need for
the additional pledges which will be required to meet
the total programme now established at $292.8 million.
458th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.

B
The General Assembly,
Having noted that the present memb~rship of the
Advisory Commission of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, established pursuant to paragraph 8 of General
Assembly resolution 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949, is
composed of representatives of Egypt, France, Jordan,
Syria, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America,
Noting further that it is in the general interest that
other contributing countries join the Advisory Commission,
Authorizes the Advisory Commission to increase its
membership by not more than two additional members.
458th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.
721 (VIII). The· question of race conftict in
South Africa resulting from the policies of
apartheid of the Government of the Union of
South Africa

The General, Assembly,
Hooing considered the report 5 of the United Nations Commission on the Racial Situation in the Union
5
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth Session, Supplement No. 16, document A/2505.
