60

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

Guided, therefore, by the need for all States, in
the supreme interest of peace and the future of mankind, to continue their efforts towards further reduction of tension, the promotion of better relations
among themselves and the strengthening and widening of detente, and, to that end,
Declare their determination:
1. To adhere firmly to and promote the implementation of the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations, as well as the universally accepted principles and declarations aimed at enhancing world peace and security and the development of friendly and co-operative relations among
States, and to fulfil their obligations arising from
multilateral treaties and agreements serving the
achievement of these objectives;

2. To consider taking new and meaningful steps.
both in bilateral and multilateral arms control negotiation forums, aimed at achieving the objective of
a cessation of the arms race, in particular the nuclear
arms race, at an early stage and realization of disarmament measures, especially nuclear disarmament
with the ultimate objective of general and complete
disarmament under strict and effective international
control;
3. To facilitate the peaceful and speedy settlement of outstanding international problems and to
strive to remove both causes and effects of international tension so that relations among all States may
evolve in the direction of co-operation and friendship in order to prevent the recurrence of situations
which might endanger international peace and security;
4. To strengthen the role of the United Nations
as a primary instrument in the maintenance of international peace and security by reinforcing both the
peace-making and peace-keeping capabilities of the
Organization;
5. To refrain from the threat or use of force
and to abide in their relations with other States by
the principles of sovereign equality, territorial integrity, inviolability of international frontiers, inadmissibility of the acquisition and occupation of the territories of other States by force, settlement of
disputes-including frontier disputes-strictly by
peaceful means, non-intervention and non-interference in the internal affairs of other States, respect for
human rights, respect for the right of all nations to
choose freely their social, political and economic
systems and to develop their external relations in
the way they deem be.t for the interest of their
respective peoples in conformity with the Charter
of the United Nations;
6. To ensure the free exercise of the right of
the peoples under colonial and alien domination to
self-determination and to promote majority rule,
especially where racial oppression, in particular
apartheid, has deprived peoples from exercising their
inalienable rights;
7. To work towards the establishment and development of just and balanced economic relation,
among States and to strive to narrow the gap between the developed and developing countries, in
accordance with the resolutions of the General Assembly adopted by consensus at its sixth and seventh

special sessions on the establishment of the new international economic order; 60
8. To encourage and promote respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all in conformity with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and other relevant international treaties and
instruments, including the International Covenants
on Human Rights; 61
9. To foster mutual understanding and trust
among peoples by promoting and facilitating cultural exch:!nges, freer movement and contacts among
them both on an individual and a collective basis;
10. To develop further their relations and cooperation in conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and to
observe the principles set forth above which derive
from the Charter, recognizing that nothing in the
present Declaration could either alter or detract
from obligations they might have undertaken in
relation to other States in accordance with the principles of international law and the Charter.
106th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
32/l9;"i,

Tenth annh-ersary of the entry into
force of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the
Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies

The General Assembly,
Noting that ten years have passed since the entry
into force of the Treaty on Principles Governing the
Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of
Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies, 62
Confirming the great importance of the Treaty for
the development of international co-operation in the
peaceful exploration and use of outer space, including
the moon and other celestial bodies, and for developing the rule of law in this sphere of human activity,
Convinced that, during the decade in which the
Treaty has been in force, it has played a positive role
in the implementation of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the progressive development of the law of outer space, including
the elaboration and adoption of other international
instruments governing the outer space activities of
States,
Noting that seventy-five States have become parties
to the Treaty,
Recognizing that participation in the Treaty contributes to the peaceful exploration and use of outer
space for the benefit of all mankind, regardless of the
degree of economic or scientific develop~1ent of States,
and to the development of mutual understanding and
the strengthening of friendly relations among States
and peoples.
Recalling its resolutions 2260 (XXII) of 3 Novemher 1967, 2453 (XXlll) of 20 December 1968, 2601
60 Resolutions

3201 (S-VI), 3202 (S-VI) and 3362 (S-VII l.

61 Resolution
62 Resolution

2200 A (XXI), annex.

2222 (XXI), annex.

III.

Hesolulions adopted on the reports of the l•'irst Committee

(XXIV) of 16 December 1969, 2733 (XXV) of 16
December 1970, 2776 (XXVI) of 29 November 1971,
2915 (XXVII) of 9 November 1972, 3182 (XXVIII)
of 18 December 1973, 3234 (XXIX) of 12 November
1974, 3388 (XXX) of 18 November 1975 and 31/8
of 8 November 1976, in which it invited States which
had not yet become parties to the Treaty to give early
consideration to ratifying or acceding to it,
Expressing the belief that the participation in the
Treaty of all States and the application of this international instrument by them can contribute to enhancing the effectiveness of international co-operation
in the peaceful exploration and use of outer space,
including the moon and other celestial bodies,
1. Tnvites States which have not yet become parties
to the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities
of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, to
ratify or accede to it as soon as possible;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake
research analysing the experience gained in the application of the Treaty over the past ten years and showing
its importance for the development of international cooperation in the practical application of space technology;
3. Recommends that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space should consider at its next
session possible measures to encourage the largest possible number of States to participate in the Treaty.
I 08th plenary meeting
20 December 1977
32/196.

International co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/8 of 8 November 1976,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 63
Reaffirming the common interest of mankind in
furthering the exploration and use of outer space for
peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend
to interested States the benefits derived therefrom, as
well as the importance of international co-operation in
this field, for which the United Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Reaffirming also the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule of law in the peaceful exploration and use of outer space,
Commemorating the twentieth anniversary since the
launching into orbit of the first man-made object, Sputnik, which marked the beginning of the exploration and
use of outer space for peaceful purposes and of international co-operation in this field,
Recalling with satisfaction its resolution 32/ 195 of
20 December 1977 concerning the tenth anniversary
of the entry into force of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and
Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other
Celestial Bodies/ 4
63 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/32/20).
6 4 Resolution 2222 (XXI), annex.

61

l. Endorses the report of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
2. Invites States which have not yet become parties
to the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of
States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, the
Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of
Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into
Outer Space;3" the Convention on International Liability
for Damage Caused by Space Objects 613 and the Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer
Space';; to give early consideration to ratifying or acceding to those international agreements;
3. Notes with satisfaction the considerable progress
achieved by the Legal Sub-Committee of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and by a working
party of that Committee in the elaboration of draft
principles governing the use by States of artificial earth
satellites for direct television broadcasting, 68 and the
work done in formulating a tentative text of a principle
of "consultation and agreements between States" 00 and
a draft preamble; 70
4. Further notes with satisfaction that the Legal
Sub-Committee:
(a)
Achieved significant progress by formulating
six additional draft principles relating to the legal implications of remote sensing of the earth from space; 71
( b)
Continued its efforts to complete the draft
treaty relating to the moon;
( c) Discussed questions relating to the definition
and/ or delimitation of outer space and outer space
activities;
5. Takes note with appreciation of the resolution
adopted by the Legal Sub-Committee paying tribute to
its Chairman, Mr. Eugeniusz Wyzner, on the occasion
of the tenth anniversary of his assumption of office; 72
6. Recommends that the Legal Sub-Committee at
its seventeenth session should:
( a) Continue, as matters of high priority:
( i)
Its efforts to complete the elaboration of draft
principles governing the use by States of artificial earth satellites for direct television
broadcasting;

(ii)

Its detailed consideration of the legal implications of remote sensing of the earth from
space, with the aim of formulating draft principles;

(iii)

Its consideration of the draft treaty relating
to the moon;

( b) Continue to discuss questions relating to the
definition and/or delimitation of outer space and outer
space activities, and also bear in mind questions relating
to the geostationary orbit;
7. Notes with satisfaction that the Scientific and
Technical Sub-Committee of the Committee on the
60 Resolution

2345 (XXII), annex.
Gu Resolution 2777 (XXVI), annex.
G, Resolution 3235 (XXIX), annex.
us Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/32/20), annex VII.
H9 Ibid., annex V.
,o lhid., annex lV.
• 1 A/AC.105/196. :innex III, appendix A.
72 //,id., para. J 4.
