S/2016/766*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 September 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2240 (2015)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 18 of Security Council
resolution 2240 (2015), by which the Council requested me to report on the
implementation of the resolution, in particular paragraphs 7 to 10 thereof.
2.
The report covers developments since the date of adoption of the resolution
(9 October 2015) until 31 August 2016. The information and observations herein are
based on submissions by Member States, regional arrangements and other relevant
stakeholders. The United Nations system was also widely consulted.

II. Smuggling of migrants and trafficking in persons in the
Mediterranean Sea off the coast of Libya1
3.
Notwithstanding my calls to address the causes and drivers that lead people to
cross the Mediterranean Sea using irregular channels and to make saving lives a
priority, national and regional efforts have not resulted in an immediate
improvement in the situation. More than 10,000 men, women and children on their
way to Europe have died or gone missing at sea since 2014. As at 31 August 2016,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) had
recorded 3,169 deaths and disappearances in the Mediterranean Sea and
281,740 arrivals in Europe by sea in 2016.
4.
The large majority of men, women and children who are smuggled and
trafficked by sea from the northern shores of Africa to Europe depart from Libya, in
particular from the areas immediately east and west of Tripoli, and arrive in Italy.
This is commonly referred to as the “central Mediterranean route”. In 2015,
UNHCR recorded more than 150,000 arrivals in Italy by sea, some 90 per cent of
which had departed from Libya. According to UNHCR and the European Union
military operation in the Southern Central Mediterranean (EUNAVFOR MED
operation SOPHIA), as at 15 August 2016, more than 100,000 people, originating
largely from sub-Saharan countries, had arrived in Italy in 2016. Those arriving
include asylum seekers and refugees fleeing from conflict and persecution. The
__________________

* Reissued for technical reasons on 21 September 2016.
1
Referred to herein as “smuggling and trafficking”.

16-14700* (E)

220916

*1614700*

S/2016/766

routes and the composition of groups arriving remain in flux. Reflecting this
dynamic, the European Union military operation noted a significant increase in
movement along the sea route from Egypt to Italy and from Algeria to Italy in recent
months. Some launches from Turkey and Tunisia to Italy were also observed. It
assesses that increasing control over some routes, including from Libya to Italy,
may have led to more frequent use of other routes. The number of unaccompanied
or separated children arriving in Italy by sea has also increas ed significantly
compared with 2015, by some 116 per cent for the period from January to July
2016.
5.
Organized criminal networks, including those involved in smuggling and
trafficking, have exploited the security situation in Libya to expand their operations,
which in turn has fuelled instability. These profitable activities may have provided
both direct and indirect funding for armed groups and terrorist organizations, further
worsening the security situation and eroding government control. There are also
signs that criminal enterprises have increased the fragility of governance structures
by breeding corruption.
6.
The business model of migrant smugglers is based on meeting the demand for
crossings into Europe by asylum seekers, refugees and migrants. As controls tighten
and in the absence of commensurate safe and regular pathways, irregular crossings
become more difficult, leading to a growing market for the services of smugglers.
An increase in demand can therefore be expected. The European Police Office
(Europol) estimates that more than 90 per cent of the persons travelling irregularly
to States members of the European Union in 2015 used facilitation services. It also
estimates that criminal networks involved in migrant smuggling had a turnover of
between 5 billion and 6 billion euros in 2015.
7.
To make the crossing from North Africa to Europe, a variety and combination
of vessels are utilized, ranging from single-use rubber dinghies and makeshift
vessels to wooden boats and larger fishing vessels. Such vessels may be used not
only for crossings, but also for transferring persons to other vessels and a s lookout
or guard vessels for smugglers and traffickers. These vessels, in addition to being
unseaworthy and lacking life-saving equipment, mostly do not carry sufficient fuel
to reach European shores. The European Union military operation assessed that
migrant smuggling networks in Libya appeared to have found a reliable source of
unseaworthy rubber boats, which is of particular concern. The consequence of this
reckless endeavour is the immense loss of lives that we continue to witness. While
smugglers do not usually accompany those transported, they are occasionally
present on other vessels supervising the crossing. Those smuggled ar e usually
instructed to manoeuvre the vessels, which often also carry communication
equipment to dispatch distress calls directly to rescue institutions such as the Italian
Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre.
8.
The smuggling networks along the main routes of movement are loosely
connected and vary in size and scope, involving nationals of more than
100 countries, according to the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL) and Europol. The networks feature different key structures, including
leaders, local managers, brokers, individuals in charge of the collection and transfer
of money, local facilitators and providers of specific criminal services such as
counterfeit identification and travel documents. The European Union estimates that
the individual fare to cross from North African shores to Europe on an inflatable

2/15

16-14700

S/2016/766

boat ranges from 1,000 to 3,000 euros and more, depending on the type of vessel
and services offered. The profit per transit for smugglers is put at between
70,000 and 400,000 euros, or more when fishing vessels are used. The smuggling of
migrants is not an isolated undertaking. Individuals and networks also engage in
other forms of criminal activity. Existing networks, smuggling infrastructure and
logistics may also be used to clandestinely transport other illicit goods such as drugs
or weapons, according to INTERPOL and Europol.
9.
Since the adoption of Security Council resolution 2240 (2015), Member States
have, unilaterally, bilaterally and multilaterally, including through regional
organizations, taken measures to counter smuggling and trafficking off the coast of
Libya and to strengthen search and rescue efforts in the Mediterranean Sea. These
include the strengthening of border control agencies and border management,
capacity-building and training and the targeted deployment of naval assets and
operations in the Mediterranean Sea.

III. Inspection and seizure of vessels off the coast of Libya and
related efforts
10. As part of efforts to prevent and combat smuggling and trafficking off the
coast of Libya, Member States, both severally or through regional organizations,
have inspected and seized vessels under applicable international law and in the
exercise of the specific authority provided through resolution 2240 (2015). In
addition, the Libyan authorities have reportedly conducted rescues or interceptions
involving some 10,246 men, women and children in 2016, also within Libyan
territorial waters.
11. In particular, the States members of the European Union, with the exception of
Denmark, launched, on 22 June 2015, a naval operation to undertake systematic
efforts to identify, capture and dispose of vessels and assets used or suspected of
being used by smugglers or traffickers in order to contribute to wider European
Union efforts to disrupt the business model of smuggling and trafficking networks
and prevent the further loss of life at sea.
12. The operation carries out its work in the central part of the southern
Mediterranean Sea. Its mandate has three operational phases. The first, completed in
September 2015, involved supporting the detection and monitoring of migration
networks through information gathering and patrolling on the high seas. According
to Council of the European Union decision (CFSP) 2015/778 of 18 May 2015, the
second phase foresees the boarding, search, seizure and diversion on the high seas
of vessels suspected of being used for smuggling or trafficking, under the conditions
provided for by applicable international law. These activities may be carried out
also in territorial waters, provided that the authority for them is granted through any
applicable Security Council resolution or consent by the coastal State concerned. In
the third phase, the operation, in accordance with any applicable Council resolution
or with the consent of the coastal State concerned, will take all necessary measures
against vessels and related assets, including disposing of them or rendering them
inoperable, which are suspected of being used for smuggling or trafficking, in the
territory of that State, under the conditions set out in that resolution or consent.

16-14700

3/15

S/2016/766

13. The States members of the European Union, with the exception of Denmark,
reported that they had implemented measures mentioned in paragraphs 7 to 10 of
resolution 2240 (2015) as part of the second phase of the European Union military
operation, which began on 7 October 2015. On 20 June 2016, t he Council of the
European Union extended the mandate of the operation until 27 July 2017 and
expanded it to include assistance in the development of the capacities and in the
training of the Libyan coastguard and navy in law enforcement tasks at sea, in
particular to prevent smuggling and trafficking. As at 31 August 2016, the operation
had rescued more than 25,400 men, women and children at sea and contributed
through its assets to the rescue of many more.
14. The European Union military operation reported that, on 9 and 18 July 2016, it
had, for the first time, detected and seized vessels manned by individuals suspected
of smuggling migrants, apprehending the crew on the high seas off the coast of
Libya. It noted that it had had reasonable grounds to beli eve that the vessels were
being used by Libya-based organized criminal entities engaged in smuggling and
trafficking. It noted that all the vessels that it had inspected and seized had been
“unflagged”. As at 9 August 2016, 84 persons suspected of smuggling migrants or
facilitating such smuggling had been arrested by the Italian authorities following
information provided or action taken by the operation.
15. As at 9 August 2016, the operation had disposed of 241 vessels, of which 198
were rubber boats, 38 wooden vessels and 5 fishing vessels. It noted that it towed or
transported vessels to Italy, insofar as possible, also in view of the potential value to
investigations and prosecutions. Otherwise, it disposed of them to avoid any risk to
the safety of seafarers, navigation and the marine environment, in line with relevant
international law and standards.
16. No further information was brought to the attention of the Secretariat
regarding any additional inspections or seizures by Member States, acting seve rally
or through regional organizations, engaged in efforts to combat smuggling and
trafficking any unflagged or flagged vessels on the high seas off the coast of Libya,
whether as permitted under applicable international law or in the exercise of the
authority provided in resolution 2240 (2015).
17. The Security Council called upon Member States taking action under
paragraphs 7 and 8 of resolution 2240 (2015) to cooperate, including by making
good-faith efforts to obtain the consent of the vessel’s flag State before using the
authority under paragraph 7 and upon flag States concerned by such action to
review and respond to requests in a rapid and timely manner. In that regard, the
European Union military operation considers four hours a suitable time frame to
qualify an effort to obtain consent by a flag State as being undertaken in good faith.
To date, however, no such requests have had to be made.
18. The European Union military operation reported that it took into account legal
obligations relating to the protection of human rights when carrying out all activities
under the authority of resolution 2240 (2015), including in respect of the principle
of non-refoulement.
19. Furthermore, in line with the call by the Security Council to provide for the
safety of persons on board as an utmost priority and to avoid causing harm to the
marine environment or to the safety of navigation, the European Union military
operation noted that it had issued, or was issuing, standard operating procedures on

4/15

16-14700

S/2016/766

the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse, the disposal of vessels in
compliance with relevant international law and the treatment on board of persons
rescued at sea.
20. In inspecting and seizing vessels suspected of involvement in smuggling and
trafficking, the European Union military operation cooperates closely with the
European Union executive agencies responsible for judicial cooperation in criminal
matters (Eurojust), law enforcement (Europol) and border management (European
Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of
the Member States of the European Union). The last-mentioned also maintains two
joint maritime operations in the Mediterranean Sea: Triton, in the central
Mediterranean, and Poseidon, in the eastern Mediterranea n. To this end, these
entities have adopted, in various forms, agreements on cooperation, coordination,
the exchange of knowledge and information and the provision of support and have
deployed liaison officers. In addition, there are continuing discussions between the
military operation and other entities such as INTERPOL and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to establish similar arrangements. The
military operation seeks to deconflict its operations with the Libyan coastguard and
the Italian naval operation Mare Sicuro by exchanging information on a case -bycase basis. It also works with the United States Africa Command, the United States
European Command and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Maritime
Command.
21. To assist in the investigation and prosecution of persons responsible for acts of
smuggling and trafficking at sea, the European Union military operation cooperates
closely with and provides information and evidence to the Italian authorities, which
exercise criminal jurisdiction. On 22 October 2015, the Italian State Anti-Mafia
Division issued guidelines concerning the legal requirements for Italy to exercise
jurisdiction over persons apprehended at sea by the operation.
22. Broader cooperation is also continuing between the European Union military
operation, international organizations, including the United Nations and its
agencies, Member States and non-governmental organizations. A mechanism to
deconflict and coordinate activities of Member States and other entities involved in
maritime security operations has been established, called “Shared awareness and
deconfliction in the Mediterranean”.

IV. Support to Libya and related efforts to combat smuggling
and trafficking off the coast
23. The Security Council, in its resolution 2240 (2015), called upon Member
States to assist Libya, upon request, in building needed capacity to secure its
borders and to prevent, investigate and prosecute acts of smuggling and trafficking
through its territory and in its territorial sea.
24. On 23 May 2016, the Council of the European Union committed itself to
undertaking work, at the request of and in partnership with the Government of
National Accord of Libya, on a comprehensive approach to managing migrati on,
including undertaking efforts to combat smugglers and traffickers and providing
capacity-building and training for the Libyan coastguard and navy. On 23 August,

16-14700

5/15

S/2016/766

the European Union military operation and the Libyan coastguard and port security
signed a memorandum of understanding on the training of the coastguard and navy.
25. On 4 August 2016, the Council of the European Union extended the mandate
of the European Union Integrated Border Management Assistance Mission in Libya
until 21 August 2017. The Mission closely cooperates with the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). It is planning for a possible future European
Union engagement in the areas of advice and capacity-building on matters of,
among others, criminal justice, migration and smuggling and trafficking, in support
and at the request of Libya.
26. On 9 July 2016, NATO announced that its anti-terrorism maritime operation,
“Active Endeavour”, had become a broader maritime security operation, “Sea
Guardian”, to perform the full range of maritime security operation tasks, as needed.
The communiqué issued by the Heads of State and Government participating in the
meeting of the North Atlantic Council held in Warsaw on 8 and 9 July documents an
in-principle agreement on a possible NATO role in the central Mediterranean Sea to
complement and support efforts of the European Union military operation, including
through a possible contribution to building the capacity of the Libyan coastguard
and navy.
27. The United Nations system and other entities also support the Government of
National Accord and cooperate with those Member States providing assistance to
Libya. UNSMIL monitors the situation of migrants in detention and has been raising
its concerns specifically with the Libyan Department for Combating Illegal
Migration, urging an end to widespread and grave abuses.
28. UNSMIL works with the European Union military operation, including in the
development of capacity-building activities for the Libyan coastguard and navy.
Since 2015, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) and UNHCR have provided training sessions to the staff of European
Union naval ships in the Mediterranean Sea on human rights in law enforcement,
the human rights of migrants, the standards of treatment for all those rescued or
intercepted at sea and the protection and human rights of refugees. Following the
extension of the operation’s mandate in June 2016, UNHCR has held preliminary
discussions on possible support for relevant training activities, notably on
international refugee and human rights law. UNODC also held several consultations
with representatives of the operation to develop synergies in the framework of
capacity-building activities to address smuggling and trafficking.
29. Since mid-2015, UNHCR and the International Organization for Migration
have held three technical consultations with the Libyan coastguard, the Libyan
Department for Combating Illegal Migration and non -governmental organizations to
consider issues relating to rescue at sea. Work is also under way to establish a
mechanism to enhance communication and facilitate cooperation between the
Libyan authorities, international organizations and non-governmental organizations,
in order to strengthen national operational responses and enhance predictability in
the provision of humanitarian assistance and support upon disembarkation of
persons rescued at sea.
30. The International Organization for Migration carries out humanitarian
repatriation activities under several projects in Libya. This is part of a
comprehensive approach to migration management that is aimed at the orderly and

6/15

16-14700

S/2016/766

humane return and reintegration of migrants who are unable or unwilling to remain
in host countries that experience conflict or natural disaster an d who wish to return
voluntarily to their countries of origin. It also facilitates the safe and dignified
return of stranded migrants.

V. International efforts to combat smuggling and trafficking
31. At the international level, renewed political, humanitarian and other efforts are
under way to comprehensively respond to the issue of large movements of refugees
and migrants, including smuggling and trafficking. The high -level plenary meeting
of the General Assembly on the subject on 19 September 2016 will afford a unique
opportunity to define and advance a collective response. The United Nations
cooperates with and supports the efforts of Member States to counter smuggling and
trafficking in various ways, as detailed below.
32. In 2015, UNODC announced a strategy to address the smuggling of migrants
across the Mediterranean, aimed at providing a comprehensive, strategic and
integrated response. In implementing the strategy, and within the framework of the
four-year UNODC-European Union global action to prevent and address trafficking
and smuggling, covering the period 2015-2019, UNODC cooperated, for example,
with Egypt and Morocco to assess their responses to trafficking and smuggling.
With regard to enhancing national capacity and legislative frameworks , more than
10 capacity-building activities were undertaken by UNODC in North Africa and the
Middle East, including in countries constituting transit points located on the
Mediterranean coast.
33. In promoting regional and transregional cooperation, UNODC convened, from
14 to 16 October 2015 in Syracuse, Italy, a transregional training workshop on
preventing and combating the smuggling of migrants by sea affecting the
Mediterranean region, one of the first technical assistance initiatives delivered since
the adoption of resolution 2240 (2015). The workshop was organized for front -line
officers, criminal justice practitioners and policymakers from States members of the
European Union, States in the Mediterranean basin and Egypt, Eritrea, Lebanon,
Libya, Mali, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, Somalia, the Sudan, Tunisia and Turkey.
34. UNODC also supports countries of origin and transit along the route to the
Mediterranean coast, delivering specialized training on addressing the smuggling of
migrants by air and detecting document fraud in April 2016. In East Africa, UNODC
has provided legislative support and training on trafficking and smuggling. In West
Africa, it is supporting police and gendarmerie training institutes in several States in
order to integrate modules on smuggling and trafficking into national training
curricula. These activities are implemented within the framework of the UNODC
regional strategy for combating trafficking and smuggling, covering the period
2015-2020.
35. UNODC regional programmes, strategies and dedicated projects supported
Member States globally. Among them, more than 40 major technical assistance
activities provided support to some 70 countries and trained in excess of
1,100 criminal justice practitioners and government officials in effectively
preventing and prosecuting trafficking and smuggling. UNODC provided
substantive support to the third session of the Working Group on the Smuggling of
Migrants, held in Vienna from 18 to 20 November 2015, which resulted in the

16-14700

7/15

S/2016/766

adoption of targeted recommendations on the smuggling of migrants by sea
(see CTOC/COP/WG.7/2015/6). These addressed jurisdictional questions over
incidents of migrant smuggling on the high seas involving unflagged vessels, not
holding seafarers criminally liable for assisting, rescuing or disembarking smuggled
migrants in distress at sea and providing assistance and protection to smuggled
migrants.
36. Economic and Social Council resolution 2014/23 on strengthening
international cooperation in addressing the smuggling of migrants and the Doha
Declaration on Integrating Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice into the Wider
United Nations Agenda to Address Social and Economic Challenges and to Promote
the Rule of Law at the National and International Levels, and Public Partic ipation,
adopted at the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice, in 2015, encourage States to consider undertaking concurrent
financial investigations when they investigate and prosecute smuggling and
trafficking. To this end, UNODC assists Member States to counter the business
model of organized criminal groups by enhancing their capacities to trace, freeze
and confiscate proceeds acquired through smuggling and trafficking and to enhance
the coordination and sharing of information among relevant agencies.
37. In January 2016, OHCHR proposed specific measures to address the
protection gaps for migrants in transit, including with regard to their vulnerability to
violence, abuse and exploitation (see A/HRC/31/35).
38. In September 2015, 26 States members of the International Maritime
Organization (IMO) and international and non-governmental organizations
concluded that the international legal framework for the rescue at sea of pe rsons in
mixed migration flows — movement of refugees and asylum seekers, among
others — was sound. They stressed, however, that the framework was not designed
or envisaged for large movements of refugees and migrants by sea, making the
prevention of grossly overloaded, manifestly unsafe vessels from taking to sea key
to reducing the loss of lives. The complex issues surrounding unsafe mixed
migration by sea were also debated at a two-day symposium hosted by the World
Maritime University in Malmö, Sweden, on 26 and 27 April 2016. At the
symposium, IMO noted that the maritime sector and others could contribute to
alleviating the root causes of unsafe mixed migration by sea by focusing on creating
conditions for increased employment, prosperity and stability b y enhancing the
maritime sector and sustainable blue economy in developing countries.
39. Two editions of the Operational Forum on Countering Migrant Smuggling
Networks, jointly organized by INTERPOL and Europol in October 2015 and
February 2016, contributed to the reinforcement of trust and enhancement of
operational cooperation between countries of origin, transit and destination affected
by the current movement of refugees and migrants towards Europe. INTERPOL also
organized international fugitive round-up and arrest operations to assist Member
States in locating and apprehending criminals wanted for involvement in smuggling
migrants, to promote the global exchange of information concerning their
whereabouts, to enhance networking between investigators and specialized units and
to promote the use of INTERPOL notices and diffusions.
40. The United Nations also supports Member States in the reintegration of
returning migrants and in addressing the root causes and drivers of movement in
neighbouring countries and the wider region, such as political and economic

8/15

16-14700

S/2016/766

exclusion, marginalization, discrimination and violent extremism. Improved
socioeconomic conditions, including increased access to basic services and political
participation, strengthened security and justice systems and the creation of
commensurate safe and regular migration channels, will be key contributions to
ensuring that migrants are not compelled to seek out dangerous and life -threatening
routes.
41. Efforts to counter smuggling and trafficking must be embedded in global
efforts to respond to displacement and migration. At the United Nations, a steering
committee, chaired by the Deputy Secretary-General and bringing together relevant
United Nations entities, has guided the system-wide response to large movements of
refugees and migrants since mid-2015, including how to best support Member
States in their efforts to define a globally coordinated approach to managing human
mobility in all its forms and to ensure the protection of the rights of migrants and
refugees.
42. On 30 September 2015, I convened a high-level side event of the General
Assembly on strengthening cooperation on migration and refugee movements in the
perspective of the new development agenda, which was aimed at encouraging
enhanced cooperation and collective action in dealing with the challenges of
migration and human mobility. I emphasized that there was a need to save lives and
to ensure protection and non-discrimination in the response, which should be based
on the principle of shared responsibility and cooperation. A key message of the
event was that only through the creation of safe and regular channels of movement
could the business model of human smugglers and exploitation by human traffickers
be stopped.
43. On 20 November 2015, the President of the General Assembly convened a
plenary meeting of the Assembly on global awareness of the tragedies of irregular
migrants in the Mediterranean basin, with specific emphasis on Syrian asylum
seekers, which continued these important reflections. In its annual resolution on
oceans and the law of the sea, the Assembly has continued to provide policy
guidance on the issue of migration by sea. In its resolution 70/235, the Assembly,
among other things, noted with grave concern the r ecent proliferation of, and
endangerment of lives through, the smuggling of migrants by sea and underscored
the necessity to address such situations in accordance with applicable international
law. In addition, the Assembly recognized that all States must fulfil their search and
rescue responsibilities in accordance with international law, including the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
44. On 16 December 2015, the Security Council issued a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2015/25) following its first-ever meeting on trafficking in persons, in
which it called upon Member States to reinforce their political commitment to and
improve their implementation of applicable legal obligations to criminaliz e, prevent
and otherwise combat trafficking, and to strengthen efforts to detect and disrupt it.
The Council importantly noted that trafficking undermined the rule of law and
contributed to other forms of transnational organized crime, which could exacerba te
conflict and foster insecurity. In its press statement of 22 April 2015, the Council
had raised those concerns on the occasion of a maritime tragedy off the coast of
Libya. The Council expressed its concern at the implications for regional stability
posed by transnational organized crime and illicit activities, such as trafficking and

16-14700

9/15

S/2016/766

smuggling, and condemned and deplored the said acts, which undermined the
process of stabilization of Libya and endangered the lives of people.
45. On 5 January 2016, I appointed a special adviser to lead the United Nations
preparations for the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly to address
large movements of refugees and migrants, to be held on 19 September 2016. In
preparation for the meeting, in my report entitled “In safety and dignity: addressing
large movements of refugees and migrants” (A/70/59), I reiterated that there was a
need to counter smuggling and trafficking as part of a global response to those large
movements. In that regard, I stress that only a comprehensive approach to forced
displacement and global mobility, based on responsibility-sharing and the
facilitation of orderly, safe, regular and responsible migration, will constitute an
effective strategy.
46. On 30 March 2016, a high-level meeting on global responsibility-sharing
through pathways for admission of Syrian refugees, convened by UNHCR in
Geneva, secured important pledges to increase opportunities for the admission of
Syrian refugees.

VI. Key issues
47. The risk to life and bodily harm is not confined only to the actual crossing of
the Mediterranean Sea, but extends to the time before and after crossings.
Throughout the journey, people are at high risk of being robbed of their belongings
and subjected to repeated abuse. The men, women and children who arrive in Libya
often remain dependent on the same criminal networks that brought them there. The
unequal power relationships between smugglers and migrants, as well as traffickers
and their victims, often result in disproportionate vulnerability to violence, abuse
and exploitation. This holds particularly true for women at risk, children, older
persons and persons with disabilities. Most often, they are unable to seek justice and
redress. At the same time, they are at risk of being forcibly returned to their country
of origin or third countries. Operations to counter human smuggling must ensure
that effective police and criminal justice protection is provided to all persons and
that their rights are ensured.
48. Libya is not party to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees or
the 1967 Protocol thereto. It has ratified the Organization of African Unity
Convention governing the specific aspects of refugee problems in Africa of 1969 ,
but has yet to adopt asylum legislation or establish asylum procedures. Under
Libyan law, all irregular entry, stay or departure is criminalized.
49. The transitional authorities in Libya are facing multiple challenges, including
political divisions, instability, violent extremism and the need to improve public
services. At the same time, men, women and children continue to pass through the
country. Refugees and migrants rescued or intercepted at sea by the Libyan
authorities are disembarked and transferred to detention centres in Libya, where
they are at risk of being held arbitrarily for indefinite periods and have no recourse
to judicial review. These facilities, run by the Libyan authorities, but also by
non-State groups, often expose those detained to inhuman and degrading conditions
and the risk of torture, ill-treatment, extortion, forced labour, sexual and gender based violence and abuse, religious discrimination and murder. Very often, detainees
have little access to basic goods and services. Detention centres are chronically

10/15

16-14700

S/2016/766

overcrowded. Sanitary facilities are insufficient and often broken, undernutrition is
rampant and a lack of health facilities and recreational opportunities creates undue
suffering. The conflict in Libya has exacerbated the al ready-vulnerable situation of
asylum seekers, refugees and migrants, who are at risk of abduction, torture and
other ill-treatment, exploitation, extortion and killings by armed groups, smugglers
and traffickers, in addition to Libyan officials. For exampl e, OHCHR has received
reports that it deems credible with regard to the commission of sexual violence,
including rape, against women and girls in migrant detention facilities by guards, as
well as by non-State actors, such as smugglers and traffickers, mor e broadly.
50. In addition to being exposed to these risks, some groups are even more
vulnerable. Information received from humanitarian partners on the ground
indicates that persons from sub-Saharan Africa tend to be detained for longer
periods than those from elsewhere. UNHCR expressed particular concern with
regard to the high number of unaccompanied and separated children. In comparison
with 2015, 2016 saw an increase in the share of women and children forming part of
the movements across the Mediterranean Sea. With this development, the risk of
sexual and gender-based violence, forced and child labour and other forms of
exploitation and discrimination increases.
51. When men, women and children are intercepted or rescued off the coast of
Libya, it is of utmost importance to ensure their continued security and safety, in
line with international law, including the prohibition of refoulement. In October
2015, UNHCR updated its position on returns to Libya, in which it urged all States
to suspend forcible returns to the country until the security and human rights
situation had improved considerably. This advice remains valid without prejudice to
further obligations under international, regional or national law to provide
international protection for persons found to meet the criteria for refugee status or
other forms of international protection under the 1951 Convention or other relevant
instruments. UNHCR also urged States to refrain from returning to Libya any third country nationals intercepted at sea and to ensure that those in need of international
protection are able to gain access to fair and effective asylum procedures upon
disembarkation.
52. OHCHR has called for any cooperation between the Government of National
Accord in Libya and other Member States and regional organizations with regard to
the provision of capacity-building support to the Libyan coastguard and navy to be
carried out in full respect for the human rights of the people involved. For example,
such cooperation should not facilitate the return of rescued persons to situations in
which they would be at risk of arbitrary detention and abuse. In view of Member
States, acting through regional organizations, expanding their activities into the
territorial waters of Libya, including for capacity-building activities, this
consideration must remain highly pertinent.
53. International law also requires the disembarkation of persons rescued at sea in
a place of safety. The IMO Maritime Safety Committee has not yet considered the
issue in the Libyan context, based on the International Convention for the Safety of
Life at Sea, 1974, and Committee resolution MSC.167(78) on guidelines on the
treatment of persons rescued at sea. In the light of the volatile security situation and
the particular protection risks for third-country nationals, however, UNHCR does
not consider that Libya currently meets the criteria to be designated as a place of
safety for the purpose of disembarkation following rescue at sea.

16-14700

11/15

S/2016/766

54. The European Union has noted that it could not board, inspect and seize all
vessels suspected of being used for smuggling and trafficking off the coast of Libya
for legal reasons, given that the Security Council, in its resolution 2240 (2015), did
not address presumed places of departure other than Libya. The European Union
assesses that, with changing and emerging routes to Europe, its military operation is
not able to counter the issue to the best extent possible. The operation is of the view
that, while its presence and activities have limited the freedom of manoeuvre of
migrant smugglers and affected their operations and tactics, effective measures have
to be taken on land and at sea.
55. Large-scale migration by sea presents a range of challenges to the maritime
sector and seafarers. Legally, the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by
Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, requires a State party that takes measures against a
vessel suspected of smuggling migrants by sea to take due account of the need not
to prejudice the commercial or legal interests of the flag State or any other
interested State and not to endanger the security of the vessel or its cargo.
56. More than 80 per cent of global trade moves by sea. Any disruption to the
maritime part of the supply chain therefore constitutes a risk to national and
regional economies. In 2014 and 2015 in the Mediterranean Sea alone, some
1,300 merchant ships were diverted from their routes, taking part in 392 rescue
operations and saving the lives of 57,515 men, women and children.
57. Merchant seafarers continue to bravely perform their duties of rescue, but the risk
to their safety and that of those rescued while they are aboard these ships should not be
underestimated. Merchant ships generally have small crews and are not configured to
carry, feed and care for large numbers of people, many of whom are desperate, under
stress and potentially agitated. They also do not carry personnel trained to respond to
the medical needs of survivors of shipwrecks and other trauma. With their often high
sides, no appropriate embarkation equipment and crews untrained in rescuing large
numbers of people at sea safely, merchant vessels are not suited to performing this
function. Many of the recorded deaths of migrants at sea occurred when boats capsized
within sight of a potential rescue ship and the crews were powerless to save them.
Ships are also inherently dangerous places for those not trained in the rigorous safety
standards observed by seafarers, with additional measures required if dangerous cargo
is carried. IMO, UNHCR and the International Chamber of Shipping have developed
guidance on rescue and large-scale rescue operations at sea.
58. Smuggling and trafficking also have an impact on the fisheries sector,
including fishing fleet operations, in Libya. According to the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the current contribution of the fisheries sector
to the national economy is well below expectations. The national fish ing fleet
reportedly numbered around 3,000 vessels in 2015. The Secretariat is not aware of
any effects on the marine environment caused by action taken under paragraphs 7
and 8 of resolution 2240 (2015).

VII. Observations
59. I highly commend the invaluable search and rescue efforts of the brave men
and women who risk their lives to save others, as part of national authorities, the
merchant fleet, civil society or the communities along the shores of the

12/15

16-14700

S/2016/766

Mediterranean Sea, including the European Union military operation. At the same
time, I am deeply concerned that the number of men, women and children who die
or go missing in the Mediterranean Sea has not fallen. Until prevention efforts bear
fruit, I call upon Member States to further strengthen dedicated search and rescue
capabilities and to undertake efforts to mitigate the impacts of smuggling and
trafficking on seafarers, merchant shipping and trade.
60. A truly sustainable and effective strategy to address the proliferatio n of
smuggling and trafficking off the coast of Libya can be found only in a
multidimensional approach that is aimed at addressing the causes and drivers of
people leaving their homes. At the same time, the need for safe passage and
protection has to be met, rooted in cooperation among countries of origin, transit
and destination and based on international solidarity. Ensuring that persons are not
compelled to resort to facilitation services to irregularly cross borders not only
destroys the business model of smugglers, but also prevents the deaths, suffering
and exploitation of the men, women and children who are at the mercy of organized
criminal groups.
61. Such a strategy includes a law enforcement component, in particular against
organized criminal actors, the prevention of armed conflict and violence and efforts
to end persecution and systematic human rights violations, address governance and
rule of law deficits and create economic opportunities and sustainable and inclusive
development. Measures to better prevent and control irregular border crossings must
go hand in hand with increased safe and regular avenues for movement for refugees
and migrants. All measures to counter smuggling and trafficking have to be carried
out in full respect of international human rights law and related standards. I
recognize that such a strategy requires efforts that go beyond national and regional
measures and are closely linked to renewed global commitments to address large
movements of refugees and migrants, to prevent violent conflict and violent
extremism, to address ever-growing humanitarian needs and to move towards
sustainable development for all. In this context, the Sustainable Development Goals
provide a suitable framework to address some root causes of involunta ry movements
of refugees and migrants and to facilitate well-managed migration policies.
62. Men, women and children continue to be smuggled and trafficked by sea in
substantial numbers from Libya to Europe. It is first and foremost the responsibility
of Member States to prevent proliferation in smuggling and trafficking, including
off the coast of Libya. When doing so, cooperation among Member States, and with
other relevant actors, is essential. The United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, its Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by
Land, Sea and Air and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, establish general and specific forms of
cooperation and assistance for the prevention, investigation and prosecution of
offences covered by the instruments. Provisions relate to cooperation among States
parties and measures to strengthen coordination among them, to the adoption of
multilateral, regional and bilateral agreements and arrangements to set reasonable
time frames for responding to requests, to the circumstances of boarding of vessels
suspected of being used for migrant smuggling, and to jurisdictional questions when
offences have been committed aboard vessels flying the ir flag as well as unflagged
vessels. I encourage Member States to closely cooperate to counter smuggling and
trafficking and make use of avenues of cooperation provided in relevant
international instruments. In addition, I echo the call of the Security Co uncil for

16-14700

13/15

S/2016/766

Member States to consider ratifying or acceding to, and for States parties to
effectively implement, the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants and the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children.
63. I welcome the efforts of Member States to work with the Government of
National Accord in Libya and to cooperate with one another to address the threat to
peace and security posed by smuggling and trafficking. As efforts are strengthened,
it is important to continue to integrate them into the broader work towards stability,
security and good governance in Libya. The links between smuggling and
trafficking and other criminal activities, including financial aspects, have to be
closely monitored and accounted for.
64. Smuggling and trafficking also affect the political transition and
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement, signed in Skhirat, Morocco, on
17 December 2015. The strengthening of criminal and terrorist organizations and
increased security threats impede the implementation of the interim security
arrangements outlined in the Agreement. The Presidency Council of the
Government of National Accord, which is establishing effective control over State
institutions following its arrival in Tripoli on 30 March 2016, is under growing
public pressure to improve service delivery. International and national pressure to
stem the flow of men, women and children passing through the country comes on
top of the many other challenges facing the transitional authorities, including
bridging the political divide, improving security and public services, combating
terrorism and promoting national reconciliation. I commend the strong international
support offered to the Presidency Council in its efforts to tackle these issues.
65. In particular, I commend Member States on their support offered and provided
to build the capacity of the Government of National Accord to prevent the
proliferation of smuggling and trafficking, including at sea. Such capacity -building
efforts have to include support for ensuring the protection of human rights,
including the rights and needs of asylum seekers, refugees and migrants. In
particular, they should not facilitate the return of persons to situations in which they
would be at risk of arbitrary detention and other abuses. The needs of vulnerable or
traumatized individuals are of particular concern in this regard. In addition, the
rights, including the right to justice, of those suspected of smuggling migrants or
trafficking in persons have to be ensured. I urge the Government of National Accord
to improve the protection and conditions for refugees and migrants in Libya, in
particular by working to improve conditions in detention facilities and ending
arbitrary detentions. I also call upon it to consider acceding to relevant international
instruments, including the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and
the 1967 Protocol thereto, adopting an asylum policy and decriminalizing irregular
migration.
66. In all efforts to prevent and counter smuggling and trafficking, it is of utmost
importance to adopt policies and processes that are sensitive to the immediate needs
of all persons who have been exposed to physical or psychological danger during
their journey, whether by land or by sea, and regardless of their migration status.
Their immediate needs must be met and their human rights protected. Protection
from refoulement and the particular needs of those seeking asylum are likewise vital
considerations. Standardized procedures should be put in place to ensure the rapid
and accurate identification and referral of migrants in situations of particular

14/15

16-14700

S/2016/766

vulnerability to appropriate services. Children and women in situations of
vulnerability are particularly exposed to risks throughout all sections of their
movement, including rescue operations, inspections and seizures of vessels and
transfers to and disembarkations at places of safety, as well as throughout the
process of status determination. I note with concern the signifi cant increase in the
number of unaccompanied or separated children arriving by sea in Italy in 2016 and
encourage the taking of specific measures to ensure that their particular protection
needs are met. I welcome the steps taken by the European Union mili tary operation
to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse. I call upon Member States, in particular
those taking action in the Mediterranean Sea, to place those concerns at the heart of
their operational response in all its aspects, examine their existing po licies and
integrate those considerations into their efforts to build and strengthen capacity to
counter smuggling and trafficking by sea.
67. I welcome the efforts undertaken by Member States and other entities,
including the European Union military operation, to cooperate, exchange
information and provide mutual support and to coordinate their activities at sea,
including with regard to the inspection and seizure of vessels, through institutional
and legal arrangements. I encourage Member States to conti nue to strengthen their
cooperation with one another and with all other relevant actors, especially as
engagement to counter smuggling and trafficking in the Mediterranean Sea is being
reinforced. A shared understanding of the challenges associated with co untering the
problem is key to developing effective and complementary responses.
68. In view of the complex and transnational nature of the crimes committed in the
process of smuggling and trafficking, cooperation among Member States regarding
the investigation and prosecution of those responsible is of particular importance. I
welcome existing measures and encourage Member States to redouble their efforts
to end the impunity enjoyed by criminal networks involved in this crime and disrupt
their business model, including by tracing, freezing and confiscating proceeds.
Recognizing that corruption is a key facilitator of smuggling and trafficking, I call
upon Member States to integrate anti-corruption measures into their efforts.
69. The routes that refugees and migrants follow towards Europe are not static, as
illustrated by recent departures from locations other than Libya. Migrant smugglers
adapt when conditions change. Vessels launch from new locations and fresh routes
emerge. I call upon countries of origin, transit and destination, the Security Council
and those Member States taking action to counter smuggling and trafficking off the
coast of Libya to respond to such changing dynamics with flexibility and increased
cooperation to ensure continued and effective efforts, including the investigation
and prosecution of those responsible for smuggling and trafficking.

16-14700

15/15
