UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/26631
25 October 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council,
at its 3297th meeting, held on 25 October 1993, in connection with the Council’s
consideration of the item entitled "The situation in Burundi":
"The Security Council expresses its grave concern at and condemnation
of the military coup of 21 October 1993 against the democratically elected
Government of Burundi.
"The Security Council deeply regrets and strongly condemns the acts of
violence and the loss of life which have been caused by the perpetrators of
the military coup. It demands that they desist forthwith from taking any
action which would exacerbate tension and plunge the country into more
violence and bloodshed, which could have serious implications for peace and
stability in the region.
"The Security Council demands that the perpetrators of the military
coup cease all acts of violence, reveal the whereabouts and fate of
Government officials, release all prisoners, return to their barracks and
put an immediate end to their illegal act, with a view to the immediate
reinstitution of democracy and constitutional rule in Burundi.
"The Security Council pays tribute to the deceased President of
Burundi, His Excellency Mr. Melchior Ndadayem, and members of his
Government for their supreme sacrifice for democracy. Those responsible
for their violent deaths and other acts of violence should be brought to
justice.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to monitor and
follow closely the situation in Burundi, in close association with the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), and report to the Security Council
thereon urgently. In this context, it takes note with appreciation of the
dispatch by the Secretary-General of a Special Envoy to Burundi.
"The Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----

93-58055 (E)

251093
