S/PV.8728

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8728th meeting

Thursday, 20 February 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Ben Sliman
Mr. Clay
Mr. Barkin
Mr. Dinh

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic (S/2020/124)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-04502 (E)
*2004502*

S/PV.8728

The situation in the Central African Republic

the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
the Central African Republic (S/2020/124).

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

As the Council is aware, this year is an important
turning point for the men and women of the Central
African Republic, who, starting in December 2020,
will be going to the polls to elect their leaders.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic (S/2020/124)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Mankeur
Ndiaye, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Central African Republic and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic;
Mr. Matias Bertino Matondo, African Union Special
Representative and Head of the African Union Office in
the Central African Republic; His Excellency Mr. Olof
Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations; and His Excellency Mr. Omar
Hilale, Permanent Representative of Morocco to
the United Nations, in his capacity as Chair of
the Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Mr. Matondo is joining via video-teleconference
from Khartoum.
Since we have four briefers today — an unusually
high number — I would ask for their cooperation in
trying to keep the briefings within reasonable time
limits. We will try to cover all the briefings in 30
minutes, so I would like to ask each briefer to be as
concise as possible.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2020/124, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the Central African Republic.
I now give the f loor to Mr. Ndiaye.
Mr. Ndiaye (spoke in French): I am pleased to
present to the Council, in the early part of this year,
2/11

20/02/2020

However, before speaking about the electoral
process, I would like to share with the Council a brief
analysis of the main political, economic and security
developments that have taken place in recent months
in the Central African Republic.
On 6 February, the country commemorated the
first anniversary of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
signed by the Government and 14 armed groups. That
commemoration was an opportunity to look back on
the progress and address challenges in implementing
the peace agreement.
Among the notable strides made, I should like to
first stress that the inclusive Government that emerged
from the peace agreement remains valid and operational
and that the signatory parties have reaffirmed their
commitment to it, notwithstanding, of course, numerous
difficulties. I also note the significant decrease in
violence against the civilian population; the gradual
and continuous extension of State authority, including
the appointment of all prefects in all 16 prefectures of
the country; and the ongoing deployment of the Central
African Armed Forces and the internal security forces,
including in areas where they were previously absent.
The disarmament process has not been launched in
the west of the country. Similarly, progress has also
been made in the establishment of the special mixed
security units, as provided for by the peace agreement.
On 16 December, the first recruits of the special mixed
security units completed their training in Bouar and
are awaiting deployment. However, many logistical
and political challenges remain to be addressed before
they are operationalized.
We can also commend the progress made in
the fight against impunity and the promotion of
transitional justice. Despite some structural challenges
in the judicial and penitentiary administrations,
jurisdictions are continuing their work, with the
technical and logistical support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and the
United Nations Development Programme, by holding
20-04502

20/02/2020

The situation in the Central African Republic

criminal sessions more or less regularly. I welcome
the conviction on 7 February of 28 persons involved
in the violence committed in Bangassou in 2017,
including in the killing of Blue Helmets. For its part,
the Special Criminal Court is pursuing its judicial
investigations into cases of serious human rights
violations and examining cases in relation to the 2019
civilian massacres in the Paoua region by members of
the Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation armed group.
Furthermore, the key draft laws envisaged in the
peace agreement are now in Parliament, including
the bills on the status of former Presidents, the bill
on political parties and opposition and the bill to
establish the commission on truth, justice, reparation
and reconciliation. Once adopted — hopefully in the
coming weeks — those laws should contribute to
creating a peaceful political environment and provide
armed groups with political alternatives for their
demands. The commission on truth, justice, reparation
and reconciliation should provide the long-awaited
reconciliation framework that will allow the victims
of the crisis to have their voices heard and receive
reparations for harm done.

S/PV. 8728

between armed groups competing for territory and
resources. Those clashes pose serious threats to the
protection of civilians and have also led to rising
intercommunal tensions in locations like Birao, Bria
and Alindao. Those security developments in the north
remain sources of major concerns. The inter-ethnic
clashes in Birao between Runga members of the Front
populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique (FPRC)
and the Mouvement des libérateurs centrafricains pour
la justice (MLCJ), mainly Kara, have further weakened
the security and humanitarian situation in that part of
the country.
(spoke in French)

(spoke in English)

In response to those worrying developments,
MINUSCA has had to adopt a robust posture to curb the
attempts to invade the town of Birao made by the FPRC
and to take measures to protect the civilian population,
in line with its mandate. Even as I speak, mediation
efforts are under way for a cessation of hostilities
between the warring parties. I strongly condemn the
FPRC and the MLCJ for the resumption of fighting, in
f lagrant violation of the peace agreement. I would also
like to condemn the public call for violence against
MINUSCA, launched by the FPRC in Ndélé, where
the population was rallied to invade the MINUSCA
camp. That is all the more unacceptable as it uses
women and children as human shields to besiege the
MINUSCA camp and obstruct its operations. I also
denounce the illegal expansion of the Union pour la
paix en Centrafrique into the extreme south-east of the
country, Haut-Mbomou and some localities in the west.
MINUSCA recently launched a military operation to
halt that expansion and will spare no effort to stop the
violence and protect civilians. I urge the Council, for
its part, to consider strong measures against all those
who continue to impede the implementation of the
peace agreement.

As we all know, a peace agreement is not yet peace.
It is a step forward in a long process that is sometimes
fraught with pitfalls. Despite significant advances in
the implementation of the peace agreement, several
challenges remain. Those include persistent violations
of the peace agreement by some armed groups,
which have continued over the past year to occupy
administrative buildings, collect illegal taxes and
expand their areas of inf luence. Despite improvement
in the overall security situation of the country, there
remain pockets of instability, related mainly to clashes

Such bleak news from the ground has not diminished
MINUSCA’s determination to implement the mandate
that the Council conferred upon it. Together with the
guarantors and facilitators of the peace agreement,
as well as other international partners, we continue
to take all necessary steps to, in particular, protect
civilians, support the parties in the implementation
of the peace agreement and support the preparation
of the presidential and legislative elections of 20202021 — an important step in the strengthening of the
country’s democratic institutions and the rule of law.

While the victims are waiting for reparations, the
Central African people, scarred by years of conf lict,
hope to enjoy the dividends of peace as soon as possible.
That is why I wish to commend the macroeconomic
progress observed in the Central African Republic in
2019, the promising growth prospects for 2020 and the
progress made in the implementation of the National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. We hope that such
economic impact and peace dividends will make it
possible to increase the population’s access to basic
public services throughout the country and thereby
promote a gradual improvement in the daily lives of
the Central African population.

20-045023/11

S/PV.8728

The situation in the Central African Republic

As those elections approach, new political
dynamics have emerged, notably with the return of
former Presidents Bozizé and Djotodia from exile. Both
have stated and reaffirmed their desire to contribute to
peace, stability and the holding of peaceful elections,
which is to be welcomed. Allow me to commend
President Faustin Archange Touadera for his spirit of
openness and for engaging in consultations with the
former Heads of State and Prime Ministers in order to
ensure a peaceful political environment.
It is also essential to ensure the inclusiveness
of those elections by allowing refugees to vote and
increasing the participation of women as candidates
and voters. Moreover, the establishment of the
framework for consultation with political parties of all
stripes, civil society and public authorities, which held
its first meeting on 17 February, is to be welcomed as
it augurs well for the consensual management of the
electoral process.
However, the elections can be held only if the
international community lends all its technical,
logistical and financial support. Despite the
mobilization of nearly half of the resources necessary
for the holding of the elections within the constitutional
time frame, it is urgent that all pledged funds be
disbursed as soon as possible and that the resources
that are lacking be mobilized. I urgently appeal to all
Central African Republic’s partners to honour their
commitments and provide the unpaid contributions,
and I request the support of the Council to that end.
In that regard, I would like to thank the Chair of
the Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission for the renewed support of
his institution for the stabilization of the country, as
he further demonstrated during his visit to Bangui last
week. I have no doubt that his calls will bolster my
calls for financing for the elections.
In conclusion, allow me to pay tribute to the
countries of the region that have rallied to revitalize
their cooperation with the Central African Republic,
thereby contributing to the stabilization and peace
efforts in the Central African Republic. I also commend
the determination and political will of the Government
to mobilize all the active forces to ensure the full
success of the implementation of the peace agreement
and the holding of the forthcoming elections, which
will open a new chapter in the history of the country. I
know that the men and women of the Central African
4/11

20/02/2020

Republic will also always be able to count on the
goodwill and support of the Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ndiaye for his briefing.
I now give the f loor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I am truly honoured to brief the
Security Council on behalf of the European Union
(EU).
As of today it has been 12 months since the
Government of the Central African Republic and
14 armed groups signed the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic in Bangui. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/124) gives a clear picture of the
accomplishments in the implementation of the peace
process, as well as of the remaining challenges.
I will focus on those areas in which the European
Union sees the greatest need for all stakeholders now
to act with resolve. Let me mention what we see as
positive developments.
First, this is the only one among the many earlier
agreements signed in the Central African Republic that
is holding. This is not a minor achievement, it needs
to be consolidated, and confidence in the agreement
needs to be maintained and strengthened. This will
best done through its effective implementation.
This result is largely owing to the determination of
President Touadera and his Government to maintain a
courageous and conciliatory posture.
We welcome the appeasing approach adopted
in dealing with the former Presidents’ return to the
country. They have to become part of the process.
We also commend the Government for pursuing the
dialogue with other stakeholders, including former
high-level officials, armed groups and the region.
Holding bilateral joint commissions with neighbours of
the Central African Republic helps to build confidence
and solidify peace.
We also see progress in setting up the special
mixed security units, which benefit from significant
EU support. We are witnessing the first encouraging
signs of State authority returning to some regions,
and as the deployment of the national Armed Forces is
progressing, we should ensure that the process receives
the necessary support in order to be sustainable and
credible. By now, all stakeholders should realize
20-04502

20/02/2020

The situation in the Central African Republic

that, despite its imperfections, the Bangui agreement
remains the only joint and viable framework for
peace, whereby everyone — signatories, facilitators,
civil society, political actors, and partners of the
country — has a role to play in making it work.
(spoke in French)
Let me also talk today about the next steps and the
challenges that we must face. One year after the signing
of the agreement, several armed groups continue to
fail to uphold their commitments. The violence that
erupted on Sunday in Birao between two armed groups
was unfortunately not an isolated incident. It was a
planned operation carried out to undermine the peace
agreement. At the end of the day, the local populations
are the main victims and the work of the humanitarian
actors is prevented.
Nothing justifies that violence. The European Union
urges the parties to honour their word. We also call on
the Government and the guarantors and the facilitators
of the Bangui agreement to act and to seriously consider
imposing sanctions against those responsible for those
acts. This intolerable situation must end. The violence
is also the result of a culture of impunity that has gone
on for far too long. The fight against impunity must
be pursued and centred on justice. That is one of the
key provisions of the agreement, which is critical to
supporting the population.
In addition, the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process must be stepped up and
carried out simultaneously with the establishment of
the special mixed security units. In that regard, the
specific criteria for demobilization, disarmament,
verification and training must be followed to the letter.
Unfortunately, we note that some armed groups are not
meeting those criteria, although they are well defined.
Instead of committing to their obligations, several
leaders are trying to renegotiate the terms. Once
again, we urge the guarantors and facilitators of the
agreement to take the appropriate measures necessary.
(spoke in English)
That brings me to the role of the European Union.
We stand by our commitment to working with the
Government and the people of the Central African
Republic and all other stakeholders. Our commitment
is also clearly attested by the European Union’s
significant support for the upcoming elections. The
EU will shoulder roughly half of the estimated budget

S/PV. 8728

and plans to deploy electoral experts. We hope that
other donors will follow our example, and we echo the
appeal made earlier by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in that respect. Elections are
essential to consolidating democracy and democratic
institutions. Postponement is not an option. Political
leaders must show responsibility by contributing to a
peaceful, transparent and inclusive electoral process.
Likewise, the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) for security
and logistics remains of critical importance. The
constitutional calendar needs to be respected.
The EU is deploying a civilian mission — the
European Union Advisory Mission in the Central
African Republic — to support reform and deployment
of the internal security forces. The EU Advisory
Mission will complement the valued work done by
our European Union Military Training Mission in
the Central African Republic (EUTM-RCA). The
EUTM-RCA continues to work in full transparency,
coordination and cohesion with MINUSCA and others.
I will just add final word to reiterate our commitment
to a solid partnership with the United Nations and
the African Union, as shown by, among other things,
our joint trilateral high-level mission to the Central
African Republic. I would like to stress that the recent
campaigns of manipulation and disinformation against
international partners in the country, notably against
MINUSCA, are a matter of serious concern to us. I
want to reiterate our full support for the work of the
Mission and praise the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, who is here today.
The Central African Republic has the potential
to turn into a success story for the Council and,
most important, for the people of the country itself,
but that will require that we remain united, engaged
and mobilized.
The President: I thank Mr. Skoog for his briefing.
I now give the f loor to Mr. Matondo.
Mr. Matondo (spoke in French): Allow me, in
my capacity as African Union Special Representative
and Head of the African Union Office in the Central
African Republic, to express my deep gratitude
for this opportunity to address the members of the
Security Council, who are once again demonstrating
their continued interest in issues relating to peace

20-045025/11

S/PV.8728

The situation in the Central African Republic

and security in the Central African Republic and the
subregion of Central Africa.
In February, we welcomed with guarded optimism
the first anniversary of the signing of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic. Twelve months after the signing of
the agreement, there was neither pomp or circumstance
at the ceremony held in Bangui, which was attended by
the signatory parties, members of the Government and
its institutions, the guarantors and facilitators of the
agreement, and former Heads of State of the Central
African Republic — all of whom came to witness
that historic moment to express their commitment to
achieving peace and national reconciliation.
After a year since the agreement’s implementation,
I am pleased to deliver the following statement by
recalling the progress made and the many challenges
that remain to be met under the peace agreement.
With regard to progress vis-à-vis the Government,
it is important to highlight the establishment of various
entities for the implementation and monitoring of the
agreement, the formation of an inclusive Government,
the opening of permanent dialogue with the armed
groups, the implementation of specific security
measures relative to the launching of the special mixed
security units in the west, the drafting of several bills
envisaged by the agreement and their transmission
to the National Assembly for adoption, the gradual
return of State authority throughout the entire country,
the launch of preparations for the electoral process,
including updating the country’s electoral map, the
launch of several social impact projects under the
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan, and the
gradual modernization of the Central African Armed
Forces and the internal security forces.
With regard to the progress made concerning
the armed groups, it is a matter of renouncing their
desire to divide up the territory of the Central African
Republic, their recognition of State authority and
its institutions, the adherence of certain groups to
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process, the operationalization of the special mixed
security units, and vacating the administrative
buildings held by certain armed groups.
Generally speaking, with the signing and
implementation of the agreement, we note an
improvement in the security situation, a decrease in the
level of violence and an uptick in the free movement of
6/11

20/02/2020

goods and people. However, many challenges remain
because the majority of armed groups have not yet laid
down their weapons and continue to occupy territories
and exploit natural resources to the detriment of
the State. Moreover, certain armed groups that are
signatories to the agreement continue to be involved
in clashes in an effort to exert control over areas in the
interior of the country. That is the case of the Front
populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique (FPRC)
and the Mouvement des libérateurs centrafricains pour
la justice (MLCJ) in Vakaga, in north-eastern Central
African Republic. Clashes between the armed groups
in the north-east have devolved into intercommunal
conf lict, which, although complex, urgently needs to
be resolved.
Overall, although progress has been made over
the past year, much remains to be done in connection
with the linked legislative and presidential elections
in 2020 and 2021. In that regard, signatories to the
agreement must fully honour their commitments in
order to create conditions conducive to the holding of
elections. Over the past year since the agreement was
signed, the signatories were strongly urged to uphold
their commitments. Those who attended the event to
commemorate the first anniversary of the signing of
the agreement called for the sanctions under article
35 to be applied and demanded that we be firm with
any parties that breach the agreement. In that regard,
we welcome the convergence of views and unanimity
of the international community, which, on the first
anniversary of the agreement, took the opportunity to
reaffirm its willingness to assist the Central African
Republic in ensuring that elections take place within
constitutional deadlines, and its readiness to mobilize
financial resources and the technical wherewithal to
attain that objective.
The security situation remains of concern, in
particular given the clashes between the FPRC and
the MLCJ to gain control of Birao. In the second
week of February, the forces of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, working together with
the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic,
repulsed FPRC combatants who had entered Birao.
Although the situation in Birao is under control,
tensions remain high in the north-east of the country,
including in Bria and Ndélé. Those areas require
considerable attention from facilitators, guarantors
20-04502

20/02/2020

The situation in the Central African Republic

and the various partners working for peace in the
Central African Republic.
In addition, we acknowledge the serious
humanitarian situation in the three areas of Birao,
Ndélé and Bria. Despite all the difficulties, which
are a source of concern with regard to creating the
right conditions for the holding of free and credible
elections, efforts continue for the implementation of
all aspects of the peace agreement, which is the best
political framework for stabilizing the situation in the
Central African Republic. It is for that reason that the
National Assembly opened an extraordinary session
yesterday, 19 February, to review and adopt the draft
texts envisioned in the peace agreement that relate to the
status of former Heads of State, the charter of political
parties, the status of the opposition, the commission
on truth, justice, reparation and reconciliation and the
municipalities code, among others.
The seventh session of the Executive Monitoring
Committee of the agreement, scheduled for
28 February, will certainly not only help us to assess
the Committee’s functioning, but also and above all
show us all remaining challenges in the implementation
of the agreement. We underscore the role that the
countries of the subregion must play to help stabilize
the situation in the Central African Republic, in
particular since the conf lict could very easily spill
over to the rest of Central Africa.
It is important to underscore the very active
cooperation and coordination among the United
Nations, the African Union and the European Union,
as highlighted by the African Union Commission
Chairperson, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, and
Secretary-General Mr. António Guterres during the
opening ceremony of the thirty-third ordinary session
of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government
of the African Union, held a few days ago in Addis
Ababa. Such cooperation has been an integrating
and catalysing factor for the implementation of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic and must be welcomed
and maintained. Similarly, the harmonization of
positions among the other parties to the peace and
reconstruction process in the Central African Republic
remains a considerable challenge.
I have provided a brief overview of the situation
in the Central African Republic and the efforts of the
African Union. The situation deserves the attention

S/PV. 8728

of the Council, in particular with regard to concerns
about improving the security situation, securing the
electoral process, funding the elections, ensuring
that parties honour their commitments, enforcing
the sanctions regime, holding elections in line with
constitutional deadlines, launching social projects as
peace dividends and mechanisms for the uptake and
reorientation of former combatants of armed groups
into more useful social activities.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Matondo for his briefing.
I now give the f loor to Mr. Hilale.
Mr. Hilale (spoke in French): As Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, I am very pleased to commend the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, for his
detailed briefing on the situation in the Central African
Republic and to warmly thank him and his entire team
for their hospitality and support during our visit to
Bangui from 11 to 14 February.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Lieutenant General Balla Keïta, head
of the military component of the Mission. I believe
that today’s meeting of the Security Council will be
the last with him in that capacity. He has conducted
and completed his mission with energy, devotion
and professionalism. That is what I heard when I
was in Bangui. I would like him to know that we are
very grateful because the mission in Bangui is not
the easiest.
A detailed report of that visit was transmitted to
you, Mr. President, earlier today. I will therefore limit
my statement to three points.
The first concerns the elections. The upcoming
presidential, legislative and local elections, scheduled
to begin in December, will be crucial for the future of
the country. All of those with whom I spoke during my
visit — including the President of the Central African
Republic, the Prime Minister, Cabinet members and
the representatives of the institutions of the Central
African Republic and of civil society — expressed
to me their unanimous and firm commitment to the
holding of free, transparent, credible and inclusive
elections, within constitutional deadlines. However,

20-045027/11

S/PV.8728

The situation in the Central African Republic

the organization and success of those elections will
depend on several factors.
First, the funding of the elections is managed by
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
which estimates that $41.8 million will be required. To
date, we are still $20 million short. I thank the European
Union, which has pledged $17 million, as well as UNDP
and the Government of the Central African Republic,
which have each provided $2 million. Preparations
for the elections must respect the timetable set by the
Constitutional Court. They have begun, but funds are
urgently needed. I therefore plan to continue my work
with our partners in the Central African Republic in
an effort to underscore the importance of disbursing
funds as soon as possible. I am pleased to announce
that the Kingdom of Morocco plans to help fund the
elections, as it did in 2015. Its total contribution will
be announced shortly.
Secondly, during my various meetings, I stressed
the importance of inclusive elections, encouraging
the Government to ensure the participation of
internally displaced persons and refugees. That
call was well received by all my interlocutors, who,
without exception, committed to that goal. That goal
also applies to women and young people, who are not
sufficiently aware of the importance of that process, as
ref lected by the low registration rate of that segment
of the population. That is why mobilization efforts are
so important.
Thirdly, MINUSCA has finalized a security
plan for the elections, which has been submitted to
the national authorities. The post-electoral period
will be key and require close monitoring if we are to
consolidate the gains achieved.
My second point concerns the implementation of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic, which is advancing
steadily, despite the many provisions that have yet to be
implemented. Indeed, all stakeholders are aware that
there is no alternative to the agreement. As highlighted
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
important legislation set forth in the agreement, such
as those relating to political parties, decentralization
and the status of former Heads of State, has been
finalized and will be adopted shortly. In addition,
the justice sector policy for the period 2020-2024 has
been adopted.
8/11

20/02/2020

The growing ethnic polarization, particularly
among the armed groups, fuelled by the use of hate
rhetoric disseminated through social networks, radio
and the written press, is a source of concern and a
contributing factor to the volatility of the security
situation. In recognition of that problem, MINUSCA is
working closely with the Government to defuse what I
might call a time bomb, so to speak, and calls for calm
and strict compliance with the peace agreement. In
my capacity as Chair of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, I have
raised this question with State authorities at the highest
level, who have assured me of their commitment to
that effort.
I take this opportunity to pay a special tribute to
Central African civil society, in particular youth and
women’s representatives. Their thirst for peace and
their commitment deserve recognition. The same is true
of the forum of women parliamentarians. I was quite
moved by the courage of those elected women, ready
to risk it all in the face of the numerous roadblocks
erected by the armed groups, in order to carry out their
mandates. One parliamentarian in particular made a
deep impression when she assured me that she was
prepared to travel by motorcycle to her constituency
more than 600 kilometres from Bangui, braving every
danger in order to raise awareness of the importance of
participating in the upcoming elections.
My third point concerns the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan. As highlighted this morning, over
the past year significant progress has been made in the
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan, with the
enhanced support of the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and the European Union, as well as that
of MINUSCA, the United Nations country team and
the bilateral partners of the Central African Republic.
We have focused on the rule of law, given its
importance for the people. In that regard, we welcome
the verdict of the Bangui Court of Appeal, condemning
the Bangassou militiamen for their abuses against the
civilian population and, more specifically, United
Nations Blue Helmets. Two leaders have been given a
life sentence of forced labour. The verdict demonstrates
the progress made in strengthening the entire criminal
justice system in the Central African Republic.
The Special Criminal Court is pursuing its
investigations with the aim of starting trials in early
2021, but is also facing difficulties with recruitment
20-04502

20/02/2020

The situation in the Central African Republic

and funding. That progress should encourage us to
maintain our political, financial and institutional
support for the Special Criminal Court and the
judicial system as a whole. In that regard, the bill
creating the commission on truth, justice, reparation
and reconciliation has also been finalized. We must
ensure that it prohibits impunity for serious human
rights violations.
Finally, I take this opportunity to commend the
exemplary work of the Peacebuilding Fund in the
Central African Republic. During my visits, I was able
to see first-hand the positive impact of the projects
financed by the Fund in the Central African Republic.
On my latest visit, I was impressed by the clearly
evident role the Fund plays as a catalyst in the country.
Its investments in transhumance projects, support for
mixed units and the participation of young people
in political life will encourage other donors, which
have contributed up to 100 times the amount initially
disbursed by the Fund.
In conclusion, allow me to share some observations
with the Security Council.
First, the upcoming elections will be a historic
moment and an opportunity to achieve sustained peace
in that country. It would be a pity if we cannot ensure
adequate conditions because of a funding shortfall,
which could jeopardize the efforts and sacrifices of
the United Nations and the significant investments
made by the international community thus far in the
Central African Republic. I therefore join my friend,
Mr. Ndiaye, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, in appealing to all countries and partners of
the Central African Republic to contribute in order to
meet the country’s budgetary needs as soon as possible.
Secondly, MINUSCA needs the firm support
of the Security Council and human and financial
resources for the implementation of resolution 2499
(2019), in order to be able to continue to secure the
country and support the Government both for the
elections and for the implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic and the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan.
Thirdly, the monitoring mechanisms put in place
for both the political agreement and the National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan are very complex
and are exerting heavy pressure on the Government,
whose capacities are limited. It would therefore be

S/PV. 8728

advisable to ref lect on how to simplify the monitoring
processes and further optimize the coordination of
partners upstream in order to more effectively and
efficiently support the Government’s efforts.
Fourthly, the exemplary partnership between the
United Nations, the African Union and the Economic
Community of Central African States symbolizes
the potential of the partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations, particularly the
African Union. As such, it should serve as a model.
Partnership with international financial organizations
is also crucial and will ultimately make it possible to
implement many structural projects.
Finally, I would like to send a message of hope
and an appeal for continued mobilization in support
of the Central African Republic. The international
community has indeed done a great deal for the country.
Although the people are not sufficiently enjoying the
dividends of peace, the foundations have been laid for
a return to stability, provided that the current level of
support can be maintained. I am confident that the
Security Council will continue to give full attention
and political support to that country. The Central
African people, who have suffered so greatly, now
legitimately aspire to stability, peace, development
and, above all, a better life.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Hilale
for his briefing.
I now give the f loor to those Council members
wishing to make statements.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I would
like to very sincerely thank all the briefers: the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the African Union Special Representative and the
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations. I also want to thank the Ambassador
of Morocco, who has just given an excellent briefing
on the Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
It is my honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of South Africa, Tunisia, the Niger and Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines.
Today’s meeting takes place only a few weeks after
the Council’s adoption, on 31 January, of resolution
2507 (2020), renewing the sanctions regime imposed
on the Central African Republic, followed by the
presentation, on the same day, of the final report of

20-045029/11

S/PV.8728

The situation in the Central African Republic

the Panel of Experts on the Central African Republic
(see S/2019/930), in the context of a briefing by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic, which
I have the honour of chairing.
The situation in the Central African Republic
continues to improve, as ref lected by the various
briefings that we have just heard. We therefore warmly
welcome the observance, on б February, of the first
anniversary of the signing of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, as well as all the progress made by the
Government in implementing the Agreement, which
has led to a reduction in violence and human rights
violations. We continue to encourage the Government
and the people of the Central African Republic to fully
implement the Political Agreement in order to bring
the country out of the cycle of conf lict.
We are convinced that dialogue among Central
Africans is the key to ending the crisis over any
other support that the countries of the region and the
international community can provide. We therefore
welcome the fact that the Central African authorities
have taken significant steps to promote peace and
reconciliation at the local and national level. The
recent finalization of the procedures to establish
the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Reconciliation is also commendable. Once set up,
that mechanism will undoubtedly help the Central
African people to deliver justice so as to be able to
maintain peace.

20/02/2020

the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
armed groups and the consolidation of democracy.
In that context, we wish to stress the importance
of providing the Central African defence and security
forces with adequate capacity to carry out their
constitutional mandate. It is crucial for the country
to make significant progress in the context of the
benchmarks set by the Security Council in April 2019
with a view to completely lifting the arms embargo
ultimately, as desired by the Central African authorities.
We commend the Government, the National
Electoral Authority, MINUSCA and donors for having
begun preparations for the presidential, legislative and
local elections scheduled for 2020 and 2021 in order
to strengthen peace and democracy in the country.
We call on the international community to provide the
necessary support to the Government to ensure the
holding of peaceful and credible elections within the
constitutional time frame.
We also welcome the strong and ongoing
commitment of the African Union and the Economic
Community of Central African States, as guarantors
of the Political Agreement, to ensuring the effective
implementation of the Agreement by all parties.

We note the return to Bangui of former Presidents
François Bozizé and Michel Djotodia, and we hope that
their presence in the country will contribute and give
impetus to the ongoing national reconciliation process,
in particular regarding the effective implementation
of the peace agreement. We commend President
Touadera for having convened a meeting with the
former Presidents with a view to promoting peace
and reconciliation.

We reaffirm our support for the leading role
of MINUSCA in promoting peace, security and
development, particularly through the implementation
of the peace agreement. The importance of that role was
jointly reiterated by the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the United
Nations in the joint communiqué issued on б February
at the commemoration of the first anniversary of
the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation. At that event, the three organizations
reiterated the need for dialogue among all the actors
concerned, stressing in particular the following points:
stopping all attacks against civilians, United Nations
staff and humanitarian workers and establishing a
judicial framework for the prosecution of all those who
commit violations of the Political Agreement or human
rights, as well as criminal acts.

On behalf of the three African members of the
Council and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, I
wish to express our support for the Government in its
ongoing efforts to restore State authority throughout
the territory. Those efforts focus on the effective
restoration of national institutions throughout the
country, including the defence and security forces,

In that regard, we call on the armed groups to
exercise restraint and to use the dispute settlement
mechanisms provided for in the Political Agreement to
resolve their differences. We urge non-signatory armed
groups to engage in all political processes, in particular
with regard to the cessation of hostilities and all acts
of violence and intimidation throughout the country.

10/11

20-04502

20/02/2020

The situation in the Central African Republic

At the same time, we welcome the progress made in
prosecuting those involved in the killing of civilians
and peacekeepers so that they are held accountable for
their acts before the court.
In conclusion, the three African members of the
Council and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, in line
with the approach of the African Union, will continue
to support the aspirations of the Central African

S/PV. 8728

Government and people to achieve peace, stability
and the foundations for sustainable development in
the country.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

20-0450211/11
