106

2 7 September 1974,

General A11aembl1
13

and such oth(:r measures as. may

be necessary to assist in the protection of the nat10nal

resources of Namibia;
16. Condemns the exploitation of uranium . an~ of
all other natural resources of Namibia by ~rgan~atio1:1,s
under private or . govemmental_ control, mcludmg m
particular transnatlo~al corpo~ati~ns, and demands t~a~
such exploitation, dtrect or mdrrect, cease forthwith,
17 Calls upon the lntemational Atomic Energy
Agency to take all possi~le me~s~res to discourage the
exploitation of uramum m Namibia;
18. Requests Member States to broad~~st programmes on their national radi? and . televis!on networks and to publish material m their offi.ci~l n~ws
media informing their populations about the situaban
in N;mibia and the obligation of Goy~rnments_ and
peoples to assist in the struggle of N amib1ans for mdependence;
19. Requests all speci~ized ag~ncies and ot~er organizations within the Umted N auons system, m ?º_nsultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia,
to render, within their respective spheres of co~p~
tence, all possible assistance to the people of Namibia
through their liberation movement, the South West
Africa People's Organization;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to_ ~?ntinue to
provide the necessary assistance. a_nd facilities_ to the
United Nations Council for Namibia for the discharge
of its duties and functions and, in particular, to _dire~t
the Office of Public Information of the Secretanat, m
co-operation with the United Nations Council for
Namibia:
(a) To increase its radio and television programmes
concerning Namibia, includi~g radio p~owammes
beamed to Namibia and radio and television programmes intended tor loe~ consumption in all areas
where there are Umted Nalions offices;
(b) To place advertisements in the news media of
Member States in arder to promote the cause of
N amibian independence;
21. Further requests the Secretary-General, in ~~nsultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia,
urgently to set up in an African ~tate a U~it_ed Nati':'ns
radio transmitter operated by tramed N am1bians, wh1ch
would have the function of transmitting radio programmes in the various languages sp?ken in _Namibi~,
informing the Namibia~ peop_le of Umted_ ~at1ons pohcies in regard to the hberat1on of Namibia, the protection of human rights and funda~ental freedoms,_ the
fight against racism and the steps bemg taken to achieve
decolonization in Namibia and throughout the world;
22. Decides to make adequate budgetary provision,
on the proposal of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, for the implementation of Decree No. 1_ ~or
the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia;
23. Decides to continuc to defray the expenses of
a representativc of thc South Wcst Africa People's
Organization, the authentic re~resentat~ve of the p~ople
of Namibia, whencver the Umted Nat10ns Counc1l for
Namibia so rcquires;
24. Decides to continue to makc adequate financia}
provision in the budgct of thc ~nitcd Nations Council
for Namibia to financc an officc of the South West
Africa Pcople's Organization in New York;
13 Jbid.,

Twenty-ninth Se.ui""• Supp/e11u•111 No. 24A
9624/Add.l ), para. 84.

( A/

Thirtieth Seuion

25. Requests a1I committees and sub-committees of
the General Assembly to continue to invite a reer~sentative of the United Nations Council for Nanubta ~
participate whenever the rights and interests of _Nam1bians are discussed, and to consult closely _With. the
Council before submitting to the Assembly at 1ts thirtyfirst session any draft resolution which may involve the
rights and interests of Namibians;
26. Requests all intergovemmental and non-govemmental organizations, bodies and conferences to ensure
that the rights and interests _of Nami?ia are prot~ted;
in this connexion the Umted Nat1ons Council for
Namibia should p:.rticipate, as appropriate, whenever
such rights and interests are involved;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to report to _the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the tmplementation of the present resolution.
2419th plenary meeting
26 November 1975
3400 (XXX). United Nations Fund for Namibia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its reso1ution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, by which the United Nations deci~e~ to terminate
the Mandate of South Africa over Nanubta and assume
direct responsibility for the Territory until its independence, and resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967,
by which it established the United Nations Council for
Namibia,
Reaffirming its determination to continue to discharge
that responsibility in regard to the Territory,
Mindful that, by assuming direct responsibility for
Namibia, the United Nations incurred a solemn obligation to assist the people of the Territory morally and
materially,
RecaUing further its resolutions 2679 (XXV) of
9 December 1970, 2872 (XXVI) of 20 December
1971, 3030 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3112
(XXVIII) of 12 December 1973 and 3296 (XXIX)
of 13 December 1974,
Recognizing that South Africa's continued illegal occupation of Namibia at present prevents the United
Nations from furnishing needed, large-scale assistance
within the Territory,
H aving examined the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Fund for Namibia14 and the
relevant sections of the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, 1~
l. Takes note of the operations of the United
Nations Fund for Namibia and of the setting up of the
Institute for Namibia;
2. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
made voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Fund for Namibia;
3. Decides to allocate to the United Nations Fund
for Namibia the sum of $US 200,000 from the regular
budget of the United Nations for 1976;
4. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Council for Namibia to continue to appeal to
Governments, intergovemmental and non-govemmental
organizations and prívate individuals for generous voluntary contributions to the United Nations Fund for
Namibia;
14 A/l0229.

Record, o/ tire General Assembly, Thirtieth Se.rsi""· Supp/e111c111 Nu. 24 (A/10024).
1.; O/]iciai

Resolutions adopted on the reporte of the Fourth Committee

5. Invites Governments to appeal once more to
their national organizations and institutions for voluntary contributions to the United Nations Fund for
Namibia;
6. Appeals to all States, the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system, as well as other organizations havmg a special
interest in Namibia, to make financia! contributions
to the Institute for Namibia through the United Nations
Fund for Namibia;
7. Expresses its appreciation to the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system for their assistance to Namibians, and
in particular to the United Nations Development Programme for having established an indicative planning
figure for Namibia, and requests the Programme to
give priority to the allocation of funds and other material assistance to the Institute for Namibia;
8. Expresses its appreciation of the efforts of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
9. Requests the speciali2:ed agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to render
all necessary assistance to the Secretary-General and
the United Nations Council for Namibia in implementing the work programme of the United Nations Fund
for Namibia;
1O. Calls upon all specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system-in
particular, the Intemational Labour Organisation, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the United N ations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, the World Health Organization,
the Intemational Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Intemational Monetary Fund, the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Institute for Training and Research-to assist the
Institute for Namibia, particularly by providing specialists, lecturers and researchers;
11. Decides, pending the entry into full operation
of a comprehensive programme, that Namibians shall
continue to be eligible for assistance through the United
Nations Educational and Training Programme for
Southern Africa and the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution.
2419th plenary meeting
26 November 1975
3420 (XXX). lnformation from Non-Self-Govern•
ing Territories transmitted under Article
73 e of the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it requested the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of
the D~claration . on the Granting of Independence to
~olomal C<;mntnes and Peoples to study tbe informatlon transm1tted to the Secretary-General under Article
73 e of the Charter of the United Nations and to take
s?ch _infor~ation fully into acc_ount in examining the
s1tuat10n w1th regard to the 1mplementation of the
Declaration,

107

Recalling a/so its resolution 3293 (XXIX) of 13
December 1974, in which it requested the Special
Committee to. continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII),
H aving examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter18 and the
action taken by it in respect of that information,
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on tbis ítem, 17
Deploring that, despite the repeated recommendations of the General Assembly and the Special Committee, sorne Member States having responsibilities for
the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories
have ceased or have failed to transmit information
under Article 73 e of the Charter,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the information from Non-Self-Govemmg Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations;
2. Reatfirms that, in the absence of a decision by
the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing
Territory has attained a full measure of self-govemment
in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering Power concemed should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with respect
to that Territory;
3. Requests the administering Powers concemed to
transmit, or continue to transmit, to the SecretaryGeneral the information prescribed in Article 73 e of
tbe Charter, as well as the fullest possible information
on political and constitutional developments in the
Territories concerned, within a maximum period of six
months following the expiration of the administrative
year in those Territories;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with
established procedures, and to report thereon to the
Assembly at its thirty-first session.
2431 st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3421 (XXX). Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions
associated with the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the ítem entitled "Implementation
of the_ Declaratio~ on the Granting of Independence to
Colo~ial Countnes and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the intemational institutions associated
with the United Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960
and the programme of action for the full implementa~
tion of the Declaration, contained in its resolution 2621
(XXV) of 12 October 1970, as well as all other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council,
16 lbid., Supplement No. 23

t, A/ 10307.

(A/10023/Rev.l) chap. XXXII
'
.
