: .’ OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

YEAR

2148’”

MEETING:

\

NEW

.

RjEi:C;ORDS

14 JUNE 1979

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. . . . . .. . : . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2148)
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 30 May 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13356);
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(S/13384) . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

.

WPV.2148

NOTE

..,

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined ‘,’_I
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations :
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the Offiaiar Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2148th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of Egypt,
Iran, Ireland, Jordan and the Netherlands containing
requests that they be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In accordance with established practice and with the consent of the Council, I
propose to invite them to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

1

. Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2148)
1. Adoption

14 June 1979, at 10.30 a.m.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Elaraby (Egypt),
Mr. Shemirani (Iran), Mr. Keating (Irean4, Mr. Shamma
(Jordan) and Mr. Scheltema (Netherlands) took the places
reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber.

of the agenda

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 30 May 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13356);
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (S/13384)

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): The
first speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
4. Mr. ELARABY
(Egypt): Mr. President, allow me at
the outset to express my delegation’s pleasure at seeing
you presiding over the deliberations of the Security Council during the month of June. As a permanent member of
the Council, the Soviet Union is entrusted with a special
responsibility in the maintenance of international peace
and security and in ensuring the sovereignty, the political
independence and the territorial integrity of every Member State. All Member States look to the Council to
uphold legitimate causes such as the quest to be free from
foreign occupation and outside intervention, and in general to support just causes. I trust that with your wellknown talents and wide diplomatic experience, the
Council, under your wise leadership, will be able to take
the required action and to carry out its responsibilities as
the guardian of a just peace.

The meeting was called to order at 11.20 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 30 May 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13356);
Report of the Secretary-General on the United .Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (S/13384)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): In
accordance with the decisions taken by the Council at the
2146th and 2147th meetings, I invite the representative of
Lebanon to take a place at the Council table and I invite
the representatives of Israel, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
and the Syrian Arab Republic to take the places reserved
for them. at the side of the Council chamber. In accordance with a decision taken at the 2146th meeting, I invite
the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization to take a place at the side of the Council chamber.

5. I wish also to pay a tribute to your predecessor,
Ambassador Vasco Futscher Pereira of Portugal, who
very ably guided the work of the Council during the
month of May.
6. The Council is once again called upon to deal with a
grave situation. In a letter dated 30 May 1979 [S/13356-j,
Mr. Tutni, the Permanent Representative of Lebanon,
requested the convening of an urgent meeting of the
Council to consider the rapidly deteriorating situation in
Southern Lebanon resulting from Israeli escalation of its
attacks and the consequent adverse effect this has on the
implementation of Council resolution 425 (1978).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tut%i(Lebanon) took
a place at the Council table, Mr. Blum (Israel), Mr. Kikhia
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) and Mr. El-Choufi (Syrian Arab
Republic) took the places reservedfor them at the side of the
Council chamber and Mr. Abdel Rahman (Palestine Liberation Organisation) took the place reservedfor him at the side
of the Council chamber.

7. When resolution
regarded by Israel,
1

425 (1978) was deliberately disthe Council in clear terms de-

12. The deteriorating conditions in Southern Lebanon
are a source of utmost concern to my Government which
has consistently warned ‘against any interference in the
internal affairs of Lebanon and called for strict respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of Lebanon. Egypt has, moreover, strongly
condemned all actions aimed at infringing upon ‘the
sovereignty of Lebanon or undermining the full and
effective authority and control of the Lebanese Government over all the territory of Lebanon.

plored in resolution 444 (1979) the lack of co-operation
‘on Israel’s part. However, the magnitude and continued
escalation of the recent Israeli attacks require prompt
and effective action by the Council, particularly in the
light of the assistance extended by Israel to the illegal
forces of Major Haddad to enable him to defy the authority of the Lebanese Government and undermine the mandate and functioning of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
8. It is indeed deplorable that Israel opted to ignore the
resolutions of the Security Council regarding Lebanon.
The intensified Israeli air raids and naval bombardments,
as well as the repeated military incursions into Lebanon,
have resulted in the killing or maiming of many innocent
civilians, including Lebanese and Palestinian women and
children. The Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon have
been subjected to unwarranted
and deliberate bombardment by the Israeli armed forces.

13. It is imperative in our view that concrete steps be
taken in order to fully implement resolutions 425 (1978)
and 444 (1979). The Council should consolidate and
strengthen the provisions of those two resolutions and
condemn any attempt to obstruct the deployment of
UNIFIL over the entire area of operation as envisaged by
the United Nations and the Lebanese Government. ’

9. Israel attempts to justify its actions in Southern
Lebanon on the grounds of safeguarding its security.
What we oppose-in
fact deplore-is
that any country
should invoke that argument to justify intensive military
action outside its international borders and its interference in the internal affairs of sovereign countries. The
self-defence pretexts advanced by the Israeli Government
to justify those attacks have no validity whatsoever. The
scope of self-defence, in international law, certainly could
in no circumstances be stretched and abused to cover the
Israeli aggressive acts against Lebanon or to give Israel a
free hand to kill innocent civilians.

14. I should like to seize this opportunity
to pay a
special tribute to the soldiers, officers and commanders
of all United Nations peace-keeping forces in the Middle
Fast. I should like also to emphasize that .the Egyptian
Government firmly believes that the United Nations is
performing a central and indispensable role in the area
through its peace-keeping operations. Such a commendable role should indeed be developed and supportedby all
peace-loving nations. In his report on UNIFIL,
the
Secretary-General
rightly points out that he wishes:
“to emphasize once again the indispensable function
which UNIFIL is actually performing in bringing calm
to a sorely affected area and in reducing the active
threat to international peace and security” [S/13384,
pura. 411.

10. The provisions of Article 51 of the Charter clearly
stipulate that a State may have recourse to the inherent
right of self-defence only when an armed attack occurs.
In point of fact, under the general principles of international law-and
this was true well before the Charter
ushered in a new international legal order-States
are
required to observe certain limitations which affect the
measure and degree of the use of force. The notion and
scope of self-defence were admirably defined and articulated by Daniel Webster, an eminent United States Secretary of State. He coined, in a concise and lucid manner
over 150 years ago, what became the widely acknowledged definition of the doctrine of self-defence. Selfdefence, according to the former United States Secretary
of State, could be invoked only-1 repeat: only-when
an
armed attack was “instant, overwhelming,
leaving no
choice of means, and no moment for deliberation”.

15. The Secretary-General
recommends in hi report
the extension of the mandate of UNIFIL
for a further
period of six months. Lebanon, the host country, consents to that extension and my delegation therefore joins
in urging the Council to endorse the Secretary-General’s
recommendation.
Notwithstanding
obstacles deliberately placed in its way, UNIFIL is admirably discharging
its delicate and difficult mandate. The Council should, in
the view of my delegation, state in the clearest possible
terms that any restriction on the deployment of the Force
will not be tolerated. UNIFIL
is certainly a tangible
manifestation of the United Nations’ dedication to the
maintenance of peace and security. It should be fully
supported in order to enhance the effectiveness of the
United Nations in maintaining world peace and to assist
countries like Lebanon to safeguard their sovereignty
and territorial integrity.

11. Furthermore,
the 1949 Geneva Conventions,’
as
well as the 1977 Additional Protocols* to those Conventions, clearly prohibit attacks on civilian centres like the
Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon. It is also relevant
to recall that article 1, common to the four Geneva
Conventions-to
which I believe all the members of the
Security Council are parties-contains
a clear obligation
on the parties not only to respect but also to ensure that
all other parties shall scrupulously respect their provisions. Thus, the Israeli actions are beyond any legality
and clearly violate the basic norms of international law.

16. The Government
of Egypt has condemned the
Israeli actions against Lebanon and against the Palestinian refugees in Lebanon and stated that such actions
contradict and undermine the efforts to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle Fast. Indeed, the
Egyptian Government has made it abundantly clear that
such actions seriously violate international law as well as
the spirit of the just and comprehensive peace to which
Egypt is committed and which it is earnestly striving to
achieve.

’ United Nations, Treuiy St-ties. vol. 75. Nos. 970-973.
‘A/32/144,
annexes I and II.

2-

r
17, Egypt firmly believes that if we are to get out of she
vicious circle of violence and bloodshed that has plagued
our region for over three decades, it is imperative to
resolve the Palestinian problem. Sincere endeavours in
good faith, particularly on the part of Israel, should be
doubled, extended and widened, in order to realize a
settlement of the Palestinian problem that will enable the
Palestinian people to exercise all their legitimate rights,
including their inherent right to self-determination.
That
is the only valid prescription for attaining a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

fulfilling its mandate primarily because of the activities of
the Israeli authorities. Israel continues to exploit the
situation and fish in troubled waters. This policy is part of
the activities of the Tel Aviv. group to destabilize
Lebanon in pursuit of its expansionist designs.
25. It is evident that the so-called de f&o Lebanese
forces under Haddad could not persist in their activities
without the active support of Israel. The situation has
been worsened by continued Israeli armed invasions of
Southern Lebanon, for which there can be no justification whatsoever. Any act of aggression by any country
against another constitutes a flagrant violation of international law and the norms of amity among peoples and
nations.

18. Mr. LUSAKA (Zambia): Mr. President, it is gratifying for me to be able to congratulate you on your accession to the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. We have in you a seasoned diplomat who represents a country with which my own has very friendly
relations based on mutual interests and a similar outlook
on issues of liberation the world over. We wish you well in
the weeks ahead, in view of what promises to be a very
crowded schedule during the month of June.

26. -The members of the Security Council should work
tirelessly to ensure that Israel desists from its war of
attrition .in Lebanon.
27. In conclusion I wish, on behalf of Zambia, to commend the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, for his
latest report on UNIFIL, which is, as usual, lucid, objective and comprehensive. We also wish to pay a tribute to
the Commander of UNIFIL,
Major-General Emmanuel
A. Erskine of Ghana, of whom the United Nations as a
whole and Africa are proud. Our homage goes also to the
men who constitute UNIFIL.
Theirs is a difficult task
under very trying circumstances.
This is exemplified,
infer ah, by the casualties: four killed and 23 injured as a
result of tiring incidents between 13 January and 8 June
1979, in addition to the six who were killed and the 15
who were wounded as a result of accidents. The members
of the United Nations peace-keeping forces are soldiers of
peace with a noble mission on behalf of mankind’s existence. The contributing countries also are to be commended highly, and we hope they will continue to honour
their pledges.

19. Once again the Security Council has to deal with the
problem of Lebanon in its many aspects. Zambia is aware
that the situation in Southern Lebanon is closely linked
with the situation in the rest of Lebanon. In turn, the
problem of Lebanon is intrinsically intertwined with the
over-all problem of the Middle East. Above all, the whole
question of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
is a consequence of the situation to which I have just
referred.
20. Lebanon continues to bleed from the fratricidal
strife, with no immediate solution in sight. The situation
on the ground in that country is very serious. Complexities underlie this condition. Thus simplistic rhetorical
solutions cannot be a panacea for the problems.
21. The Security Council, which is the highest organ of
the United Nations vested with responsibility for maintaining world peace and security, has a duty to devise
solutions to global problems. As it does so, Council
members, both individually and collectively, have to endeavour to maintain objective stances in approaching
such problems. We all have to rise above parochial interests in the service of peace.

28. Zambia strongly recommends that the mandate of
UNIFIL
be renewed for another six months without
equivocation. Let this Council send a clear message to all
the parties: that it intends to have UNIFIL
fulfil its
mandate. Any ambivalence on the part of the Council
would undermine the vital and necessary role of the
United Nations in that troubled region of the Middle
East.

22. In an analysis of the situation, it is vital to maintain
a sense of the problem. Not all parties are responsible for
the predicament of Lebanon, or for the strife in the south
in particular. While some groups are contributing to the
solution, others persist in fuelling and brewing problems
for the area, which renders any resolution difficult.

29. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): Sir, may I start
by congratulating you on your assumption of your position as President of the Security Council for the month of
June. It promises to be a busy month, and I suspect that
you will be a busy President. May I also say how grateful
we were to your predecessor, Ambassador
Futscher
Pereira of Portugal, for his considerable efforts made last
month.

-23. Until the problem of Lebanon is resolved meaningfully, there is no choice but to retain UNIFIL
as an
interim force. At this point let me state unequivocally
that UNIFIL is indispensable to Lebanon at the present
time. This point has been underscored also by the Secretary-General in his report.

30. The Secretary-General’s
report makes sombre reading. Although there have been one or two welcome developments, including the dispatch of the Lebanese army
battalion to the UNIFIL
area of operation and an increase in the numbers of Lebanese civilian administrative
personnel in the area, the report generally paints a picture
of escalating violence over the period under review. Such
activity is scarcely calculated to increase the confidence
of the beleaguered citizens of Southern Lebanon, who

24. Successive reports of the Secretary-General
on
UNIFIL
have emphasized its important role. Unfortunately, to date UNIFIL has not been able to implement
its mandate in full. UNIFIL
is being prevented from
3

have surely suffered enough. It is clear that such stability
and normality as they do enjoy is due primarily to the
unstinting efforts of the officers and men of UNIFIL. It is
for this reason that. my Government unhesitatingly
accepts the Secretary-General’s recommendation that
the Force mandate should be renewed for a further six
months. I cannot, however, let this occasion pass without
some comment on the more disturbing aspects of the
Secretary-General’s report.

over the de facto forces. We have also said that webelieve
the Government of Israel should cease supplies to those
forces of the military equipment which is currently enabling them to frustrate efforts by UNIFIL fully to implement its mandate. Of the various incidents reported by
the Secretary-General involving the de facto forces, there
are two aspects which provoke particular alarm and,
indeed, indignation. First, we are told that there were
deliberate attacks against UNIFIL headquarters on two
occasions, together with regular harassment of the Force
throughout the mandate period. Secondly,‘we are told
that, on various pretexts, villages in the UNIFIL area
have come under heavy shelling and serious threat of
‘.
.
destruction.

31: As in previous reports, our attention is drawn to a
perplexing lack of co-operation from both the de facto
forces and the Israeli Government with the United
Nations Force in its attempt to implement its mandate.
Our attention is drawn also to the increased number of
incidents involving Palestinian and Lebanese armed elements-armed
elements for whose co-operation in the
past the Secretary-General has been able to express
appreciation.

38. This policy has resulted in large numbers of villagers feeling compelled to abandon their, homes and
property and flee the area. In our view, there can be no
possible excuse either for this type of activity or for the.
failure to co-operate with the peace-keeping force of the
United Nations. As the Secretary-General so aptly
warned at our last meeting, the continued presence of
UNIFIL is not inevitable. We expect the Israel representative’s statement at the same meeting of his Govzrnment’s intention to co-operate with UNIFIL
to be
translated now into action on the ground.

32. In previous statements on this subject we have
warned that such co-operation from the armed elements
was clearly fragile and that, unless the deficroforces and
the Government of Israel adopted a more constructive
approach, this co-operation could well be jeopardized.
Certain parts of the current report sadly underline how
well founded those warnings were.

39. In thanking the Secretary-General for his report I
must state our admiration
for his determined and
devoted efforts, and those of his staff, in the pursuit of the
extremely difftcult goal which the Security Council has
set them. For General Erskine and his offtcers and men,
the task facing them remains one of enormous complexity and physical hardship, coupled with a danger greater
than any to have confronted a United Nations force since
the Congo operation. Their performance under the most
difficult conditions, at times under fire, deserves our
highest praise and gratitude. The cost continues to be
high, however, and I should here like to pay a trtbute to
the memory of those members of the Force who have
given their lives in the cause of peace in Southern
Lebanon.

33. We welcome, of course, the information that the
PLO has reaffirmed its commitment not to initiate any
action from inside the UNIFIL area of operation and its
undertaking not to shell targets of the Israel Defence
Forces or the defucto targets unless first attacked. Nevertheless, we strongly deplore such incidents as have taken
place, and most particularly that which resulted in the
tragic death of two soldiers of Fiji in February and was
indirectly responsible for the accident in which four of the
Norwegian personnel lost their lives.
34. I must also repeat again that my Government
strongly deplores terrorist action across the border into
Israel. Nothing can justify the violent acts which have
resulted in the loss of so much innocent life. And this
argument applies with equal force to the retaliatory
actions undertaken by the Government of Israel. We
particularly deplore the air raids which inevitably lead to
the loss of civilian life.

40. The PRESIDENT
(inferprefarian from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of the Netherlands.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
41. Mr. SCHELTEMA
(Netherlands): Mr. President,
first of all I should like to pay my respects to you, Sir, on
your assumption -of the duties of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I should also like to
express our appreciation to your predecessor, the representative of Portugal, for the able way in which he conducted the work of the Council last month. I should also
like to thank you and the other members of the Council
for granting my delegation’s request to take part in this
debate. This request was prompted by our awareness of
the special responsibility my Government carries, since
the Netherlands is one of the countries that contribute
troops to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, a
contribution it is prepared to continue if the Council
decides to extend its mandate.

35. I must also record the British Government’s dismay
at the incursion by elements of the Israel Defence Forces
into the Irish sector of the area controlled by UNIFIL
early in the month of May. Such action in territory controlled by the United Nations is, I believe, unprecedented.
The Force has quite enough problems without such
unjustified and unacceptable provocation.
36. Given these views, it follows that my Government is
alarmed by the reported Israeli determination to continue its policy of undertaking pre-emptive strikes at
what are described as PLO strongholds on Lebanese
territory. We cannot see how such action will help to
bring about the peace in the area which it is the duty of us
all to work towards.
__
.:
37. We have expressed before in this chamber our belief
that the Government of Israel has considerable influence

42. My Government has been deeply concerned over the
military and political obstacles that have been put and
4

still are being put in the way of the implementation oft&
UNIFIL mandate. This has been clearly outlined in successive reports of the Secretary-General;most recently in
the.report now before the Council.

and particularly to the defacto forces, to Israel and to the
PLO, to fulfil without delay the conditions set out in
paragraph 42 of the Secretary-General’s report, thus ensuring the security of UNIFIL, and the implementation
of its mandate and of the relevant United Nations resolutions. Only in this way can peace and security in the
area be ensured and the suffering of the people of
Lebanon alleviated.

43. When the Lebanese Government, in full conformity,
with the aims of the mandate and with the decisions of the
Security Council, decided to deploy troops in the southern part ‘of its own territory, the de facto’ forces of
Major Haddad reacted violently and actually attacked
UNIFIL
headquarters. Numerous incidents followed,
such as the abduction of three UNIFIL soldiers and the
Israeli incursion into the village of Shagra. More recently
shellings into the UNIFIL
area have seriously endangered the lives of the local population and of UNIFIL
personnel. Instead of being allowed to deploy fully in its
area, UNIFIL at this moment is under pressure as a result
of efforts by the de facto forces to expand their area of
control.

49. In conclusion, I should like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and his staff for their untiring efforts. I should
also like to pay a tribute to the UNIFIL Commander, his
staff and troops for their courage and self-restraint in this
most difftcult situation. They have our warm sympathy
and they deserve our unanimous support.
50. Mr.. LEPRETTE
(France) (interpretation from
French): It is with special satisfaction, Mr. President, that
the French delegation welcomes your accession to the
presidency of the Security Council. The quality of the
relations and links between our two countries was
recently revealed by the visit which the President of the
French Republic made to your capital. I wish to assure
you of the total co-operation of the French delegation.
Your eminent qualities as a diplomat and negotiator will
surely lead to the successof our work during the month of
June.

44. Attacks on and harassment of United Nations
peace-keeping forces constitute a challenge to the authority of the Security Council and to that of the United
Nations as a whole. The parties concerned, therefore,
bear a heavy responsibility. My Government hopes that
they will live up to that responsibility and appeals to the
Government of Israel to bring its influence to bear upon
the de facto forces.

5 1. I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, the representative of Portugal, who, with talent,
imagination and effectiveness made constant efforts on
behalf of peace during the month of May.

45. My Government fully understands Israel’s need for
security. It deplores and indeed rejects terrorist activities
committed in that country. At the same time, we believe
that Israel’s security will best be served if UNIFIL
is
allowed to operate fully and unhampered. In this respect,
my Government welcomes recent commitments made by
the Palestine Liberation Organization such as that for the
withdrawal of its armed units from towns and villages in
the area. We look forward to the carrying out of those
commitments and we trust that they will contribute to
greater security in Southern Lebanon.

52. We are bound to observe that on balance the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon has not so far fulfilled
our hopes. It is not the Force itself which bears responsibility for this, as is clear from the report of the SecretaryGeneral. The Force has striven with praiseworthy
perseverance and courage to discharge its mission. Nor is
the Government of Lebanon to blame. It has for its part
undertaken to set up the phased programme of activities
suggested to it by the Council, and we are grateful to it.
Essentially, the fact that little progress has been made is
due to constant defiance of UNIFIL not only by the de
facto armed forces, which, as we all know, enjoy support
from Israel, but also by Israeli forces themselves.

46. In our view, UNIFIL has so far done everything in
its power to prevent the recurrence of fighting and to
ensure that .its area of operation is not used for hostile
activities of any kind. We believe that the Force has so far
been successful in carrying out that part of its mandate
under sometimes trying circumstances. Indeed, the casualties suffered by the Force sadly bear witness to the
dedication of its members. Their restraint, in the face of
what often seems to be harassment or provocation, has,
in our view, been exemplary.

53. The incidents which have thus increased in the
course of the past months and already led to our meeting
offtcially on two occasions are particularly serious. They
are serious first and above all because once again they
have unfortunately led to the loss of human lives, mainly
among the civilian population. But also they are serious
because, as everyone is aware, in several instances they
have taken a form that gives them a political significance
warranting grave concern. Indeed, one cannot but
wonder about the true nature of the objectives pursued by
the various sides, when Christian militiamen deliberately
attack the headquarters of the Force at Naqoura, as they
did on 29 March and 18 April, or when they carry out acts
of intimidation against the population of the area where
UNIFIL and the first units of the Lebanese regular army
are stationed, or, finally, when there are Israeli attacks
against numerous places in Southern Lebanon. On 9 May
last, regular Israeli units even crossed the international
border and then sought to enter the zone controlled by

47. Acts of aggressiveness must now come to an end in
order to enable the Force to carry out its task of ensuring
peace and security in fulfilment of its mandate. My
Government therefore fully shares the view expressed by
the Secretary-General in his latest report that UNIFIL
cannot continue to function without certain essential
conditions being fulfilled.
48. My Government has responded on various occasions to the urgent call for all Member States to bring
their influence to bear on those concerned. As a Member
of the United Nations, and particularly as a troopcontributing country, the Netherlands seizes this opportunity to renew its earnest appeal to all parties concerned
5

the Force. The reasons then given for this incursion
cannot justify it. The authorities of France have already
indicated several times in the past that, while unambiguously condemning blind violence, they refuse to consider
as unavoidable the consequent spiralling repression.
They accept it even less in this latest case because these
so-called reprisals at one time took on the appearance of
a deliberate defiance by a Member State of the authority
of the United Nations. We hope that in the near future the
Government .of Israel will adopt an attitude more in
accord with the decisions of the Council and the properly
understood interests of peace in the region. For at present
everything must be done to enable UNIFIL to pursue its
mission and, first and foremost, it is essential that its
security be better guaranteed, whether at headquarters,
among operational units or logistic components. In this
respect my delegation welcomes the measures adopted
recently to that effect by the PLO.

60. Although I am sure that Ambassador’ irasco
Futscher Pereira will have an opportunity to do so personally, I should also like to thank all the previous speakers who have been so generous as to address. to my
country and to Ambassador Futscher Pereira himself
kind words -with regard to the way in which .Portugal
acquitted its duties as President of the Council for May.
.. I,,.;
61. The Portuguese delegation would like to associate
itself with those who have paid a tribute here, to the
civilian personnel and the soldiers who, under. the command of General Erskine, are serving in IJNIFIL. The
high level of morale and dedication with which they are
performing an often difficult task compel ‘both our
respect and our admiration. The sacrifice of those who
fell for the cause of peace should inspire us to continue
our efforts for the same end, namely, that of restoring
peace in the region, particularly in the zone of operation
of the Force; My delegation-pays a tribute tothe memory
of those who have given their lives and wishes to convey
its condolences to their families and their countries. We
should also like to pay a tribute to the Governments
which have contributed contingents to UNIFIL for the
encouraging proof they give of the importance they attach to peace-keeping operations.

54. The alarming nature of this record, which is
reflected in the report of the Secretary-General, can
escape no one. In the meantime, the Council by meeting
on several occasions during the past months has demonstrated that it is aware of the considerable difficulties
encountered by UNIFIL and the urgency of improving
the situation.

62. As members are aware, my delegation, on a Council
mission, albeit in another context, recently had occasion
to visit several Middle East countries, including
Lebanon. This shows how mindful we are of the gravity
and difficulties of the situation in which UNIFIL is called
upon to carry out its functions, how aware we are of the
human dimension of the tragedy which has befallen the
Lebanese and Palestinian peoples, so sorely tried by the
violence and insecurity of which they are victims, and
finally, how strongly we feel that the exile of the Paiestinian refugees, whose lives are marked by mourning and
deprivation, is intolerable.

55. It was in order to enhance this awareness that on
two occasions in the past we advocated a reduction in the
length of the envisaged extension of the mandate of the
Force. The authorities of France have not considered it
necessary to make such a request again. However, they
wish to recall that the life of the Force was conceived of as
of limited duration and that it is essential to continue
the necessary efforts to restore fully the authority of
Lebanon in the region concerned.
56. Having in mind this fundamental objective, my
delegation will vote in favour of the proposal of the
Secretary-General to renew the mandate of UNIFIL for
six months.

63. We shall not hesitate to vote in favour of prolonging
the mandate of UNIFIL, in accordance with the wishes of
the Government of,Lebanon. Also, we share the view of
the Secretary-General that, in spite of all difficulties, the
presence of UNIFIL is indispensable if we want to avoid
the deterioration of a situation which is already so
fraught with tension.

57. Before concluding, I wish on behalf of the authorities of France and on my own behalf to pay a tribute to
the 10 soldiers who sacrificed their lives in the course of
the past five months and to their comrades-in-arms who
were wounded. If proof were necessary, this heavy loss
would show the devotion of the men of the Force, under
the leadership of their officers and their Commander,
General Erskine. To all of them as well as to the
Secretary-General and his assistants, we express our
gratitude.
58. The PRESIDENT
(inrerprezution from Russian): I
thank the representative of France for the kind words he
addressed to me. For my part too I should like to speak
with satisfaction of the friendly relations existing between
my own country and France.

64. But we cannot refrain from deploring most vigorously the attitude, which in our eyes nothing canjustify.
of those who are creating obstacles to the accomplishment of the mandate of the Force. The necessary conditions must be created to permit it to‘ conclude its task
successfully, in accordance with resolutions 425 (1978)
and 444 (1979), particularly with regard to the restoration
of the effective authority ‘of the Lebanese Government in
the region, in respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of Lebanon.

59. Mr. MATHIAS
(Portugal) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, permit me first of all to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency for this
month. Your knowledge, skill and experience -and your
great professional qualities, which are recognized by all,
are the best earnest of the effectiveness with which you
will surely conduct our proceedings.

65. We share the view that the Council can and must
also be an instrument for constant but discreet diplomatic action. The efforts that have ‘been undertaken to
that end seem to us to deserve our encouragement and
should be continued, inasmuch as they represent one way
of seeking peace. We do not exclude’the possibility, in this
context, that it is often not at all ‘easy to narrow differ.6

:

ences, to reduce the-drama ofThe debates andbetter to
highlight shared interests.
1;.
.
:.
.
66. The objective of peace in thesouth of Lebanon and
the will to achieve it should cause us to spare no effort.
We are in favour of all positive-initiatives which, without
preconceived ideas, could lead to that outcome, because
it is our hope in that way to contribute to safeguarding
the unity and independence of Lebanon. That country is
the victim of a conflict whose dimensions.transcend its
own frontiers, but the solution of that conflict, while it
must necessarily be global,. could be furthered by the
sectoral reduction of tensions.

people to deprive them of their livelihood and of the
peace .that Lebanon$ce
enjoyed .and had enjoyed for
j .1
centuries.
:”
-, .’
:
74. To our understanding, *UNIFIL
was created to
combat those. evil Zionist, forces -and restore peace to
Lebanon. It is not mudh to ask, ,as the report does in
paragraph 42, that “certain essential conditions (be] fultilled” if UNIFIL is to continue its mission of restoring
peace to Southern Lebanon. One of those conditions is “a
cessation of the harassment of the civilian population and
of UNIFIL
by the de facfq .forces” and another is “a
change in the ‘position of. the Israeli authorities”. The
prerequisites for restoring peace to Lebanon are so simple and so explicit. Will the Israelis heed the SecretaryGeneral’s simple conditions for peace? Of course not.

67. It is ,with that in mind that we welcomed the intention recently announced by the PLO and mentioned by
the Secretary-General in paragraph 38 of his report-a
report which, once again, gives us a very clear and distinct
picture of the situation. We believe that the reaffirmation
of that position by the PLO is a positive element which we
welcome most. warmly.
’

75. Mr. Waldheim sounded extremely pessimistic when
he expressed regret that the stalemate had persisted and
that UNIFIL continued to encounter difliculties in fulfilling the.task assigned to it by the Security Council in
resolution 425 (1978). In other words, Israel and its evil
Zionist values have led UNIFIL to the end of its third
mandate without permitting it to fulfil its assigned mission of restoring peace to Lebanon. My Government
shares the concern of the Lebanese Government at this
situation which Ambassador Ghassan TuCni has described as deteriorating rather than improving.

68. Permit me, in conclusion, to repeat to the SecretaryGeneral and his assistants the thanks of my Government
for their work towards the full accomplishment of the
UNIFIL mandate.
69. The PRESIDENT
fintervretation
from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Jordan. I inviie
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

76.

It is common knowledge that the occupation by de
is only a
mask for an Israeli presence in Lebanon. That presence is
designed to .control the headwaters of the Jordan River
and portions of the Litani River to ensure that Israel has
an ample water supply for its development and progress,
not to mention the purpose Ambassador TuCni spoke of
before the Council on 8 December 1978, when he said:
“Israel has in fact achieved one of two things, or probably both:.pushed its real border further north into our
country [Lebanon] and established through occupation by proxy a shadow client mini-State*’ [220&h
meeting, para. 1241.
1

facto forces of portions of Lebanese territory

70. Mr. SHAMMA
(Jordan): Allow me to extend to
you, Sir, and to your great nation my delegation’s sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I need not dwell on
the cordial and friendly relations between Jordan and the
Soviet Union, but I am certainly confident that, under
your able and wise guidance, the conclusion of the work
at hand will be most fruitful and productive.
71. I wish also to express my delegation’s esteem and
respect to Ambassador Futscher Pereira of Portugal,
your.predecessor, for his excellent work in so ably conducting the Council’s work last month.

77. How can we believe the Israeli representative when
he says before this Council that all along the State of
Israel has been pursuing peace and stability in the area,
when we know that that State has expanded by wars into
the territories of Jordan, Syria, Egypt and now Lebanon?
What kind of peace is the Israeli representative talking
about? Is it the peace that weal1 value asan instrument of
respect for other peoples’ right to live? Or is it the peace
that the Zionists -value as an -instrument for living by
depriving other peoples of their right to live?

72. I must also address the Secretarv-General. Mr. Kurt
Waldheim, and extend to him our he&-t-felt appreciation
and admiration for his selfless and tireless efforts in the
service of peace. These efforts are clearly shown in his
report on the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
One can see in the report the sincerity, courage and
dedication of the Secretary-General and all those
involved in UNIFILin
trying to serve the cause of establishing peace in Southern Lebanon. But one can also see
the forces of evil, namely, those of Israel and its de facro
forces, working against the cause of establishing peace in
that area.

78. I happened to listen to the testimony of 22 witnesses
from the West Bank of Jordan who appeared before the
Security Council Commission established .under resolution 446 (1979) which a month ago travelled to my country to investigate the Israeli establishment of,settlements
in the occupied Arab territories.‘1 am sure that the Commision was moved by .the .testimonies of those 22 wit- ’
nesses for they contained factual information about
Zionist treatment of West Bank Palestinians. That information was enough to turn anybody’s stomach 22 times.
The methods used by the Zionists to deprive the Palestinian people in the West Bank of their livelihood exceed

73. Israel and its Zianist values are a phenomenon of
evil, cruelty and hatred. In the past 30 years, the forces of
Zionism have brought four destructive and miserable
wars to our area; they have deprived a whole people, the
Palestinian people, of their homeland; and now those
same evil Zionist forces are ‘working on the Lebanese
7

by far the brutality of-the methods used by the Nazis
against the Jews. I shall not cite those. methods, lest I be
labelled, as usual, “anti-Semite”.
I shall leave it to the
Commission’s report3 to expose the crimes committed by
the Zionists against the helpless Palestinians in their
homeland. I am sure that it will be a sobering report, a
reminder for the Zionist leaders to resort to reason, to
behave like other .civilized people and, at least, to be
human as other people are.

events in Soutnern Lebanon. We therefore appreciate the
opportunity once again to address the Security ‘Council
on yet another matter dealing directly with the explosive
and dangerous situation in the Middle East. ..
84. Only three months ago, during the Council’s debate
on the situation in the occupied Arab territories, my
delegation, ,in its first statement before ,the United
Nations [212&h meeting], referred to the over-all Middle
East situation and the impemtive need for itsjust solution
as a major consideration in the foreign policy of the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran. Therefore,
we have seized upon this opportunity with great readiness
to express our views and convictions on a matter
-namely, the situation in Southern Lebanon-the
resolution of which carries great substantive ,arid symbolic
value for a comprehensive and just solution of the Middle
East problem.

79. However, we know from experience that the Zionist
mentality is neither civilized nor human, and that the
only way of reaching such a mentality is by an act of the
Security Council, by taking firm and effective measures
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the United
Nations Charter, including those of Chapter VII..
80. Israel should be made to reaiize that peace, security
and stability in the Middle East cannot be achieved by
aggression, invasion, occupation, the deprivation of people and usurpation of their land and resources. Rather,
peace can prevail and security can be maintained only
through Israeli respect for other peoples’ right to live on
their own land in their own homes. The representative of
Israel claims to be a professor of international law, which
should make him qualified and put him in a good position to advise his Zionist cohorts in Israel that international law provides for the respect for the sovereignty
of other States and for ‘their territorial integrity and
political independence. I should like to remind the professor that his own concept of international law providing for the occupation of other peoples’ land is invalid in
civiiized international law. Lebanon is recognized by all
nations as a sovereign State, and all States Members of
this Organization respect its territorial integrity, political
independence and national unity. Israel should be
brought to do likewise-specifically,
to cease its acts of
aggression against Lebanon and to cease support and
assistance to the defacto armed forces so that UNIFIL
can fulfil its mandate in bringing peace and tranquillity to
the Lebanese people.

85. The interim report of 19 April 1979 [S/13258] of the
Secretary-General concerning the United Nations Intel,
rim Force in Lebanon and his report of 8. June 1979
[S/Z3384 candidly and objectively capture the facts
along with the intricacies of the situation in Lebanon as it
exists. If there is one outstanding and indisputable conclusion that emerges from those reports it is that the
alarming nature of the situation and the inability of
UNIFIL to perform its task free of harassment, intimidation and danger are intertwined. That being’the case, a
composite assessment of the causes of this potentially
volatile situation, based on world-wide press accounts
and governmental as well as United Nations reports,
invariably reveals the sinister and self-serving role that
Israel has chosen to play in this situation. But that revelation should not come as a surprise to anyone, for Israeli
intrigue, incursion into and general involvement in the
domestic affairs of Lebanon and its violation of its sovereignty have on numerous occasions been the subject of
reports and resolutions emanating from the Council.
86. The reports of the Secretary-General concerning
UNIFIL to which I referred earlier again document in an
updated context such heedless Israeli behaviour. Paragraph 19 of the report of 19 April and paragraphs 32 and
42 of the report of 8 June in particular combine to illustrate clearly the crucial and pivotal role that Israel exercises in regard to the growing tensions both along the
Israel-Lebanon border and inside sovereign Lebanese
territory. The Security Council for its part, in resolution
444 (1979), has restated its belief that Israeli noncooperation with UNIFIL
efforts fully to implement its
mandate, as well as Israeli assistance to irregular armed
forces in Southern Lebanon, is deplorable and constitutes a formidable obstacle in the path of international
efforts aimed at the reduction of tensions in the area.
Such Israeli behaviour has quite accurately and frequently been described by the Council as a form ofblatant defiance of its resolutions and in violation of the
Charter of the United Nations.

81. The PRESIDENT
(inzerprerazion from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Iran. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
82. Mr. SHEMIRANI
(Iran): Mr. President, as the
Security Council continues its deliberations on sensitive
issues relating to the Middle East conflict, it is a source of
great comfort Bnd confidence for my delegation to see
you with your abundant diplomatic skills and talents
presiding over this month’s proceedings of the Council.
Certainly, your predecessor, the representative of Portugal, by his own skills and abilities greatly facilitated the
difficult task of the Council during the month of May,
and we are certain that that trend will continue during
your term as President of the Council.
83. Given the profound interest of the Islamic Republic
of Iran in a just solution of the Middle East problem and
the stake it has in such a solution, my delegation has been
following with the deepest concern and alarm the recent
3Circulated

on 12 July

1979 as document

S/13450

87. Recent events, marked by Israeli invasion of Lebanese territory and the subsequent loss of innocent civilian
life and destruction of property caused by those vicious
attacks, have served once again to. ‘drive the point
home” regarding Israel’s expansionist, belligerent and

and Corr.1.

8

self-serving mot&es. The banmuptcy of Israeli attnnpts
at justification and pretexts for such unacceptable infringement on the territorial sovereignty, unity and political independence of a Member State has again been
exposed by the facts as they appear.

Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and%o make a statement.
: :_.
93. Mr. EL-CHOUFI
(Syrian Arab Republic):
Mr. President, first of all I feel that I owe you, as the
representative of the Soviet Union, special and untraditional congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. The selfless
friendship between the Soviet Union and my country
already forms part of our national pride. We in Syria
appreciate the role the Soviet Union has played in helping
us to defeat the aggressor, to strengthen our independence and to regain our occupied territories. It is not
incidental that the Soviet Union takes the side of the
oppressed against the oppressor. After all, your country
was the site of the great October Revolution, the first
revcilution ever in human history to place State authority
in the hands of the working people. Allow me to convey,
through you, our utmost appreciation to the great people
of the Soviet Union.

88. The issue,at stake here is a rather basic and fundamental one: whether we, the community of nations, are
going td allow the flagrant and continual violation of the
national and territorial sovereignty of a fellow Member
State. No fabricated or imaginary excuse, pretext, or
smoke-screen, whether in the: form of “punishment
raids” or “peace accords”, should distract our attention
from that very basic fact. Our failure to deal with this
issue resolutely, firmly and in unison will set a dangerous
precedent for the conduct of international relations. The
risks of such ‘failure are particularly high in a region
where conflict, injustice and aggression have for too long
been a part of the political landscape.
89. .The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran
has on several occasions and in various forums addressed
itself to this point, having strongly condemned Israeli
violence and aggression against defenceless and innocent
civilians in Southern Lebanon. That being the case, we
believe that the Council must by its decisions make it
clear that acts of violence and destruction cannot be
tolerated in the region, and that such inhumane actions
emanating from Zionist expansionism and deliberate
Israeli provocations aimed at the destruction of any
chance of a just peace or of guaranteeing the rights of the
Palestinian People, on which the just resolution of the
Middle East conflict ultimately depends, remain intolerable.

94. I should also like to express my appreciation to your
predecessor, Ambassador Futscher Pereira of Portugal,
for his able handling of the Council’s deliberations last
month.
95. The question facing the Council has been a source
of much dismay and distress for all of us, and rightly so.
The sufferings and misery that have been borne by the
Lebanese people under continued Israeli intrusions and
violations of Lebanese sovereignty cannot escape
anyone’s humanitarian and peace-loving concern. It was
in this spirit that the Council mandated the formation of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon in order to
assist the Lebanese Government in restoring peace, tranquillity and normality in its besieged country. Along those
same lines, resolution 444 (1979) called for the drawing
up of the phased programme.of activities to promote the
restoration of Lebanese authority in Southern Lebanon.

90. My delegation wishes to restate its view that any
peace not guaranteeing the rights of the Palestinian people, including the right of return, the right to selfdetermination and the establishment of an independent
State in its homeland, is at best tenuous and at worst
contains the makings of a broader international conflict.
Therefore we believe that any decision regarding issues
related to the Middle East question as a whole, such as the
one we are discussing here today, must keep constant
cognizance of this fact.

96. At the last meeting of the Council in May, the
President said:
“I should like, before I relinquish my presidency, to
address an appeal to all parties, which I hope will be
heeded, to respect the cease-fire in accordance, inter
alia, with the Armistice Agreement, to refrain from all
acts of violence to help UNIFIL to carry out the mission entrusted to it by the Security Council in resolution 425 (1978)” [2146th meeting, para. 743.

91. It is in this understanding, then, that we support
efforts by the Council to strengthen and renew the mandate of UNIFIL and to further the general implementation of the phased programme of activities with the aim of
securing full implementaiion
of the Council’s relevant
resolutions on this issue. Such decisions should ultimately lead to the full return.of the Lebanese Government’s effective authority over all its territory, based on
strict respect for the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
political independence of Lebanon within its internationally recognized boundaries. The alternative to this is the
further aggravation and complication of an already delicate and dangerous situation and, in the final and over-all
analysis, the denial of two universally cherished concepts
that form the underpinnings of the Charter-namely,
global peace and security and world-wide human dignity
based on freedom, equality and justice.

98. For its part, the Palestine Liberation Organization
has declared its willingness to help UNIFIL to carry out
its mandate, as the Secretary-General has recognized in
his report in which he states that:

92. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpreration from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab

“The PLO leadership have recently reaffirmed their
f commitment not to initiate any action from inside the

97. After that solemn appeal, what exactly has transpired to make the convening of the present meetings of
the Security Council imperative? Did the Zionist entity of
Israel desist from or mitigate its acts of aggression against
Lebanon? Have the Israeli aggressors shown any indication so far that they will ever respect the authority of this
august body?

9

UNIFIL area of operation and,have stated that they
will not shell IDF or defaczo forces targets from Lebanese territory unless they are attacked first. It is also
relevant to mention a recent joint communique’isued
,by the’PL0 and the allied Lebanese parties within the
’ context of discussions on the situation in Southern
Lebanon according to, which ‘all armed forces will be
evacuated from villages and towns’ and ‘the PLO will
remove all of its offices from the city of Tyre’.”
[S/13384, para. 38.1

103.’ A year ago, the Secretary-General,,mhis
interim
report of 13 June 1978, [S/12620/,4&.5+like
all his
other subsequent reports, as well as several statements
made by his subordinates-pointed
out that the PLO has
always been co-operative with UNIFIL, and. has been
honest in-helping UNIFIL to discharge its mandate.
104. It goes without saying that the Lebanese Government has also done everything within its power to the
same end. At the same time, we cannot failto note that
Israeli occupation by proxy continues up till this very
moment. We cannot fail to observe that the Israelis’
defiance of the Security Council is still as.strong as ever.
In fact, the Secretary-General, in his latest report, states
that:

.

:

99. I think that all the members of the Council have
carefully read the report, which has provided us with an
even-handed and realistic description of the situation. In
all fairness, one cannot but conclude that the expansionist authorities of Zionist Israel are still persisting in their
arrogant defiance of the authority of the Council and in
perpetuating their expansionist schemes against Lebanon. To give just one example, I should like to
remind Council members of the moving appeal made by
the representatives of Lebanon before this august
body on 31 May. He said:

“UNIFIL
has recorded a total of 291 such border
violations during the period under review. Themost
serious border violation occurred on 9 May when a
sizeable unit of the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF)
entered into the UNIFIL area of operation manned by
the Irish battalion in the vicinity of Shaqra.” [S/13384,
.para.28.]

“One war in the South, if allowed to develop, will
inevitably lead to another, and Lebanon ‘will then
become again the arena it has been for almost five years
now, unable to rebuild its national institutions and
recover the unique position it occupied in the Arab
world, and the world at large, in politics, and beyond in
the broad realm of human achievements.” [224&h

105. I cannot but endorse the important conclusion of
the Secretary-General in the same report that achange in
the position of the Israeli authorities is yet another prerequisite for significant progress. But, of course, I for one
believe that unless the Security Council rises up to its
responsibility and resorts to other actions which it is
empowered to take in accordance with the Charter and in
the interest of international peace and order, there will
never be any change in the position of the present Israeli
leadership.

meeting, para. 31.1

He concluded his statement by saying:
“SO let US see to it together that the Council’s debate
shall lead to a resolution that will express both our
concern for peace-keeping and the confidence and
faith of the soldiers of peace who chose to imperil their
lives waging peace, not war.” [Bid., para. 35.1

106. We fear that if there were.a change in the Israeli
position, it would indeed be for the worse. Encouraged by
its separate peace treaty with Egypt, Israel would indeed
increase its aggressiveness and arrogance and its defiance
of the authority of the Council. Israel in fact has not
failed to reveal its particular concept of what its leaders
shamelessly call a “peace settlement”: at the same time
that they claim their adherence to the principleof peaceful settlement, they intensify their acts of provocation in
the West Bank, the Golan Heights, Southern Lebanon
and elsewhere.

100. At the very same meeting, the representative of
expansionist Israel had merely this to say:
“the Government of Israel has the right and, indeed,
the duty to take all the measures necessary to protect
the lives and safety of its citizens” [ibid., para. JO].
And he went on to describe this as the “right” of the
Israelis to strike wherever they wish and to kill whomever
they wish under the pretext of “security”.

107. It is relevant to quote the following excerpt from
an article in The New York Times of this morning reporting on a debate in the Knesset over the latest settlement
near Nablus:

101. The Israeli authorities, from the terrorist Begin
down, do not hesitate to defend State terrorism. This is
indeed reminiscent of the Nazist ideology, under which
Hitler gave himself the right to expand, to terrorize others
in order to satisfy his imperialist schemes. Like Hitler, the
Israelis advocate the ideology of the “chosen people”,
which is another version of Hitler’s ideology of “German
supremacy”- and both of these served as pretexts for
colonial expansion even at the cost of annihilating
another people.

-“Mr. Sharon” -the Israeli Minister of Agriculture- “‘defended the establishment of Elon Moreh on
a hill near Nablus and the confiscation of privately
owned Arab land nearby as moves that would guarantee the security of the West Bank’s main north-south
road.
“. . . he said the site had actually been designated for
Jewish settlement in November 1967, several.months
after the war, by the ministerial security committee of a
Government led by the Labour Party.

102. I realize that we are here to deal with practical and
not ideological questions and, reserving further comments on the rotten ideology of Zionism, I shall try to
confine my remarks to the very practical side of the
problem facing us today.

“He said that years before the’ 1967 war*‘-1 repeat:
“years before the 1967 war”-“the
Israeli military had
10
I

so, must resort to the following two feasible actions.
First, it is imperatiye that the mandate of UNIFIL
be
redefined in order to enable the Force to carry out that
mandate. Being a United Nations, peace-keeping force,
UNIFIL must have adequate military credibility to enable it to carry out its mandate: In many of its resolutions
the Council has referred to the possibility of resorting t!o
“other measures*‘. I think that it-i8 high time that the
Council told the world what those “other measures”may
be. That is why H(e think that UNIFIL
should be empowered at least to defend itself when it is attacked either
by the Israeli army and/or their henchmen, the so-called
irregular forces of Major Saad Haddad. Secondly, we
completely agree with the Lebanese proposal that it is
necessary to reactivate the Israel-Lebanon
Mixed
Armistice Commission, We believe that there must be
neutral, credible and reliable observers to inform the
Council who, between Lebanon and Israel, really is violating the cease-fire agreement and who between them is
violating whose borders.

planned to seize the area because of its s&ategic
importance.
“Mr. Sharon said critics who said settlements in the
occupied areas were endangering,peace did not understand that the issue was part of the struggle against the
establishment of a Palestinian ‘State.
“ ‘Accordingly’, he said, ‘Israel will go ahead with its
settlement programme. No fifth column will prevent it,
and no band of hypocrites will succeed in undermining
true Zionism.’ *’
.
108. Apparently the Zionists’ understanding of peace is
unique: they want to annihilate the Palestinian Arab
people, subjugate all the Arab lands to their colonialist
schemes and deceive the world at large by still claiming
their “adherence*’ to peace. It is clear that, to be achievable, peace in the Middle East must be just and
comprehensive.
109. I cannot but reiterate that we in the Middle East
and the Member States of the United Nations at large,
and especially this august body, cannot depend on the
“good intentions” of the Zionists. I further believe that
deep in our hearts we are aware that the aggressor will
never voluntarily withdraw from its aims and intentions;
it will have to be compelled to do so.

112. In conclusion I should like to remind the Israelis
that The Christian Science Monitor stated in an editorial
on 5 June that the Israelis have some serious thinking to
do on their Government’s illegal settlements in the West
Bank, Gaza, the Golan Heights and elsewhere, But they
have more serious thinking to do concerning their very
existence in the Middle East. Policies advocated by.the
terrorist Mr. Begin and his like cannot secure their future,
Their Government’s arrogance in Southern Lebanon and
elsewhere can never pave the way to a peaceful settlement
in the Middle East.

110. History bears out that truth. That is why we wish
to make an e&nest appeal to the Security Council todeal
with this arrogant aggressor-Israel-as
it deserves. We
know that because of the steady position taken so far by
one permanent member of the Council-the
United
States-the
Council will be barred from taking the appropriate measures against expansionist Israel under Chapter VII of the Charter. But we think that there are two
feasible actions that must be adopted, and we hope that
the United States will not go on using the same damaging
tactic which it always has used-that
is, blindly supporting the aggressor-because
the stakes in Southern
Lebanon are too high to be compromised. I am tempted
to say that the failure by the Council to help in putting an
end to the tragidy going on in Southern Lebanon would
result in a still bigger tragedy that might go beyond
Lebanon and the Middle East.

113. We in Syria and in the Arab world earnestly hope
that conscious awareness of the real interests of the great
majority in Israel will triumph over policies of expansionism, terrorism and anachronistic imperialist ambitions.
We are confident that truth and justice will triumph over
the terrorist Begin and his like.
114. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): I
thank the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic for
his kind words about my country and me personally. For
my part, I too would like to express my satisfaction
regarding the friendly relations existing between Syria
and the Soviet Union.
115. The representative of Israel has asked to be allowed
to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

111. I subscribe to the contention of the SecretarvGeneral and other fair-minded authorities that the situ&
tion in Southern Lebanon is internally linked to the
over-all Middle East problem and that, therefore, the
final solution in Lebanon truly lies in the solution of the
core of the Middle East problem, that is, in a just and
lasting settlement of the Palestinian question, a settlement which would fulfil their right to self-determination
in their own homeland and the thoroughgoing rectification of the historical injustice committed against the
Palestinian people. However, I believe that it is the duty
of the Council to spare Lebanon more suffering and more
bloodshed and to spare us all more abuse and arrogance
from the Zionists. That is to say, that the Council, in our
view, is indeed in a position to deal with the situation in
Southern Lebanon independently and separately from its
efforts to reach a comprehensive, just and durable peace
in the Middle East. In that context, my Government
believes that the Council can and, if you allow me to say

116. Mr. BLUM (Israel): The Jordanian representative
came here today to exploit this debate and professed to
express concern about the situation in Lebanon. How
quickly memories fade! When the terrorist PLO threatened to do to his country what it is now doing to
Lebanon, Jordan had no hesitation in removing that
threat in the most brutal way possible. Has the Jordanian
representative forgotten the so-called Black September of
1970 when Jordanian tanks and artillery massacred thousands of Palestinian Arabs and expelled the PLO from
Jordanian territory? Has he forgotten Yasser Arafat’s
statement to journalists at Beirut on 24 October 1970 that
the fighting between his followers and Jordanian troops
“claimed about 20,000 victims, dea’d or wounded”? Has
the Jordanian
representative
forgotten
that PLO
11

members fled to Israel in 1970 to escape his Government’s repression? Now he comes to the Security Council
to shed crocodile tears over Lebanon’s fate because that
unfortunate country has been less successful than his own
in destroying the terrorists. Let me also refer the Jordanian representative to the statement by his monarch to the
senior editor of Newsweek. Arnaud de Borchgrave, at the
height of the Lebanese civil war in 1976. King Hussein
told Newsweek that, as a result of its activities in
Lebanon,

own barbarities against the Lebanese population certainly are. Less than a year ago the world was appalled
and outraged as Syrian forces indiscriminately
shelled
populated civilian areas of Beirut itself. Syrian artillery
relentlessly shelled the city, killing hundreds of innocent
men, women and children and turning half a million
more into refugees. With that record, the Syrian representative should have the good grace to abstain from
further comment on the Lebanese situation-while his own
country’s occupying forces remain on Lebanese soil.

“the PLO has weakened, perhaps irreparably, its argument that Jews, Moslems and Christians could live in
harmony, side by side, in a future greater Palestine”.

119. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
The representative of Syria has asked to be allowed to
exercise the right of reply. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

117. Syria, with its army of occupation still on Lebanese soil, is hardly more qualified to comment on Lebanon’s sovereignty and independence. The memory of the
Syrian representative appears to be shorter still than that
of his Jordanian colleague. When his country’s armed
forces illegally intervened in the Lebanese war, they ruthlessly killed thousands of Palestinian Arabs, prompting
PLO terror attacks against targets in the heart of Syria.
After PLO terrorists, who had attacked the Semiramis
Hotel at Damascus, were publicly hanged in a Damascus
square in September 1976, Syrian President Hafez AlAssad stated:

120. Mr. EL-CHOUFI
(Syrian Arab Republic): We are
all already used to the diversionary tactics of the representative of Israel who always tries to shift the discussion
from the subject under consideration to other matters. As
concerns the Syrian presence in Lebanon I should like,
just for the record, to state that the fact of the matter is
‘that the Syrian force is part of the Arab deterrent force
and is under the direct command of the Lebanese
Government. Because of Syria’s long and close historical
ties with Lebanon, it responded to the latter’s call for
assistance in bolstering its presence and authority in the
south where it has been and continues to be besieged by
continual Israeli aggression.

“The only thing these PLO leaders wanted was to
attack Syria.. . We condemn this act of terror committed by a gang of traitors and criminals.”

121. The Syrian force is more than ready to leave
Lebanon the moment the Lebanese Government indicates its desire to terminate the mission of the Arab’
deterrent force. If Israel stops its aggression against tebanese territory and stops instigating armed provocations
in the south by ending its criminal support of the renegade Major Haddad, then there will be no cause forthe
Arab deterrent force to remain there.

His Defence Minister, General Mustafa Tlass accused the
PLO of planning “the massacre of Lebanon”. Writing in
the official Syrian army newspaper Tishrin on 10 September 1976, General Tlass remarked that the PLO
“arouse nothing but disgust among all honest Arab
citizens”.
118. But if Syria’s own actions against the PLO are not
sufficient reason for it to stay out of this debate, then its

The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.’

.

:

12

.,

.:

1
,
I

_’

. .

:

HOH;

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS PUBLICATIONS

Unite 1 Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Secti~.
New. York or Geneva.
COMMBN+

SE PROCURER

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

’

UNIES

M publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
d&ositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aup*
de votre libmire ou admssen-vous
A : Nations Unies. Section des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
KAK

*auIey
HausR.

HOJIYUHTb

H%HAHUX

zuiarn~o~
Yarasme
Ceaum no nponaxe

COMO CONSEGUIR

OPI-AHH

3AUHH

OWJxEAHHEHHMX

nnH nmmi~e
nd alpecy : Opranajauna
ns~annR.
Hbm-Hapa
HRH Xemeaa.

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

HAUHR

Ob-benaaexHbrx

UNIDAS

Las publicacionm
de las Naciones
Unidas
e&An en vents en librertas
y casas distribuidom
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas. Seccidn de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations. New York

Price: tu.s.

1.50

79-70002-February

1982-2.250
