126

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

Economic Rights and Duties of States, to be convened for
three weeks in1985, to carry out the review mentioned in
paragraph I above, and requests the Committee to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its fortieth session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report
on the implementation of the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States, to be submitted to the Ad Hoe Com­
mittee in1985.

103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/164. Report of the Intergovernmental Committee
on Science and Technology for Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Vienna Programme of Action on Science

and Technology for Development 5 and General Assembly
resolution34/218 of19 December I979 .
Noting the forthcoming mid-decade review of the imple­
mentation of the Vienna Programme of Action to be con­
sidered by the Intergovernmental Committee at its sev­
enth session in the context of the review and appraisal of
the International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade,6
l. Takes note of the report of the Intergovernmental
Committee on Science and Technology for Development
on its sixth session7 and of Economic and Social Council
decisions1984/168 and1984/169 of25 July1984:
2. Supports the initiatives of the Intergovernmental
Committee with a view to strengthening its role and effec­
tiveness and, in particular, its decision to adopt a selective
approach that will enable it, at each of its sessions, to con­
duct deliberations of greater depth by selecting in advance
themes for .consideration; 8
3. Notes, in this context, that information systems for
science and technology for development have been selec­
ted as the theme for consideration at the seventh session of
the Intergovernmental Committee in 1985 and that the
two themes selected for the eighth session are mobilization
of resources for science and technology for development
for developing countries and technology applied to
agricultural development and related development areas. 9

103rd plenary meeting
17 December /984

39/165. Critical situation of food and agriculture in
Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions320 I (S-VI) and3202 (S-VI) of

I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Pro­
gramme of Action on the Establishment of a New Interna­
tional Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, and3362 (S-VII) of16 September 1975
on development and international economic co-operation.
Gravely concerned at the dramatic deterioration in food
and agricultural production in Africa, as a result of which
there has been an alarming increase in the number of
5 Report of the United Nations Conference on Snence and Technology ji,r
Development. Vienna, 20-31 August 1979 (United Nations publication, Sales

No. E.79.1.21 and corrigenda), chap. VII.
6 Resolution 35/56, annex.

7 Official Records of the General Assemhli-. Thmy-ninth Sessum, Supple
ment No. 37 (A/39/37).
8 Ibid., annex, resolution 6 (VI), sect I. para. I

people exposed to hunger. malnutrition and even starva­
tion.
Recognizing the special emphasis placed upon food and
agriculture and the undertaking and resolve of Africa to
devote its scarce resources on a priority basis to the reha­
bilitation of food and agricultural production as reflected
in and in accordance with the Lagos Plan of Action for the
Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Econo­
mic Development of Africa, 10
Faking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the critical situation of food and agriculture in Africa. 11
Noting the exacerbation of Africa's food and agricultural
crisis by the adverse impact of prolonged drought and
accelerating desertification and. moreover, that the
African countries have been hit by adverse external forces,
including falling trade earnings resulting from the global
economic recession. the worsening terms of trade and the
debt crisis,
Convinced that the food and agricultural crisis in Africa
has a long genesis and has been rendered more acute by
natural factors, such as poor rainfall, widespread bush
fires, unusually severe crop infestation, and epidemics of
plant and animal diseases,
Welcoming the adoption, on25 July1984, by the Thir­
teenth FAO Regional Conference for Africa, of the Harare
Declaration on the food crisis in Africa, prepared by the
African Ministers for Agriculture and Rural Development,
I. Reaffirms its resolution 38/159 of 19 December
1983 , as well as all other relevant resolutions on the criti­
cal situation of food and agriculture in Africa, and calls for
their immediate and effective implementation;
1
Welcomes the conclusions and recommendations of
the World Food Council at its tenth ministerial session.
held at Addis Ababa from11 to15 June1984, 12 in partic­
ular those relating to the African region:
3. Notes with appreciation the encouraging response by
the international community to the various appeals made
for the alleviation of the present critical food supply situa­
tion in Africa;
4. Welcomes the unanimous adoption by the Commit­
tee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes on8 November
1984 of a resolution on the food crisis in Africa, 13 and calls
for its full and prompt implementation;
5. Urges the international community, in view of the
continued critical food supply situation in a large number
of African countnes, to sustain and increase its efforts to
provide the additional food aid required on an emergency
basis, as well as technical and other forms of assistance
needed in that connection;
6 . Urges the international community also to respond
generously to the urgent need for agricultural inputs for the
rehabilitation of agriculture and animal husbandry;
7. Calls upon the international community to continue
to support efforts undertaken by African countries at the
national, subregional and regional levels to increase food
production through, inter alia, the provision, on a priority
and long-term basis, of additional financial and technical
assistance to Africa by organizations of the United
Nations system, such as the International Fund for
Agricultural Development, the United Nations Develop­
ment Programme and other organizations involved in the
Ibid.. para. 3.
IOAJS-11114, annex I
I I A/39/270-E/1984,97.
I 2 See Ofjicial Records of the General -tssl'lnblr. Thirtr-ninth Snsion, Sup­
{'lcment No. 19 (A/39/19), part one.
11WFP1CFA: 18/18 ·\dd.l para. 34
Q
