United Nations

S/PV.6075

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6075th meeting
Friday, 23 January 2009, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ripert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Butagira
Sir John Sawers
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-21747 (E)

*0921747*

S/PV.6075

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President (spoke in French): I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the representatives
of Canada, the Czech Republic, India, Jordan,
Morocco, Nigeria, Pakistan and Uruguay to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council’s
agenda, without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): I propose, with
the consent of the Council and in accordance with the
provisions of article 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, to extend an invitation to Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Field Support; Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti; and
Ms. Lila Ratsifandrihamanana, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I should like, first of all, to thank my colleagues
and the invitees for their participation in the debate that
we have organized today under the French presidency
of the Council. Collectively, participants represent the
key branches of the Secretariat responsible for carrying
out peacekeeping operations, several of the main troop
contributors from every geographical group, the two
regional organizations with the most extensive
cooperation on the ground with the United Nations and
countries responsible for a very large portion of the
financing for peacekeeping operations.

2

It seems to us that it is high time that the Council
hold a debate on peacekeeping, which has and
continues to make it possible to achieve great things, in
particular thanks to the skill and dedication of the staff
of the United Nations. However, peacekeeping also has
its shortcomings and problems. In that connection, the
analyses contained in the Brahimi report (S/2000/809)
and the conclusions reached by the Council itself
almost 15 years ago, as reflected in its presidential
statement (S/PRST/1994/62) of 1994, are as relevant as
ever.
However, we are at a critical juncture as a result
of the scale of our engagement, deteriorating
conditions, the increasing complexity of mandates and
the growing constraints on our resources. All of us
acknowledge that the situation calls for a response.
Numerous initiatives have been launched, beginning
with the Secretariat’s own efforts but including also
those of others, including our Canadian friends. I am
sure that they will tell us about them in due course.
Nevertheless, the Security Council has a special
responsibility, both because the Charter confers upon it
the responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and because it is the Council that
defines peacekeeping operations. In that connection,
there has been significant improvement in the way that
the Council carries out its own work, including in its
daily activities and in its relations with the main
protagonists in the area of peacekeeping.
It is for those reasons that France and the United
Kingdom have sought to initiate a debate in the
Council on how we can make the improvements that
are so necessary. In that regard, we circulated a
background document to serve as the focus of the first
informal exchange among the members of the Council
during the informal seminar we hosted yesterday at the
French Mission in cooperation with the British
Mission. The Ambassador of the United Kingdom and I
could provide participants with more information about
that. However, we feel that the very first stage of that
undertaking should be to listen to the planners and
organizers of peacekeeping operations and those
responsible for their day-to-day functioning, including
special
representatives,
troop
and
financing
contributors and others providing support for this
crucial activity. Success would not be possible without
them.
The Council must of course be responsible for its
own duties, but it must also be in a better position to
09-21747

S/PV.6075

discharge its peacekeeping responsibilities. That is a
collective function in which everyone must play their
part. In turn, every voice must be listened to carefully.
It is therefore my pleasure now to give the floor to
participants.
At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations; Ms. Susana Malcorra,
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support; and
Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. I now give the floor to
Mr. Le Roy.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): The United
Nations turned an important corner 10 years ago. The
year 1999 was one of profound changes for
peacekeeping operations as well as for international
peace and security. The reports on Srebrenica, the
operations in Rwanda and the monumental failure of
the United Nation Operation in Somalia led to great
introspection and, ultimately, to new ways of thinking
about peacekeeping. That undertaking was in great part
possible thanks to the report (S/2000/809) of the HighLevel Panel on United Nations Peace Operations,
known as the Brahimi report, which was published in
2000.
A surge in peacekeeping operations in 2000
resulted in an increase in personnel from 14,000 to
about 40,000. This growth has been ongoing and
continues today, exactly a decade later, with over
112,000 personnel deployed and many more to come
with the strengthening of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), the ongoing development of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and the authorization of an
enlarged mission in Chad. These numbers will continue
to increase in the coming weeks. As Council members
know, planning and preparation for a potential new
mission in Somalia is also under way.
Today, we are more numerous and widely spread
than at any time in our history, with mandates that are,
as members know, both more complex and more robust
than ever. These Council mandates reflect, of course, a
better appreciation by the international community of
the complexities of current conflicts, as well as the
desire for more comprehensive peace settlements by
the various parties to the conflicts.

09-21747

The last decade has also, as I mentioned, been a
time to rethink United Nations peacekeeping
operations, undertake reforms within the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and gradually
strengthen the professionalism of our operations. We
have seen many improvements. We have clarified our
thinking on peace operations and strengthened the
institutional capacity of the United Nations to support
them. Nevertheless, as we can all see, much remains to
be done.
The growth in United Nations peacekeeping over
the past years clearly reflects its success and its
necessity. These operations can indeed provide the
international community with a credible response to
assist in the implementation of peace agreements; they
can also provide a platform for a wide range of
assistance and support to help countries move from
conflict to stability; and they can, of course, bring the
legitimacy of the United Nations and its neutrality to
bear, so it can serve as an honest broker in many
instances. Ultimately, they have proven to be a flexible
and resilient tool in the maintenance of peace and
security.
(spoke in English)
Yet, as Council members are well aware, the last
10 years have not always brought good news. We have
faced operational challenges in almost all of our
theatres of deployment and the reform at Headquarters
has not always resulted in as much improvement as is
needed. The implementation of the Brahimi
recommendations, the Peace Operations 2010 reform
agenda, and most recently, the Secretary-General’s
initiatives to create two strengthened departments —
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support (DFS) — have all been a
manifestation of our desire to strive constantly to do
the job of peacekeeping better.
The Council has been our partner in this ongoing
process and we want to assure members of our
continued
commitment
to
this
agenda
for
professionalization and improvement. We are open to
new ways of tackling persistent challenges and to new
ways of doing business in partnership with the Security
Council, the General Assembly and our operational
partners.
I believe that 2009 is a pivotal year for
peacekeeping. A number of our missions face risks that
are so significant that there is a potential for mission

3

S/PV.6075

failure, with terrible consequences for the entire United
Nations.
In the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the parties recently brought the country to the brink of
catastrophe and MONUC was hard-pressed to manage
the crisis. The mission was called upon to support the
Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo in combat even as it crumbled and at the same
time protect hundreds of thousands of civilians spread
across a vast area.
In Darfur, UNAMID continues to face difficulties
in deploying, while the parties on the ground are
increasingly belligerent and the political negotiations
move slowly. Even at full strength, UNAMID will
continue to face daunting challenges. Over 2.5 million
refugees and internally displaced persons look to
UNAMID for protection. At the same time, as members
know, the Mission still lacks the helicopters that would
provide the mobility essential to carry out its important
mandate.
As I speak, our DPKO and DFS colleagues are on
an assessment mission looking at the situation in
Somalia. The Security Council’s resolution on the
intention to establish a future United Nations
peacekeeping operation is clear. In the interim, our
colleagues in DFS now face the dual challenge of
continuing to prepare and plan for a mission that will
undoubtedly face tremendous operational hurdles while
simultaneously strengthening and supporting the
African Union Mission in Somalia. As members know,
there remains no peace to keep in Somalia.
It is clear that United Nations peacekeeping is
overstretched. We face operational overstretch and, I
would argue, political overstretch too. With 18
operations deployed in five continents and with 78,000
military, 11,500 police and 23,500 civilians deployed,
the operational challenge of maintaining full support to
all our missions and mounting new ones is far beyond
what the Brahimi reforms envisaged. They were scaled
to allow the United Nations to launch one
peacekeeping operation per year. Only last week, the
Security Council voted through two new mandates for
Chad and for a potential mission into Somalia.
Meanwhile, we are still in the deployment phase in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Darfur. That
represents four operations at the same time for DFS in
particular.

4

At the same time, our missions carry out
mandates that represent much more than the
deployment of uniformed personnel. Many are
fundamentally political operations supporting complex
transitions to peace within deeply divided countries.
Even with well-crafted mandates, these missions need
continuous and concerted international support as they
manage constant tactical and political adjustments on
the ground. Even after the adoption of a resolution, this
support is clearly badly needed. Yet for many of our
missions, there is no consensus in the international
community regarding the optimal political direction.
Therefore, we face three sets of fundamental
questions. First, is peacekeeping being developed
beyond its capabilities? Is the current model of
peacekeeping up to the challenges of these new
mandates? Does it have the right resources? Are there
sufficient troops of requisite capabilities? Can we find
the air assets essential to meeting these robust
mandates with mobility and deterrence? In too many
cases, the answer is no. There is now a constant strain
between mandates and resources and between
expectations and our capacity to deliver, and there is a
strain on Secretariat resources to plan, manage and
support our current pace and scale of operations. My
colleague and friend, Susana Malcorra, will speak
more about the operational challenges that lie
immediately ahead.
Secondly, is the United Nations properly
configured to manage the complexity of the
peacebuilding challenges that are at the heart of
resolving internal conflict and civil war? Many of our
peacekeeping missions are early peacebuilding
missions, but do we have the expertise and resources
necessary to rapidly deploy and plan the complex and
long-term assistance required to support national actors
in rebuilding their States? The linkage of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council in
aligning political direction, aid strategies and donor
support is an important issue. The linkage of the
missions, the United Nations country teams and
international financial institutions and bilateral donors
on the ground is, of course, equally important. We are
working hard on these partnerships, and we have done
a lot to integrate the United Nations response on the
ground. However, there is much left to be done if,
together, we are to provide a comprehensive
peacebuilding response. I am conscious that this is an
issue that will be addressed in an upcoming report of

09-21747

S/PV.6075

the Secretary-General in March, so I will not dwell
extensively on it here.
The third type of question — and probably the
most fundamental for peacekeeping — is the question
of where peacekeeping fits into the overall political
response of the international community to complex
crises. Are the political and regional dimensions which
drive the crisis being adequately addressed, and is
peacekeeping the right tool to do that? Is there even, in
many cases, a peace to keep? Peacekeeping, however
well resourced, will simply not be sufficient where the
parties are not willing to achieve peace. Indeed, over
the past few years we have seen increasing signs of
non-cooperation from host Governments and increased
resistance from some parties to conflict to our presence
and actions.
Many of these questions were of course raised in
the broad Brahimi process, and we would do well to
return to take a look at how recommendations have, or
have not been implemented. Some of the issues we
face have arisen since the Brahimi reforms. Indeed,
United Nations peacekeeping as a whole also faces
questions of a more systemic nature: a deepening world
economic crisis that will further limit our resources and
our flexibility to respond to crises and changed
circumstances on the ground, normative and legal
developments in the fight to end impunity and ensure
justice that have repercussions for peacekeeping
operations,
and
increased
demand
for
the
implementation of protection of civilian mandates,
among other questions.
The very fact that we are engaged in this dialogue
now, and not after a catastrophe, is an important
indication of the seriousness of our collective intent to
strengthen United Nations peacekeeping. If we act in
concert, together we can ensure that peacekeeping does
not falter, as it did in the 1990s.
United Nations peacekeeping has proven
remarkably resilient and has established a good track
record. It is a uniquely universal burden-sharing
arrangement and enjoys a high degree of legitimacy
when used appropriately. It combines military response
within an integrated civilian approach, a critical
attribute that gives it a niche role in the spectrum of
options for the maintenance of peace and security. But
it is not a tool for all situations. When used
inappropriately, its failures can tarnish not just the
image of the operation in question, but the credibility

09-21747

of the Organization as a whole as the guarantor of
peace and security that saves succeeding generations
from the scourge of war.
Yet, there are also areas of potential opportunity
which we should bear in mind as we consider the
challenges. There is an increased engagement of
regional organizations as instruments for the
maintenance of regional peace and security. How best
should they, and the United Nations, fit into an overall
international capability? There is an increased
recognition by international and regional financial
institutions of the need for early engagement in fragile
post-conflict countries. The new Chairman of the
World Bank was very clear on this issue. And of
course, we now have an increased interest by Member
States to support United Nations peacekeeping. We,
collectively, must transform these opportunities into
structural supports for United Nations peacekeeping.
United Nations peacekeeping is a unique
partnership, in which we all have a stake. It is an
endeavour of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, of contributing nations and host nations, of
the Secretariat and the field missions, of individual
peacekeepers and the populations where they are
deployed, who hope for security and a better future. We
all need to work together to protect the investments we
have made and the successes we have achieved. That
calls for a renewed consensus on the state of
peacekeeping, its challenges and its way forward.
In order to move together to face our new set of
challenges as one, I feel that there are some
fundamental questions we must ask ourselves, for
which we must find solutions together. Do we share a
common vision of what United Nations peacekeeping
can and cannot do? Do we have a common vision of
how United Nations peacekeeping differs from other
options for peace and security? Can better conflict
prevention avoid demands for peacekeeping? Do we
understand the limits of peacekeeping and its
comparative strengths? Have we entered an era where
we appreciate that United Nations peacekeeping is the
institution of first resort for some situations but is illsuited for others? What other tools can be called upon
reliably when United Nations peacekeeping is not the
best instrument?
Within DPKO, we have struggled with some of
these questions in the enunciation of our internal
publication — the so-called capstone doctrine — on

5

S/PV.6075

principles and guidelines for United Nations
peacekeeping, which sets out our views, from the
implementation perspective, about what modern
peacekeeping is doing and what it is able to do. It
builds upon the Brahimi review process and captures
internal lessons and good practices that we have
learned. This effort to arrive at a common vision is not
easy, even internally, and it would surely be even more
difficult across a partnership as diverse as the United
Nations peacekeeping partnership. But it is this sort of
intellectual endeavour that will be at the heart of
establishing a common vision for the future. We can
then construct solutions to impediments through an
honest exchange on what is working and what is not.
To ensure that United Nations peacekeeping
remains a viable and indeed a stronger instrument for
the future, I believe we need to follow two
simultaneous tracks this year. First, we must survive
the current operational workload and the looming
challenges in the months ahead. This demands concrete
and practical action on several fronts. For example, we
must find short-term measures to close the gap between
the troops and material we are able to raise and the
authorized levels needed to meet our mandates. At the
same time, we must begin to find new potential
contributors to the peacekeeping endeavour.
To deploy at high pace into remote territories, we
must find innovative ways to draw on support which
only Member States can provide. The recent support in
moving materiel for UNAMID is an example of the
sort of assistance that, on a larger scale, may be needed
to establish fully and quickly those underdeployed and
expanding missions.
We need on-hand capacities to reinforce missions
from the strategic level if a crisis erupts. Contingency
plans for those likely crisis spots must begin to emerge
immediately. In missions where we have stabilized the
peace process, but where lack of peacebuilding
investment is threatening gains — such as in Haiti,
Liberia and Afghanistan — critical resources need to
flow to shore up peacekeeping efforts. And we need, of
course, to find ways to intensify and sustain political
efforts — a political surge if you will — to support
peace processes or to help realize peace where it has
not yet been realized.
I will dwell for a minute on that last point of
political support. Too often, missions are launched only
to find themselves later being tested on the ground as

6

they pursue their mandates. When these missions are
tested, as we recently were in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo or as we were with the United Nations
Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea and as we are
continually in Darfur, it is not just the mission that is
being tested. It is a test of the will of the international
community and of the Security Council.
In those situations, the mission, while needing to
play its part, must also act knowing that the political
response will also come from the strategic level. In
those situations, the unified voice of the Security
Council — an unequivocal political message — and
behind-the-scenes political pressure from key players
in the Council and countries in the region are critical.
Peacekeeping and political leverage must work
together. Political support from the Security Council
can assist in other ways too, for example in mobilizing
troops and other resources through démarches and
bilateral engagements with prospective troop and
police contributors.
The Secretariat needs continuous support from
the Security Council and Member States after a
resolution is adopted. At the same time, we are, of
course, ready to work with the Security Council to
ensure that it has the information it needs to craft
mandates with relevant benchmarks and to engage with
the Council in monitoring and evaluating them.
That leads me to the second track of work: we
may need to tackle larger, systemic challenges. We
need to bolster — and, in some instances, mend — the
global partnership that we need for a healthy and wellfunctioning United Nations peacekeeping system.
United Nations peacekeeping is effective only if all
actors have a shared vision of what that instrument can
and cannot achieve.
Much needs to be done to achieve a better
convergence of views. Peacekeeping, although owned
by all, is not commonly understood by all. Today we
find ourselves looking at a very complex puzzle from
different angles and with differing assumptions and
expectations. The Secretariat, the troop and police
contributors, the Fourth and Fifth Committees of the
General Assembly and, of course, this body, the
Security Council — each of us carries a fragment of
the puzzle that is peacekeeping. Those puzzle pieces
must be brought closer together than they are today.
I hope that we can harness our intellectual
energies and our capacity to come together to solve

09-21747

S/PV.6075

problems in order to address some of the persistent
challenges we face. For that reason, I am extremely
grateful for the debate that is starting today. It marks
the beginning of a process of reflection in the Security
Council.

we in the Secretariat are fully mobilized to engage in
such reflection with the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the contingent contributors and all actors in
order to come up with recommendations and very
specific solutions as soon as possible.

The Council is, of course, a major part of the
equation, but others need to act as well. Several weeks
ago, Susana Malcorra and I initiated an internal process
of introspection and stock-taking to review how far we
have come in the Brahimi process and to consider how
to meet new challenges on the horizon even as we
grapple with today’s urgent issues. We need to look at
our own house and to find new and innovative ways to
tackle the challenges of modern peacekeeping. We will,
of course, share our findings with the Security Council
and the General Assembly with a view to building
consensus on the way forward and sharing our
reflections.

Obviously, we consider this debate to be an
essential first step on that path. We recall that, for all of
us, success requires a clear vision of the instrument
that we want to have and, of course, the need to
achieve it by consensus. To that end, we need both
determination and unity.

The General Assembly, the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee are
absolutely pivotal actors in that partnership. The
Secretariat looks forward to continuing its ongoing
dialogue with the Special Committee and the Fifth
Committee in the coming session on many
peacekeeping issues that lie squarely within the
Assembly’s remit. I hope that 2009 can be a decisive
moment for re-energizing our thinking on how we can
better support United Nations peacekeeping. With
troop contributors, police contributors and those who
fund capacity-building efforts, we need to build a fully
functional dialogue on what is needed. The first step in
strengthening our partnership is to work together
constructively to develop a more shared appreciation of
what United Nations peacekeeping is today and can be
tomorrow.
(spoke in French)
Too often, changes in attitudes and operational
changes come only after crises. It is our fervent hope
that this time we will not need to have a new
generation of reports on regrettable operations and
major failures — such as those that followed the
tragedies in Rwanda and Srebrenica — before we seek
solutions to the new challenges besetting us.
The year 2009 needs to be a year of both new
ideas and success on the ground. Obviously, it must be
a year of cooperation and tangible solutions. Now is
the time to reinvigorate our thinking about partnership
as it relates to peacekeeping operations. For our part,

09-21747

The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Le
Roy for his detailed briefing on what the Department
has done and is continuing to do.
I now give the floor to Ms. Susana Malcorra,
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support.
Ms. Malcorra (spoke in Spanish): I take great
pleasure in coming before the Security Council today
as Under-Secretary-General of the Department of Field
Support in the first of what I hope will be a series of
discussions on the future of peacekeeping operations in
the United Nations. In that context, I am grateful for
the opportunity to inform members about some of the
challenges facing us in the area of field support.
Undoubtedly, a process of cross-fertilization of ideas
regarding support issues, on the one hand, and
substantive issues, on the other, is what is needed at
this time, and it is absolutely critical that we address
that.
(spoke in English)
My friend and colleague, Alain Le Roy, has
clearly articulated that we in the United Nations
peacekeeping community are at a new watershed after
a decade of unprecedented expansion. Structurally,
Secretary-General Ban recognized that soon after he
had taken office, when he proposed the creation of a
new department specifically dedicated to the staffing
and equipping of United Nations field-based peace
operations. The newest United Nations department —
the Department of Field Support — now supports 16
peacekeeping missions and 18 special political
missions and oversees more than 22,000 international
and local civilian staff. It operates and maintains more
than 250 medical facilities, 300 aircraft, 18,000
vehicles and 40,000 computers.
There is a growing recognition that field support
issues are gaining in prominence and stature. The

7

S/PV.6075

Department now sits at the table as an equal partner in
crucial discussions at every stage of the mission life
cycle:
planning,
deployment,
sustainment,
reconfiguration and, eventually, liquidation. When
problems are encountered, we are able to engage at the
political level with Member States and partner
organizations to find solutions. As it happens, I just
returned two days ago from precisely such an
engagement: a third round of discussions with the
Sudanese Government and the African Union to
facilitate the free flow of people and materials for our
mission in Darfur. I am happy to report that as a result,
we have thus far been able to meet the agreed-upon
deployment targets.
The creation of the Department has also led to
greater clarity of purpose, with an improved focus on
the delivery of service to the field — becoming fieldcentric, if you will. The political direction is
determined by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations — in partnership with Member States, of
course — and it is up to my team to focus “simply” on
getting the right staff on board, securing sufficient
financing and providing the equipment and the
logistics necessary for the operation. The beauty of
having a narrow mandate is that it is easier to establish
baselines and measure progress. One of our current
challenges is how to calibrate that support to the
increasingly varied size and nature of various field
presences. I believe that there is an opportunity for a
more targeted and nuanced approach.
In addition, we are making good progress in
developing capacities in the various support streams.
For example, we will soon have a specialized in-house
capacity to advise both departments on how to manage
and mitigate risk — a badly needed source of
expertise. The establishment, several years ago, of a
Conduct and Discipline Unit at Headquarters — it is
now housed in the Department of Field Support — and
of related teams within the missions is starting to pay
dividends. We are also developing the capacity to
introduce “greening” aspects into all our operations.
The challenges laid out by Alain are indeed
daunting — even intimidating — and no less important
for DFS: the rapid expansion in breadth, scope and
complexity of missions; an increasingly hostile
security landscape in a number of different locations;
and the gap between the scope of the mandates and the
resources available to perform them.

8

From the support perspective, I would also add to
that list the difficulties of working within a regulatory
framework not designed for fast-paced operations
deployed in high-risk environments. The resulting
tension is simply unfair; either we comply with the
existing rules, but face the ire of this body when we do
not deliver services in a timely manner, or we get the
job done by testing the limits of the rules, risking
censure from the oversight bodies. We must be able to
find a way to reconcile results with compliance and
getting things done with due process.
While I agree that we are not in a crisis, we are
nevertheless under great strain. We need to reflect, take
stock and think deeply about the way forward. I will be
the first to acknowledge that the new DFS is still
finding its feet and that we have some way to go. A
more elaborate assessment of the restructuring exercise
will be put before the General Assembly this spring,
but let me just say at this juncture that putting in place
a new structure, new staff and new systems and
properly embedding these changes takes time and
perseverance under any circumstances. The fact that
this process has taken place at the same time as
peacekeeping has undergone a 30 per cent increase in
the authorized strength of its personnel has truly tested
the limits of the new structure.
The new missions — the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad — are two of the most complex and difficult
operations ever contemplated by the United Nations.
The task of moving materiel and people in these
regions would challenge the most solid, stable and
mature of structures. With a new and untried support
concept emerging from the recent resolution 1863
(2009), on Somalia, a country even more challenged by
security and infrastructure constraints, DFS has an
even more daunting task ahead in the year to come.
Perhaps one of the advantages of having DFS at
the table is that it can provide a reality check to
discussions. In this spirit, I would like to offer some
concrete illustrations which I hope demonstrate the
magnitude of the support challenges before us. In
Darfur, thousands of kilometres from the nearest
seaport, we must move heavy equipment and supplies
for the construction of 35 camps, which are required to
house our almost 26,000 troops and police. The road
networks are unreliable and unsafe; the existing
airfield infrastructure is poor and the wet season halts

09-21747

S/PV.6075

movement and construction progress for up to four
months a year. At a certain point during the
deployment, we had 8,000 containers making this
journey.
We face an even greater test in neighbouring
Chad. Abéché is 2,400 kilometres from the nearest
port, roughly the same distance as between London and
Moscow. The sea-land route, known as the Douala
corridor, connecting the Cameroonian port of Douala to
Abéché, is approximately the same distance — 2,400
kilometres — of which only 900 kilometres have
railroads. Aside from poor road conditions, the Douala
corridor is, in relative terms, one of the world’s most
expensive commercial transportation routes.
In Somalia, without prejudging the outcome of
the technical assessment mission, we can well imagine
that supporting the African Union Mission in Somalia
will require logistics, resources and efforts that surpass
even those being made in Darfur and Chad. In addition
to challenges posed by infrastructure, security, terrain,
climate and social fabric, for the first time the United
Nations has been requested to provide logistical
support to a regional organization with a significant
level of resources attached to it.
On a systemic level, we often struggle with the
competing priorities of deploying troops, setting up the
necessary infrastructure and negotiating with the host
nation. Sometimes, troops are deployed prematurely
because of mandate commencement pressures, but
without having first secured the necessary agreements,
for example, on usage of land. At other times,
sequencing questions arise over whether an
engineering company should deploy first to establish a
battalion campsite or whether security elements move
in first to protect the engineers and the list of
challenges goes on.
I am, however, afraid that with the magnitude of
the operational challenges before us, the urgent ones
often trump a more thorough assessment of the
important ones. By this I mean finding a more strategic
approach to doing our business; exploring new, more
efficient and effective ways of working; doing it right
and fast; achieving the kinds of economies of scale one
would expect from a global operation of more than
$7 billion; partnering with Member States, others in the
United Nations family, regional organizations, civil
society and others in meeting the support challenge;

09-21747

and finding a regulatory framework which is strong yet
agile, and prudent yet reasonable.
To address those concerns, we are making a
concerted effort to develop the details of the support
strategy. The strategy, which we intend to share with
Member States later this year, will explore a number of
themes.
First, the notion of support hubs could provide
logistics and administrative support services from more
secure locations to missions in the region, rather than
attempting to recreate a full support structure in each
and every mission.
Secondly, there could be greater delegation of
managerial and administrative authority to managers in
the field, while ensuring that appropriate training is
provided in advance and that predefined monitoring
and oversight mechanisms are in place.
Thirdly, there could be a diversified approach to
sourcing goods and services required for field missions
from local, regional and international sources through
greater use of partnerships and a broader set of
suppliers and service providers.
Lastly, there could be a smarter approach to
technology by using different applications in the
provision of aviation tasks, equipment usage, military
support and rapid response. Technology must be an
enabler of business, particularly in the environments
where we deploy.
These are, I believe, fully in line with the first
track of issues Alain mentioned on which concrete and
urgent actions are required this year. In addition, we
intend to move quickly in implementing the provisions
of the recent General Assembly resolution, which, we
hope, will pave the way for a more flexible, mobile
workforce and address the excessive vacancy and
turnover rates we are experiencing in critical field
positions. With the Department of Management, we are
also working to develop a framework for procurement
governance more suited to the supply needs of the
field.
Finally, I think we may want to pursue a more indepth examination of the funding arrangements for
peace operations, the use of trust funds, memorandums
of understanding and partnership models.
On that last point, I would like to return to the
idea of United Nations peacekeeping as a complex

9

S/PV.6075

international partnership in which many different
actors play an important role. From my corporate
background, I might call that a joint venture: a shared
enterprise in which we all have equity and a share of
the resources, direction and control. This joint venture,
as Alain mentioned, must be strengthened to better
ready ourselves for challenges both today and
tomorrow.
Support is not an end in itself, and DFS is not an
island. The support concept works only as a key
component in this wider partnership. Without strong
working relations with troop- and police-contributing
countries and the broader United Nations family, and
without the full support of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Fifth
Committee, the support lines to peacekeeping quickly
crumble.

quality, frequency and form of exchanges with Member
States in formal and informal ways alike.
In conclusion, I join Alain in commending to the
Security Council the notion that the different actors in
the international partnership for peacekeeping are at a
critical moment. Recent history has seen rapid and
unrelenting growth. This is perhaps a vote of
confidence in United Nations peacekeeping, but the
challenges are gathering ever more quickly. The
magnitude of the peacekeeping enterprise requires an
investment in strategy. It requires that we move
together in concert, with a shared purpose and in full
recognition of the challenges ahead.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Malcorra for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Annabi.

In the support business — perhaps more than for
anyone else in this equation — we will only ever be as
effective as the common vision that guides this joint
venture. If we are not clear on the nature of the
enterprise we are supporting, the challenge of finding
the most appropriate support models is compounded. If
mandate makers, policy setters, budget developers and
troop and police contributors do not share a vision of
what the joint endeavour is, then the mixed signals
become extremely difficult to resource and organize
around, and building a most effective and efficient
support mechanism will probably remain as elusive as
ever. The costs of a lack of common vision are high
and efficiencies harder to find. As in all enterprises,
support strategists and resource providers are at their
most effective when treated as strategic enablers and
brought into the dialogue early. On top of that, we must
be able to agree on a contract of mutual trust as the
basis of our work together.

Mr. Annabi (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for giving me the honour and for kindly inviting me to
participate in this important debate on United Nations
peacekeeping. The informal document that you have
distributed is an excellent basis for discussion and
reflection, and will certainly prompt a fruitful debate.

Today’s discussion should also be the start of a
dialogue that is sustained across the various organs of
the United Nations. The Secretariat, of course, meets
each of the Member States represented here today in
different guises, in different chambers and at different
times of the year. All too often, though, the messages
received may be mixed and even inconsistent,
depending on the forum. And, of course, the Secretariat
is often chastised for exactly the same sin — sending
different messages through different people in different
forums. We can all improve our game on this front. My
team and I are personally committed to improving the

(spoke in English)

10

Certain aspects of the document address the
internal operations of peacekeeping, which is, of
course, appropriate and necessary to any discussion
held at the Headquarters of our Organization. However,
given the fact that I am now a man of the field, I
should like to leave my colleagues at Headquarters to
address those aspects. Given the responsibilities they
bear, they are in a better position than I am to speak to
them, and they have in fact already done so.
For my part, I wish to attempt to set out the main
challenges that peacekeeping faces, addressing in
particular the three following questions.
First, when is United Nations peacekeeping the
right instrument? Secondly, what tasks can United
Nations peacekeeping accomplish? Thirdly, how can
we help United Nations peacekeeping become more
effective? I will try to highlight some areas where we
need to change, together with certain principles that
have been repeatedly validated over time. I hope that I
may speak openly, since I am among friends who share
a common vision of peacekeeping as a key dimension
of United Nations activities and as a means to advance
the goals of the Charter.

09-21747

S/PV.6075

When should United Nations peacekeeping be
used? As reflected in the non-paper, the issue of when
to deploy a United Nations peacekeeping operation is
one of the most difficult questions that the Council
faces. Deployed appropriately, a peacekeeping
operation can achieve remarkable results in a relatively
short period. The people of Guatemala, El Salvador,
Namibia, Mozambique, Sierra Leone, Liberia,
Cambodia and East Timor — to name a few — can
testify to our ability to make a difference. Each
successful experience has, in turn, strengthened the
standing of the United Nations and its ability to
address future conflicts. But when United Nations
operations are deployed in the wrong circumstances,
the results can be disastrous for the population within
the conflict area, for the peacekeepers themselves and,
even more importantly, for the viability of the
instrument of peacekeeping.
How can we distinguish between those two kinds
of situations and know when peacekeeping is the right
solution? I believe, I am afraid, that the commonly
cited formula remains valid. Peacekeeping operations
can be deployed where there is a peace to keep or, at
the minimum, a viable political process that a
peacekeeping presence can help nurture and lead to a
meaningful conclusion.
Over the past decade, peacekeepers have helped
to tip the balance and have overcome some opposition
on the margins of a peace process. A display of
strength has sometimes made its use unnecessary. We
have responded vigorously to certain spoilers and
shown in several theatres — including Haiti — that
robust action by United Nations peacekeepers can at
times deter those who seek to foster instability.
Multinational and regional forces have also played an
important complementary role in that area.
These are valuable lessons, but they should not
blur a core understanding that United Nations
peacekeeping remains primarily a political, rather than
a military instrument. Its effectiveness demands that a
critical mass of those in the conflict area believe that
their interests can be most effectively pursued through
peaceful means rather than by violence. If this
precondition does not exist, Blue Helmets should not
be present. Every time we have overlooked this basic
premise, we have come to regret it.
While refraining from inappropriate deployments,
we must also avoid the opposite peril, which is an

09-21747

undue hesitation to act when circumstances permit.
Even at a time of limited resources, the United Nations
must remain ready to assume its responsibilities under
the Charter. The world does not and will not forgive
the United Nations if it is seen to stand by when it can
make a difference.
Peacekeeping partners can sometimes contribute,
and it is sensible to share the burden when others have
a comparative advantage, but at other times there may
be no realistic alternative to a United Nations
operation. It is essential for the standing of the United
Nations that any decision on whether or not to deploy
or to downsize an existing operation be based primarily
on substantive concerns and not on financial
considerations.
Even from a financial perspective, a United
Nations operation can prove to be good value. Conflict,
as we know, is extremely costly, and a swiftly deployed
and
appropriately
mandated
and
equipped
peacekeeping operation can provide enormous savings
in the long term, even if it entails a significant shortterm expense.
In weighing decisions on deployment, both the
Secretariat and Member States have a key role to play.
The Secretariat must exercise due diligence, assessing
and reassessing the situation on the ground and
conveying its understanding faithfully to the Member
States. Moreover, as Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi — who
remains an inspiration for us all — wrote in his report
of August 2000 (S/2000/809), today’s international
civil service must have the courage of its convictions
and must tell the Security Council what it needs to
know, and not merely what it wants to hear.
Member States can make a vital contribution by
providing information that may assist in decisionmaking. They should also seek to listen with an open
mind to the Secretariat’s recommendations, giving
them serious consideration, and should resist undue
pressure to act in a way that is politically expedient but
that may be fundamentally unsound.
Secondly, I would like to discuss which tasks
peacekeeping should undertake. Broadly, a United
Nations peacekeeping operation should assume those
tasks that are indispensable to cross a threshold
towards lasting peace and that they are best equipped
to discharge. What this means in practice has evolved
rapidly over the past decade, alongside our
understanding of the requirements for stability and of

11

S/PV.6075

the capacity of peacekeeping operations. Many
activities that we once would have regarded as beyond
our responsibility or reach have now become standard
fixtures in the peacekeeping repertoire. Operations
have become more active politically; they have taken
on more ambitious roles in security; and above all they
have engaged in institution-building, particularly in the
area of the rule of law, which is now a core part of our
mandate in many conflict areas.
This expanded activity has helped us to meet
multifaceted challenges on the ground and has
represented, I believe, a wise investment. But further
reflection is required to address other shortcomings. In
the area of institution-building, it is important to
strengthen institutions of governance beyond those
concerned with the rule of law. In many conflict
countries, the dearth of technical administrative
capacity affects the society’s ability to address its
problems effectively or to manage its resources in a
way that permits lasting stability. Bilateral and
multilateral technical assistance programmes will
generally remain the most appropriate means to remedy
such weaknesses, but it may be necessary to
complement these traditional approaches with other
mechanisms to help local administrations to deliver
urgently-needed services to the population in the short
term while jump-starting a coherent programme of
institutional reform in the long term.
One experiment that may offer useful ideas for
the future was the framework for international
assistance that was elaborated in Liberia, known as the
Governance and Economic Management Assistance
Programme (GEMAP). Other interesting experiences,
including our efforts in East Timor and Kosovo, where
a small corps of well-placed technical advisers
remained in place after the initial transfer of
administrative authority to strengthen the capacity and
performance of local governing bodies.
A second area where further efforts are absolutely
indispensable is socio-economic development. In many
post-conflict areas, including Haiti, political tensions
and insecurity are compounded and fed by socioeconomic privation and inequality. My current
functions have reinforced my conviction that, in such
areas, support for early recover, reconstruction and
development constitutes an integral component of the
search for peace, and that stability will be consolidated
only when the local population can see a tangible
improvement in their daily lives.

12

Socio-economic development cannot realistically
be achieved during the lifespan of a peacekeeping
operation. But we must find ways to accelerate aid
processes from the outset of a peace effort so as to
generate what we call a peace dividend: the kind of
visible results that foster public confidence and hope
and reinforce the legitimacy of local authorities while
laying the groundwork for future progress. Important
related innovations within peacekeeping operations
include the use of quick impact projects and the
community violence-reduction programme in the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). Other positive results have been
achieved through closer cooperation between
peacekeepers,
United
Nations
agencies
and
international financial institutions. Examples include
MINUSTAH’s collaboration with the United Nations
country team to conduct a nationwide vaccination
campaign in Haiti and a joint project now under way
with the World Bank, following a similar successful
experiment in Liberia.
More coherent action by all elements of the
United Nations system in support of peace and security
priorities can be fostered by Member States through
their representatives in the governing boards of all
those bodies. It may also be timely to engage other
actors in a wider debate on how to make a difference
within
post-conflict
environments,
combining
international aid, effective national decision-making
and private-sector activity. The need to address the
social and economic dimension of stability is shared by
others who can assist, including the World Bank and
various members of the private sector and the
non-governmental organization community.
Even in a difficult global financial environment,
an effort to step up aid programmes should be pursued
as a matter of urgency. This can save a lot money in the
long term, by preventing relapses into conflict. It can
also buttress the global cooperation envisaged in the
United Nations Charter, by highlighting the
commitment of industrialized countries to complement
and support the work of the Blue Helmets, who include
a very high representation of troops from developing
countries.
Finally, I would like to offer a few brief thoughts
on the functioning of peacekeeping, speaking from a
field perspective. From my current vantage point, the
key measurement of the effectiveness of the
peacekeeping machinery is its ability to support

09-21747

S/PV.6075

missions in obtaining what they need to do the job —
in other words, a political framework for their
activities, a tight institutional support structure and
provision of the necessary human and material
resources.
In Haiti, we have received strong overall political
support in the form of coherent, practical and wellcrafted mandates that identify the core areas where
progress is critical and give us the scope required to
act. I have also profoundly appreciated the strong
support we have received at every level from Member
States and the Secretariat, particularly at difficult
moments of crisis in 2008. The assistance of colleagues
and friends in Port-au-Prince, New York and national
capitals was indispensable in responding to unrest over
rising prices in the spring and to the destruction
wrought by hurricanes in the autumn.
The institutional support structure has also
provided valuable assistance. As noted in the
non-paper, Member States have delegated significant
authority to the Secretariat, which has in turn given the
mission considerable latitude to make necessary
operational and tactical decisions on the ground. At the
same time, a number of existing structures provide a
good framework for a regular and vigorous exchange
between the Security Council, troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat, although the potential of
those structures tended in the past to be significantly
underutilized.
These arrangements are thus an appropriate
subject for review by Member States. However, from
the perspective of MINUSTAH, the current
organization of decision-making and dialogue has
worked well and constitutes a key element of our
effectiveness. It has ensured our credibility as impartial
servants of the Charter, acting on behalf of 192
Member States. It has also enabled us to respond
appropriately to rapidly changing circumstances on the
ground. Meanwhile, drawing on new technology,
Headquarters has worked to enhance information flow
in peacekeeping, enabling mission staff to form
“communities of practice” with colleagues around the
world and helping troop-contributing countries to
harmonize and update national peacekeeping training
programmes.
At the same time, since peacekeeping situations
are by definition ad hoc, experience on the ground will
often inevitably be ahead of policy instruments. It is

09-21747

therefore essential to retain a flexible approach,
recognizing that guidelines and doctrine should
ultimately support practical solutions and not become
an end in themselves.
Finally, in terms of material support, we have
seen progress in enhancing the availability of key
equipment and personnel. In MINUSTAH we are
grateful for the provision of experts in such relatively
new areas as corrections and border management, and
we appreciate the efforts to enable us to undertake riotcontrol efforts with restraint and professionalism.
Peacekeeping will continue to face new and
unexpected situations. It is therefore important that
Member States be ready to provide new skills and new
capabilities as they become necessary and to facilitate
a swift response to urgent needs in pursuit of mandated
activities.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, I wish to thank you again,
Mr. President, for having allowed me to participate in
this debate. I am convinced that it is possible to
continue to enrich and adapt United Nations
peacekeeping operations to enable them to fully
respond to the needs and problems of tomorrow.
However, we must see that that adaptation is done in
the spirit that, I am sure, is inspiring our debate today,
that is to say, first, by being open to change but without
renouncing certain fundamental principles that have
demonstrated their usefulness; secondly, by committing
ourselves to the practice of effective multilateralism,
which, in keeping with the letter and spirit of the
Charter, involves the balanced participation of all in
working for peace; and finally, by committing
ourselves to strengthening and protecting this valuable
instrument of peacekeeping.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
open the debate to members of the Council.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I begin
by paying tribute to Ambassador Butagira for his
much-valued work to the United Nations over the past
five years and to wish him good luck in whatever lies
ahead.
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s debate. It is an important first step in this
Franco-British initiative that you and I have launched
on the instructions of our Foreign Ministers to improve
the way in which the United Nations system, and in

13

S/PV.6075

particular the Security Council, handles peacekeeping
issues. The speakers we have heard in the last hour
have set out the importance of the issues we are
addressing. I thank them all for their contributions,
especially Mr. Annabi for coming from Haiti to give us
the benefit of his experience on the ground.
Peacekeeping is at the very heart of what the
United Nations stands for. If one asks people on the
streets of one of our capitals what the United Nations
means to them, they will probably reply with an image
of a blue-helmeted soldier watching over an uneasy
peace. It is a powerful image, but it needs updating.
Today, as Under-Secretary-General Le Roy implied, it
could be not just a of soldier but of a police officer or a
humanitarian worker or a human rights expert. Often
they will have little in the way of a peace to watch
over. The challenges have become more demanding as
many of the conflicts we address involve non-State
actors, and United Nations peacekeeping has to change
to meet the new demands.
United Nations peacekeeping is not in crisis, but,
as Under-Secretary-General Malcorra said, it is
struggling to cope with the scale and complexity of
these new challenges. United Nations peacekeeping is
to some extent a victim of its own success, but it is too
precious a commodity to be put at risk.
The issues are not new. Lakhdar Brahimi
addressed many of them in what remains a landmark
report (S/2000/809), whose conclusions are as relevant
today as they were in 2000. We have been reminded of
their importance during our recent discussions of
Darfur, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Somalia. The point now is to revisit the Brahimi
report — build on it, adapt it where necessary and,
most importantly, make sure that we implement a more
rigorous and strategic approach to peacekeeping across
the board in the Security Council.
The United Kingdom and France set out our
initial thinking in the non-paper we issued earlier this
week. The first part outlined the challenges, which we
grouped into three areas. First is effective strategic
oversight, especially the need for better preparation,
planning, oversight and evaluation of operations.
Second is addressing the resource constraints,
including the importance of finding new ways to deal
with the pressure on funding and the availability of
troops and other resources as the demand for United
Nations peacekeeping continues to rise. The third area

14

is lessons from implementation, including how the
increasingly complex mandates that we give to United
Nations peacekeepers can be delivered.
That is a daunting agenda, but its scale cannot be
an excuse for inaction. We have suggested that we
focus first on the issues around effective strategic
oversight, many of which fall to the Security Council
to address. Let us put our own house in order first.
We made a good start at the informal seminar
held yesterday at the French Mission. I was struck by
the following themes of our discussion: the need for a
clear sense of the challenges we are addressing here in
New York and in the field, and the importance of
building capacity, not just in the missions themselves
but also in the Secretariat, which is constrained by
rules that were not designed for the new realities of
peacekeeping.
The Council itself needs better information and,
most importantly, better military advice. The Council
must improve its own practices, including more
realistic mandates, clear completion strategies and
measurable benchmarks to enable us to assess progress.
The Council must also ensure that peacekeepers have a
peace to keep, and not put poorly equipped
peacekeepers into a war zone in the hope that they will
have an effect.
While the Security Council should rightly play its
leading role, this must be an inclusive process, drawing
on the expertise and resources of all Member States
and all parts of the United Nations system. We
welcome the work under way in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Services, and we very much welcome the initiatives
under way, not least from our Canadian colleagues,
which we see as complementary to work within the
Council.
Following yesterday’s seminar, we will work with
our French colleagues to revise the joint paper to
reflect both the discussion yesterday and today’s
debate.
I look forward to hearing from Council
colleagues and other speakers today on how we can
move this agenda forward in practical ways. We have
discussed it many times, but we now need to turn our
attention to a practical programme of action. We will
all have noted the emphasis that our new American
colleague, Ambassador Rice, put on these issues during

09-21747

S/PV.6075

her confirmation hearing. Following her confirmation
last night by the United States Senate, we look forward
to welcoming her to the Security Council next week
and to working closely with her on what will be one of
the great challenges facing the Council during 2009.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by thanking your delegation,
Mr. President, and the delegation of the United
Kingdom for the timely and necessary initiative to
revisit this matter. I also wish to express my gratitude
for the comments and questions from Mr. Le Roy,
Ms. Malcorra and Mr. Annabi. I believe they are
important contributions to the Council’s discussion of
this matter.
As the Council knows, I come from a part of the
world where three United Nations peacekeeping
missions operated and successfully concluded their
activities in Central America, verifying compliance
with commitments adopted by five countries in order to
restore peace and promote development in the
subregion. The key to that success can be found in the
simple elements that we all know, but perhaps it is
worth reiterating them: appropriation of the processes
by the recipient countries, a regional commitment to
the processes, clarity in the Security Council’s
objectives and mandates and, of course, broad,
transparent and timely communication among all the
actors involved. With this experience and with some
knowledge of how this Council operates, we would like
to take advantage of this meeting to highlight a few
points.
I will begin with the obvious, because perhaps it
is not really so obvious, and that is the nature of the
problems that has brought about a natural evolution in
the scope of peace operations. I call them “peace
operations” because they go so much further than
simple peacekeeping. Very frequently, we persist in
thinking in terms of old instruments to tackle
completely new problems without making a more
creative use of the range of instruments that we have at
our disposal for addressing these new problems. That is
why we have repeatedly advocated the concept of
integrated missions that comply with the Council’s
duty to promote peace, and not simply to maintain it.
We are convinced that that is the best way to
address and possibly meet the expectations generated
by the deployment of the United Nations flag. In those
places where the flag flies, the formal distinctions that

09-21747

are of great concern to us here are irrelevant. People
who see the United Nations flag flying on the horizon
believe that a better future is at hand, hope that their
grief is coming to an end, and are pleased because their
security and their very existence are no longer
threatened. For these people, it is difficult to
understand that their security and expectations may or
may not be part of a mandate and that, as a result, those
who represent the Organization on the ground may not
be able to accomplish what these populations are
hoping for and urgently need.
That is the enormous challenge that must be met
by the United Nations and, in particular, the Council.
We have to manage growing expectations with
increasingly limited resources. That is why today’s
debate must be the beginning of a process of
rationalizing the way in which the Security Council
fulfils its mandate. The great majority of the necessary
provisions have already been agreed to by the Council.
The measures to be taken are included in resolutions
and presidential statements that are now more than
10-years old. We need to bring together all that we
have agreed upon, revise the way these decisions are
implemented and incorporate elements that experience
has shown to be crucial to success on the ground.
We have to review our own internal logic.
Despite the fact that Article 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations provides that the Council was
established to ensure prompt and effective action in the
field, we are often more concerned with achieving
results on paper. The logic of achieving results on
paper explains the fact that our decision-making
processes are exclusive. It is much easier to achieve
prompt and effective results on paper if decisionmaking is limited to members of the Council, and even
easier if the decision-making process starts with a
consensus among permanent members. That is
absolutely counterproductive if we seek to achieve
prompt and effective results on the ground.
No one around this table is unaware of the
distance between those who take decisions on peace
operations, those who implement them, those who
allocate resources, those who have to implement the
decisions on the ground, and the recipient country.
That is why we have to review the way in which
we establish and renew Security Council mandates.
Specifically, we believe that we need to have
interactive and informal meetings with the troop-

15

S/PV.6075

contributing countries and with the Secretariat. It is
also crucial to improve our interaction with the General
Assembly through the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and with the Fifth
Committee. With appropriate and timely information,
we can produce clear, convincing and viable mandates,
and with the appropriate interaction among bodies we
can guarantee that we will faithfully implement the
decisions of the Council in the field. We also need to
have inputs from the host country and other concerned
players.
The Council’s decision-making process on a
peacekeeping operation requires more active support
from the Secretariat. As we have seen in many
negotiations in the General Assembly, when our
experts meet to negotiate a resolution we need the
advice of the Secretariat to tell us, in a timely manner,
the practical implications of our proposals or of our
silence, including the financial and operational
implications of mandates. Moreover, we must
effectively follow up on the resolutions and mandates.
If something is not working as it should, we have to
identify and take measures to correct it.
We have reached the limit of our resources. We
can no longer establish mandates in the hope that our
mere presence in the field is enough. This perspective
was identified and approved by the Council when it
considered the Brahimi report (S/2000/809), and it
would therefore be timely to hold an open debate on
the implementation of the recommendations contained
in that report.
I would like to conclude by saying that we
believe that it is important to deepen and strengthen
our relationship with the Peacebuilding Commission.
The peacebuilding component is crucial, as was
pointed by Mr. Alain Le Roy. As a result, when we talk
about having the timely advice of the Secretariat, we
are referring not only to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, but also to the Department
of Political Affairs and the Peacebuilding Support
Office.
We
are
convinced
that,
although our
recommendations could prolong negotiations, the final
results will be much more effective in the field, and
that is where the Charter asks us to be prompt and
effective.
The history of United Nations peacekeeping
operations is, generally speaking, a success story. We

16

are victims of our own success. Our discussion today is
a step in the right direction towards achieving the
proper conceptualization and implementation of what
the peace operations of the twenty-first century must
be.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I, too, wish to tell my friend,
Ambassador Francis Butagira, now that he is leaving
us, how deeply we have appreciated his effective
contributions to the work of the Security Council. I
wish him all the best in his future duties.
Mr. President, we would also like to thank you
and the entire French delegation for your choice of this
subject, which is most timely. We have no doubt that
today’s debate will contribute to enriching our
thinking on one of the important activities of the
United Nations — peacekeeping operations.
We also would like to thank Mr. Le Roy,
Ms. Malcorra and Mr. Annabi for their statements.
In a world in which crises are more complex than
ever, where the resolution of conflicts often favours the
use of the force and violence, ensuring international
peace and security, as is done by the United Nations, is
no easy task. It is all the more difficult when the
soldiers of peace become potential targets of fighters or
are themselves responsible for reprehensible acts.
Most fortunately, and despite a few missteps, the
Organization is discharging its mission fairly well.
Moreover, it is tirelessly working to adapt to new
paradigms of conflict. Thus, it has decided to
incorporate in the field of action of peacekeeping
operations such issues as humanitarian and human
rights
issues,
electoral
assistance,
demining,
disarmament, the demobilization and reintegration of
fighters, the strengthening of cooperation with regional
organizations, and so on. All of those are things that
require, if not a new approach, a different way of
dealing with peacekeeping operations, from the
establishment or alteration of a mandate to the
organization and coordination of participants on the
ground.
Various developments in countries in conflict
have underscored the need to strengthen the capacity of
peacekeeping operations by giving them mandates with
clearly defined goals and command structures. In
addition, they should also have the appropriate
logistical capabilities and financing to enable them to

09-21747

S/PV.6075

be more effective on the ground. Along the same lines,
it is essential to share best practices in order to enhance
effectiveness.
The slow pace of deployment in urgent situations
is another area of concern. As recommended in the
Brahimi report (S/2000/809), we should work to ensure
that delays are reasonable. In that regard, the troubled
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur provides us with a perfect
illustration of the efforts that still need to be carried
out.
Effective coordination is one of the keys to the
success of peacekeeping operations. We must therefore
decisively improve communication and coordination
among the various bodies involved in the decisionmaking process, namely, the Fifth Committee, the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the
Peacebuilding Commission, United Nations agencies
and programmes and the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations.
There has already been substantial progress with
regard to the process of planning for integrated
missions. It is important that that be strengthened by
better coordination and unity of purpose with regard to
efforts on the ground. The effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations and the credibility of the
United Nations also hinge on the policy of zero
tolerance, which my delegation strongly supports.
With regard to cooperation with Member States,
it is important to improve relations between those who
plan, coordinate and manage peacekeeping operations
and the troop-contributing countries. The experience
and specific knowledge of those countries can
contribute to the planning process as well as to
clarifying the decision-making process. It would
therefore be useful to strengthen the system of threeway communication between troop-contributing
countries, the Security Council and the Secretariat.
As has been pointed out in the Council itself, the
maintenance of international peace and security is both
a shared and collective responsibility. Member States
should therefore continue to support the Organization
by deploying contingents and mobilizing the necessary
resources of all kinds. For its part, my country, which
has made contributing to the settlement of conflicts a
major focus of its foreign policy, continues to honour
its commitments in that regard.

09-21747

The planning process should not ignore the role
of the host country, upon which the success of a
peacekeeping mission sometimes depends. To that end,
in line with the purposes and principles of the Charter,
it is important to clearly bear in mind the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of
States. Peacekeeping operations must be carried out
both with the consent of the host country and in an
impartial way.
The contributions of subregional and regional
organizations are crucial to the success of the
operations deployed by the United Nations. Being
close to the protagonists in a conflict and to the reality
on the ground, those organizations, in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter, play an
important and unique role in that regard. Unfortunately,
the demands of some conflicts are such that regional
arrangements do not yet have the necessary resources
to meet the task.
That reality is most in evidence, and the
consequences most tragic, on the African continent,
which, unfortunately, is where most of the world’s
areas of tension are found. Such is the case with the
African Union Mission in Somalia, whose current
configuration does not allow it to address the
challenges of the conflict in that country. The adoption
of resolution 1863 (2009) was an important step that
must be followed up as soon as possible, for in Somalia
time is against those who are working towards peace
and national reconciliation.
We therefore urge the international community to
support the efforts of the African Union, both in
Somalia and elsewhere on the continent. We also
appeal for greater support for the efforts of African
subregional organizations, which are essential but often
forgotten links in the chain of peace.
The right to security and protection for which the
United Nations is working requires that we accord the
same attention to saving, comforting and helping
people in dire situations or in places where there is
need. At the same time, the Organization, first and
foremost the Security Council, must continue to
emphasize the prevention of conflict by strengthening
mechanisms for early warning and rapid reaction.
Above all, it must invest further in eradicating the
underlying causes of conflict through coordinated,
well-planned and coherent efforts. Only development
and the full realization of people’s potential, supported

17

S/PV.6075

by effective preventive diplomacy, as required, will
make it possible to ensure peace and to alleviate the
situations of the already overburdened peacekeeping
operations.
In conclusion, allow me to express our great
appreciation to peacekeepers, who, under extremely
difficult conditions and at the risk of their lives, make
an invaluable contribution to the establishment of a
safer world. We unreservedly condemn deliberate
attacks on United Nations forces, for which there is no
justification whatever.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and
Malcorra and Special Representative Hédi Annabi for
their extremely useful introductory statements.
United Nations peacekeeping operations, which
were invented out of necessity, have now played a
central role over 60 years now in restoring stability in
countries emerging from conflict. I would like to pay
tribute to all those who have ever served on those
missions over the years. At the moment, there are
90,000 uniformed military and police and 20,000
civilian personnel serving around the world. Many
dedicated men and women have given very selflessly
of themselves.
Launching a peacekeeping mission is one of the
most effective measures that the Council can take to
promote peace and security. Due to rapid changes in
the operational environment, United Nations
peacekeeping efforts are now facing challenges. The
nature of conflicts and threats has changed. Missions
are increasingly confronted with non-State actors, who
have little respect for international law and threaten the
stability of entire regions, employing sophisticated
tactics and ever-more-lethal weapons. United Nations
workers are often the first targets of those actors.
The growing complexity and enormity of the
tasks that the Council mandates those missions to carry
out are also having a serious impact on the
performance of missions. Peacekeeping missions are
increasingly asked to do much more than traditional
tasks such as monitoring ceasefire agreements. Their
mandates now cover providing protection to civilians,
supporting humanitarian assistance and coordinating
international support for socio-economic stability. Such
mandates require diverse skills and expertise, and
significant changes must be made in the way they are
implemented.

18

Obviously, when the Council takes action that
includes a mandate for the protection of civilians, it
creates expectations. If those expectations are not met,
that leads to criticism and disappointment about the
apparent under-implementation of mandates. It is
primarily the responsibility of the Council, and not of
the Secretariat, to rectify that situation and decide what
the changes should be.
We have seen many successful cases of
peacekeeping operations, but we have also experienced
disappointments. The year 1994 was one of great crisis
that is not comparable to the present. But we do have
challenges, operational challenges that entail different
kinds of issues. We should try to find a way to more
effectively and efficiently implement peacekeeping
operations. That is the task, as well as to better meet
the expectations of people on the ground. We therefore
appreciate the initiative of the delegations of France
and the United Kingdom to develop practical
recommendations in due course.
In 2000, the Council adopted resolution 1327
(2000) after reviewing the farsighted Brahimi report
(S/2000/809). The Council decided on that occasion to
give peacekeeping operations “clear, credible and
achievable mandates” (resolution 1327 (2000), annex,
part I) and “to ensure that the mandated tasks of
peacekeeping operations are appropriate to the
situation on the ground including such factors as the
prospects for success” (ibid., part II). This is an
overriding principle of the utmost importance, both
today as at the time.
Since this is a kick-off debate on a policy review
of peacekeeping operations stretching over the next
few months, I would like this morning to make three
points on improving strategic oversight.
First, to make a sound decision on launching a
new or expanded mission, the Council should be fully
informed of the realities on the ground. Timely
political and military information and high-quality and
professional analysis are indispensable if we are to
fully comprehend the nature and challenge of the
situation and if we are to enable the mission to respond
swiftly and achieve the intended objective. The lessons
learned from other missions should be fully taken into
account in formulating a plan of operations. Specific
steps should be taken to institute this practice.
It is also important to examine the scope and
feasibility of proposed mandates in depth with the

09-21747

S/PV.6075

participation of not only members of the Council, but
also other stakeholders, such as prospective troopcontributing countries, prior to a formal decision by the
Council. The Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations could be better utilized as a
forum for this purpose.
Secondly, after a mission is launched, the Council
should closely and continuously monitor the operation
of the mission, exercise flexibility with respect to its
mandate and strength and make the necessary
adjustments to improve its efficiency. The Council
must always ensure that missions are provided with
sufficient support and the means to carry out their
mandates.
At the same time, the United Nations should
exercise maximum flexibility and seek out the most
efficient use of available resources for peacekeeping
operations, because, as a whole, they are greatly
overextended and overstretched. We therefore highly
appreciate the recent good practice of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) in
eliminating one battalion and arranging for cooperation
with a neighbouring mission.
The third point relates to political issues: we
should always consider a peacekeeping mission in the
broader context. It is not a substitute for but only a
supplement to the political process. The presence of a
mission, if it is mobilized together with a serious
political effort, will have a stabilizing effect on the
ground
and
create
conditions
for
national
reconciliation. But without a credible, sincere effort to
persuade the parties to reach a political agreement, the
impact of a mission is limited. The Council should put
as much focus as possible on the political process
during the time peacekeepers are deployed.
Peacekeeping missions cannot be deployed
forever. Like the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT)
and UNOCI, every mission, in principle, should in the
future set clear benchmarks, with a realistic timeline
against which progress is regularly monitored and
reflected in future planning.
Peacebuilding efforts should produce tangible
results and change in the lives of the people on the
ground after a ceasefire or the achievement of a peace
treaty and should not wait until a peacekeeping mission
completes its mandate period. Some multidimensional

09-21747

missions, such as the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), already include
elements of peacebuilding in their own mandates. But
experience in other missions, such as those in Liberia,
Haiti and Côte d’Ivoire, are also encouraging. Even in
more conventional missions, strategic consideration
should be given from the earliest stage of planning to
ensure a smooth, gradual transition to early recovery
and peacebuilding. In some cases, both processes —
peacekeeping and peacebuilding — could overlap for a
definite period, but not too long, for a seamless
transition. The Peacebuilding Commission could
provide very vital support to this work of the Council.
In conclusion, today’s debate will contribute to
deepening our understanding of the challenges to
peacekeeping. We highly appreciate this timely
initiative and look forward to participating in finding
concrete and practical steps for improvement. We also
support the ongoing initiative of the Secretariat — the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support — to review and identify
approaches to maximize the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations. The General Assembly and,
of course, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations also have an important role to play.
It is essential that all these efforts in various
entities be directed towards the same goal of enhancing
the effectiveness, impact and efficiency of
peacekeeping operations and are synchronized in such
a way that, within a reasonable time frame, we will
complete our work and come up with concrete
recommendations for improvements.
In this context, the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations that the Council created after
reviewing the Brahimi report can be reactivated as a
forum for exchanges of views among the Council
members and other stakeholders, which will yield
creative ideas and make a useful contribution to the
work of the Council. As the Chairperson of the
Working Group, I intend to see to it that we
collectively take a harder look at mission-specific
operational issues and at generic issues with general
implications, always benefiting from the lessons that
past missions have taught us.
It is my hope that the policy review by the
Council over the next few months will be able to
achieve tangible improvement in this indispensable
tool created by the wisdom of our forebears.

19

S/PV.6075

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the French presidency for
convening today’s meeting of the Security Council and
also to Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and
Malcorra and Mr. Annabi for their substantive
presentations on United Nations peacekeeping.

troop-contributing countries to provide peacekeeping
operations with the necessary personnel and
operational capacity. This conclusion has been
confirmed by the experience of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).

The rising numbers of peacekeeping operations
and the personnel involved in them, the growing
complexity of peacekeeping mandates and the lack of
financial and logistical support for them make it
necessary to review existing United Nations
peacekeeping practices and to formulate a
comprehensive strategy for their planning and
implementation.

In the context of the increasing complexity of
modern peacekeeping operations, there is a growing
need now to differentiate their functions in specific
areas of peacekeeping and in promoting post-conflict
reconstruction. We believe that it would be rational to
mandate peacekeepers only with the primary tasks of
post-conflict reconstruction, while the actual processes
of peacekeeping and socio-economic recovery should
more actively engage the relevant United Nations
bodies, in particular the Peacebuilding Commission,
and regional organizations, international financial
institutions and bilateral donors.

We believe that any measures designed to reform
United Nations peacekeeping should be aimed at
enhancing the efficiency of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and should be evaluated
precisely according to that criterion. It is of
fundamental importance that they be carried out in
accordance with the United Nations Charter and the
norms of international law, with unfailing respect for
the primary responsibility of the Security Council for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
and in accordance with the universally recognized
principles of peacekeeping.
We see ways for improving United Nations
peacekeeping, above all in the areas of peacekeeping
operations management, making use of the potential of
regional organizations and United Nations capacitybuilding and preventive diplomacy. As regards
peacekeeping operations management, we advocate
further improvement in the practice of operational
consultations among Security Council members, troopcontributing countries and the Secretariat on all aspects
of peacekeeping operation activities, including in the
planning stage, on the basis of existing formats and
previous decisions of the Security Council. We believe
that, to establish this dialogue, it is essential to involve
more actively the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations. In this connection, we look
forward to the initiative to be undertaken during
Japan’s chairmanship of the Group.
The Security Council bears a particular
responsibility in formulating realistic peacekeeping
mandates. We believe that the decisions of the Council
on the deployment of United Nations operations must
be based on preliminary agreements with potential

20

Special attention must be given to the issue of
ensuring the required level of military expertise for the
Security Council, which remains unsatisfactory. We
support the involvement of the military experts of
Council members in the formulation and review of
peacekeeping mandates. At the same time, we must
ensure a more systematic approach by the Security
Council to the military aspects of peacekeeping.
In that regard, we believe that it is now time and
justified in all respects to revitalize the activity of the
Military Staff Committee, with the full participation of
the 15 members of the Security Council. The Military
Staff Committee’s assessment of the military situation
in countries in which peacekeeping operations are
deployed, its formulations of recommendations
regarding operational aspects of peacekeeping and its
participation in missions to assess the readiness of
troops and services assigned to peacekeeping
operations would ensure that the Council is provided
with reliable and timely information and would also
enhance United Nations peacekeeping military
expertise as a whole. My delegation is ready to share
our specific proposals on the possible organization of
the Committee’s work.
We also wish to stress the responsibility of the
Secretariat for improving the integrated planning of
operations and coordination between Headquarters and
the field. My delegation believes that, in the context of
the recent restructuring of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field

09-21747

S/PV.6075

Support, the strengthening of the Office of Military
Affairs and the establishment of the Office of Rule of
Law and Security Institutions, the Secretariat has all
the necessary potential to effectively address those
tasks. The achievement of a systematic approach is
possible only through the effective redistribution of
labour and responsibilities among the various
departments and offices of the Secretariat, while
preserving the unity of command and control. Those
objectives are particularly important now in the light of
the deployment of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
It is clear that, in order to enhance United Nations
peacekeeping, it is essential to increase cooperation
with regional operations during the deployment of such
missions. Experience has shown us that the greater
involvement of regional organizations is justified
provided that they act in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter and when
their relationships with the United Nations and
especially with the Security Council are regulated on
the basis of Chapter VIII of the Charter.
Given the growing scale of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, it is becoming increasingly
urgent to strengthen the Organization’s potential on
parallel tracks, above all in the areas of preventive
diplomacy, mediation and peacebuilding. In that
context, the forthcoming reports of the SecretaryGeneral on mediation and post-conflict peacebuilding
should provide us with food for thought with regard to
enhancing United Nations mediation capabilities by
combining the peacekeeping and peacebuilding
components of peacekeeping mandates and by creating
a roster of United Nations civilian experts.
Russia attaches great importance to increasing its
participation in United Nations peacekeeping Russian
peacekeepers have been participating in peacekeeping
operations in the Middle East, various regions in
Africa, Haiti and Kosovo. A Russian helicopter unit is
operating as part of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan and another Russian aviation group is being
dispatched to the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad.
Another important area is the involvement of the
Russian Ministry of the Interior in the training of
African specialists at its All-Russian Institute for
Enhancing the Skills of Staff Members. We are

09-21747

planning to render further assistance to the United
Nations in the area of police training. In particular we
are working on the issue of training and contributing
officers to formed police units, and on the training of
senior police staff.
Russia is ready to engage in constructive dialogue
on enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping, both within the framework of the
Security Council and in close cooperation with the
Secretariat, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations of the General Assembly, the Peacebuilding
Commission and other bodies of the United Nations
system.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would like first to
thank the Permanent Representative of Uganda for the
excellent cooperation we had and I only regret that we
did not have a chance to work longer together on the
Council.
(spoke in French)
As for the issue being discussed today, I wish
first to thank the Security Council presidency and the
delegation of the United Kingdom for having taken the
initiative on today’s debate and for their efforts in
preparing the debate.
Like previous speakers, I wish to emphasize that
the Brahimi report remains relevant as a basis for any
discussion of the peacekeeping. Since its publication,
many challenges remain the same, but new ones have
emerged. We now face an unprecedented level of
peacekeeping activities in often hostile contexts and
with increasingly complex mandates. At the same time,
given the rapid growth in the number and size of
missions, we are approaching the limits of available
resources. Changes involving work methods and
institutional changes in the planning, implementation,
follow-up and assessment of peacekeeping operations
will help us to address those issues more effectively.
My delegation notes with great satisfaction that
the Secretariat has launched a similar process to
analyse key questions relating to future peacekeeping
operations. Austria is a long-standing troop contributor
in the framework of the United Nations and of regional
structures, such as the European Union and the NATO
Partnership for Peace. Since 1960, some 60,000
Austrian soldiers have served in peacekeeping
operations under United Nations authority. It goes
without saying that we are following this work with

21

S/PV.6075

great interest and that we are ready to participate
actively in it and to share our relevant experience and
expertise.

protection of children affected by armed conflict, the
strengthening of the rule of law and the role of women
in peace processes and in supporting peace.

Given the growth in peacekeeping operations and
the fact that their mandates are becoming increasingly
complex, cooperation with regional organizations will
be more important than ever. Support for creating the
expertise and capacity is necessary to allow those
organizations to play a more important role. While the
Security Council must not abandon its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the United Nations must strive to
play a growing role as a bridging force until the
regional organizations are able to take up the slack.
That would also contribute to strengthening regional
ownership of crisis management.

In our view, an important challenge is the lack of
instructions and guidelines for force commanders and
troops on the ground for the specific implementation of
their mandates. Such instructions and guidelines should
be developed through close cooperation among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the troopcontributing countries, taking into account the review
of existing missions and best practices. This could also
play an important role for troop-contributing countries
in preparing troops for such tasks, including by
integrating those aspects into pre-deployment training.

Austria supports the idea of strengthening the
expertise available to the Security Council and all of its
members in the preparation of the Council’s decisions
on new peacekeeping missions. That is clearly true for
military expertise and for the specific expertise that
may prove necessary for action on such issues as the
protection of civilians in conflict. We are also in favour
of a temporary strengthening, if necessary, of the
strategic capacity of the Secretariat to manage and
oversee particularly complex operations.
Moreover, Austria supports an interactive process
in which the Secretariat, the Security Council and the
troop-contributing countries would meet from the
outset of the planning phase to the follow-up and
assessment of missions under way. A more in-depth
dialogue among existing structures within the Security
Council and the Secretariat would allow for better
integration of our collective political, financial and
military expertise and also make it possible to ensure
that the mandate of a peacekeeping operation reflects
from the start its needs and challenges and those of the
individuals who must be protected.
Austria also welcomes in that context the idea of
organizing, on a more regular basis, meetings among
the Security Council, the Secretariat, commanders in
the field and troop-contributing countries to discuss the
implementation, progress and challenges of the various
operations under way.
Austria firmly supports strengthening the
mandates of peacekeeping operations in the area of
civilian protection and recognizes the important role of
such operations in the promotion of human rights, the

22

Austria supports a study commissioned by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs that will
examine those issues. We also support the idea of
improving the assessment of current mission mandates,
including in terms of strategic objectives and
benchmarks. The lessons learned from a mission could
be an important source of information for the Security
Council in planning and following up on existing
missions. That process should also be shared with and
enriched by the troop-contributing countries.
In conclusion, we support and are very interested
in follow-up to this debate and are prepared to actively
contribute during our Security Council mandate.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): First of all, I should like to
pay tribute to Ambassador Butagira for his five years
with the United Nations and, in particular, for his time
working with us here in the Council.
I would like to commend the French presidency
of the Security Council and the United Kingdom
delegation for the initiative to convene of this
important and timely meeting regarding an issue of
great importance, not only for the States members of
the Council, but also for the entire membership of the
United Nations. Although the issue of peacekeeping
operations has, understandably, been a focus of this
body for many years — and with noteworthy results —
we find it appropriate, particularly at this moment, to
engage in a thorough discussion of some of its key
elements on the basis of the non-paper prepared by
France and the United Kingdom. I wish also to express
my gratitude to Under-Secretary-General Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra
and
Special

09-21747

S/PV.6075

Representative Annabi for their valuable briefings
today.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered later by the representative of the Czech
Republic on behalf of the European Union.
The world landscape has changed markedly in
recent years. The nature of contemporary conflicts has
been increasingly shifted from the inter-State to the
intra-State level. As a result, we are witnessing new
challenges and threats to international peace and
security. In reacting to those challenges, the Security
Council has, since the beginning of the 1990s,
increasingly resorted to peacekeeping operations as a
basic instrument at the disposal of the United Nations
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Today, it seems that those efforts have reached
their peak, with more than 112,000 personnel engaged
in current peacekeeping operations, while the annual
budget for those missions is three times the size of the
annualized regular budget of the United Nations. It is
fair to say that that enormous jump in the size of the
peacekeeping budget was a consequence not only of
the rising number of peacekeeping operations, but also
of the considerable change in their nature from simple
military operations to multidimensional, integrated
military-civilian projects.
In our opinion, the basic precondition for
reaching a well-founded decision on establishing
a peacekeeping operation and sending it to a certain
area — and, equally, on any changes to its mandate and
on the final closure of a mission — is to have timely
and current information regarding the situation on the
ground, as well as accompanying military and political
analysis of the conflict. In that context, we are of the
view that the information available to the Council
through various mechanisms is adequate, although
more needs to be done with regard to the quality of the
information received.
Similarly, we deem it appropriate that the
Council, in an adequate manner and at an appropriate
time, include other States — especially troopcontributing countries or States that offer other
significant contributions to a peacekeeping operation —
in the process of information exchange and decisionmaking. In addition, we think that the potential of
preventive measures and diplomacy within the United
Nations system should be further explored and
strengthened.

09-21747

Moreover, it is important to stress that the United
Nations, unlike some military alliances, does not strive
to resolve a conflict first and foremost by military
means, but rather seeks to address its root causes,
measuring, inter alia, the level of security by the level
of improvement in everyday life for the affected
population. Croatia fully supports the standpoint of the
United Nations according to which lasting peace and
security can be solidly built only through three
interlinked and firmly grounded basic pillars: security,
development and the protection of human rights.
It is obvious that, when we address peacekeeping
operations in their new, three-pillar context, the
civilian and police components of such operations are
becoming increasingly important. We are of the
opinion that it is extremely important that States
provide qualified civilian and police personnel to
engage in those tasks. We reaffirm our readiness to
contribute to the establishment of permanent rosters of
civilian
experts
experienced
in
post-conflict
stabilization, who can be deployed to a conflict area on
short notice immediately after the establishment of a
ceasefire. At the same time, it is important to keep in
mind that peacekeeping operations are not intended
primarily to engage in reconstruction or to rebuild a
country in which they are deployed, as other
specialized organizations and institutions can carry out
such activities more efficiently and less expensively.
It is becoming self-evident that the capability of
many traditional troop-contributing countries to
contribute troops to peacekeeping operations has been
significantly diminished. On the other hand, new
contributors often lack the infrastructure, equipment
and training necessary for the effective integration of
their troops into more complex missions. In order to
share the burden imposed by peacekeeping operations,
the United Nations should strengthen its cooperation
with regional organizations, as well as improve
cooperation between its agencies and other
international agencies active on the ground.
Since the majority of United Nations
peacekeeping operations take place in Africa, we
believe that cooperation among the United Nations, the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States is particularly important. However, one
should not lose sight of the fact that those
organizations lack precisely what peacekeeping
operations need: qualified personnel and resources for
peacekeeping
activities.
Nonetheless,
active

23

S/PV.6075

cooperation and support in building the capacity of
regional organizations would have enormous long-term
benefits.
Finally, in further discussions of the challenges
confronting peacekeeping operations, the Security
Council needs to carefully examine the question of
whether resources are being properly allocated or
whether room exists for reallocating resources by
downsizing some old missions or closing them
altogether. The answer to that question will have
significant influence on the future of United Nations
peacekeeping.
All of that said, it is impossible not to refer
briefly to the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) and some of
its main recommendations. Although it does not answer
all of our questions, the report clearly contains
guidelines that, even almost 10 years after they were
developed, need to be taken into consideration. As a
representative of a country that, within a short period
of time, hosted a number of United Nations
peacekeeping missions and consequently had the
opportunity to experience the performance of each of
them first-hand, I would like to draw the attention of
members to the following recommendations.
First, we need to ensure a clear and achievable
mandate. Secondly, we need to provide, before the
establishment of the mission, the resources necessary
for the full execution of the mission’s mandate.
Thirdly, forces must be appropriately equipped and
have the capacity, if mandated, to confront violence.
Lastly, we need to ensure political and resource
backing from Member States, as well as adequate
staffing.
From our individual perspective, we would also
add to the aforementioned recommendations that it is
important to involve domestic resources whenever
possible, but without exacerbating existing political
tensions. This can help to improve the effectiveness of
an operation at minimal expense and help to secure a
unique perspective towards the conflict not otherwise
available to outsiders. The value of this approach lies
in the possibility to develop the capacities necessary
for reconstruction and the establishment of a national
administration to govern the country after the departure
of the international community. It can also have the
added benefit of having the local population better
accept the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) and its forces.

24

Croatia would like to stress that, while the United
Nations has clearly defined criteria for monitoring the
implementation of DPKO mandates, it is important that
these criteria not be open to political interpretation, and
that, once adopted, they be strictly upheld. It is our
belief that this last issue, especially the question of
assessing benchmarks, opens the possibility for closer
cooperation and additional information exchange
between the Secretariat and the Member States.
It is precisely the strict implementation of the
aforementioned criteria that led us to different
evaluations of the success or lack of success of the
missions that were active in our own country. Our
experience with the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium is a telling example of how a
peacekeeping operation, when acting in full
compliance with all the aforementioned criteria, can
achieve excellent results.
In conclusion, let me add that Croatia now
contributes to 13 United Nations peacekeeping
operations and intends to continue to add its specific
experiences and expertise to United Nations
peacekeeping operations in the years to come.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to
inform members of the Council that, given scheduling
constraints for the speakers remaining on the list, in
particular the representatives of the Secretariat, whom
we thank for their continued attendance, I intend to
conclude this meeting when the list of speakers is
exhausted, not to suspend and resume it this afternoon.
Therefore, I would respectfully ask my colleagues to
respect the five-minute rule for their statements. I
would be grateful to speakers for distributing their
written statements if they are longer. I would ask
colleagues still on my list of speakers to shorten their
statements as much as possible.
Mr. Butagira (Uganda): In keeping with your
advice, Mr. President, my statement will be circulated
and I will try to brief, giving only a summary of my
text.
I would like first of all to thank UnderSecretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra and the
Special Representative Hédi Annabi for their
thoughtful remarks.
As we have heard, the number and scope of
United Nations peace operations are approaching what

09-21747

S/PV.6075

may be their highest levels ever, improving prospects
for conflict resolution but stretching the capacities of
the system.
Peacekeeping has changed dramatically over the
past two decades. The patrolling of static ceasefire
lines, which was once the norm, is no more; now it is
almost the exception. United Nations peacekeepers are
regularly charged with the responsibility not only of
protecting themselves, but in many cases, such as the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, of also protecting
innocent civilians in their areas of operation. As new
and peacekeeping missions are reviewed, it is therefore
imperative that they be properly trained, equipped and
ready to succeed.
In the immediate wake of the cold war, the
international community supported peacekeeping and
peacemaking initiatives around the world, including in
Africa. That brought some significant successes.
However, the inability of the United Nations to restore
peace in Somalia in the 1990s, culminating in the
Security Council’s unprecedented decision to withdraw
from the country before completing its mission, clearly
dampened
international
support
for
conflict
intervention and precipitated a rapid retreat by the
international
community
from
peacekeeping
worldwide. One tragic consequence acknowledged by
former Secretary-General Kofi Annan was the failure
of the international community, including the United
Nations, to intervene in order to prevent genocide in
Rwanda. The perception of the Organization’s near
indifference by the international community over
Rwanda left a poisonous legacy that continues to
undermine confidence in the United Nations
throughout the continent.
But in any consideration of a peacekeeping
operation, there is a need for a clear understanding of
the prevailing situation in the country. That must be
studied well before designing mandates. This requires a
clear analysis of the situation on the ground. Clear and
measurable benchmarks should be set in the light of the
problems on the ground. Establishing the criteria for
determining when they are met is important. In
addition to exit strategies, entrance strategies also must
be well elaborated. It should be understood that a
conflict can flare up upon the departure of the
peacekeeping force if it leaves too soon, amounting to
the abandonment of a fragile peace. Exit conditions,

09-21747

rather than the setting of dates for departure, are
critical.
There is no doubt that the international
community is slowly learning some of the lessons of
the major tragedies of the past. But we still find
ourselves engaged in some of the old debates. In a
crisis situation, the lingering questions remain. Do we
decide to call the attention of the world to the crisis
and bring the assets to that crisis, risking that we will
not have enough assets and that the crisis could turn
into a United Nations debacle, possibly damaging the
credibility of peacekeeping for years to come because
we are unsure of final support levels throughout every
step of the road? Or do we look the other way, thinking
that maybe the storm will blow away, that it will not be
a disaster and that it will go away without United
Nations involvement? That is the key dilemma of
peacekeeping, and we have to face it head on.
Once conflicts have ended, it is vital to undertake
actions to consolidate peace and prevent the recurrence
of armed confrontation. That requires not only
diplomatic and military action, but also measures
within an integrated peacebuilding effort to tackle the
various factors which have caused or are causing
threats of conflict. The crucial underlying need in postconflict peacebuilding situations is the security of
ordinary people in the form of real peace and access to
basic social facilities. That has been stressed by a
number of speakers. Such efforts must be timely,
multifaceted and adequately financed, and there must
be high-level strategic and administrative coordination
among a large number of actors.
Finally, before I conclude, I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and all my colleagues for the very kind
words spoken about me. This being my last day and
meeting in the Council, I feel very nostalgic in saying
farewell to all my colleagues. It has been a pleasure
and great delight working with all of them. I appreciate
the support and cooperation that I have received from
all members of the Council within this brief period. I
trust that the same support will be extended to my
successors.
The President (spoke in French): I assure
Ambassador Butagira that we shall miss him and his
red rose in the Council.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): Mr. President, you spoke for all of us in

25

S/PV.6075

praising Ambassador Butagira of Uganda. I wish him
every success in his future endeavours.

conflict security sector reform efforts of peacekeeping
operations.

I take this opportunity to express our gratitude
and appreciation to Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations. We
also thank Ms. Susan Malcorra, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Field Support, for her efforts in
establishing her new Department. We thank them both
for their statements. We also thank Mr. Hédi Annabi,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his valuable briefing.

We believe that the United Nations role should be
one of coordination in providing support and advice to
States in the reform process and in mobilizing
resources and enhancing their effectiveness. Reform is
multidimensional; no single solution can be applied to
all sectors. National circumstances, needs and priorities
must be taken into account if we are to help States to
achieve their own priorities. Security sector reform is
key to establishing peace and security in regions that
have been subject to conflict or are in a post-conflict
phase.

The United Nations has had great success in its
peacekeeping operations. The Organization has helped
to save the lives of countless civilians, reduced
tensions and prepared proper conditions for sustainable
peace. That success reaffirms the central role of the
United Nations as a bellwether of many parts in the
maintenance of international peace and security. Of
course, peacekeeping cannot replace the definitive
settlement of conflicts, a goal we all share, which can
be met only by addressing the comprehensive political,
security, economic and humanitarian dimensions of a
given problem.
The growing number of peacekeeping operations
requires us to analyse the root causes of conflicts if we
are to resolve and end them. Conflict resolution
requires States to provide the Organization with the
necessary human, financial and logistical resources and
political support. Communication and coordination
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Department of Field Support and all agencies and
departures involved are also needed. We must make a
sustained study to prevent the recurrence of mistakes
and to assess the threats to peace. Information
regarding accidents and casualties must also be freely
communicated. In that respect, we condemn all attacks
on peacekeeping personnel, missions and property. We
fully support a policy of zero tolerance for sexual
abuse. We condemn all such violations and call for
their perpetrators to be brought to justice.
Security sector reform must be included in the
comprehensive reform process if we are to ensure
security, stability and development. The United
Nations is highly experienced in that area. The
Peacebuilding Commission has assumed the critical
role of strengthening States’ post-conflict security
capacities. We therefore support the important post-

26

Peacekeeping mandates must be created or
renewed in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and
established criteria and guidelines, including the
consent of the State concerned, the non-use of force
except in self-defence, total neutrality, respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, and noninterference in their internal affairs. We believe it
important for all troop-contributing countries to be
involved in every phase and dimension of a
peacekeeping operation.
In conclusion, the African Union (AU) is playing
a growing peacekeeping role in certain conflict zones
on the African continent. The AU has launched
initiatives that deserve our encouragement and support.
We believe it necessary that we continue to implement
the joint work plan between the AU and the United
Nations in order to build the short- and long-term
peacekeeping capacities of the former. We hope that
the United Nations will take specific and concrete
measures in support of the AU’s peacekeeping in
Somalia, pursuant to resolution 1863 (2009).
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): My
delegation, too, would like to pay tribute to
Ambassador Butagira and thank him for his valuable
cooperation.
We also thank you, Sir, for presiding over this
timely meeting. This morning, we heard from UnderSecretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra and Special
Representative Annabi of the new challenges facing
United Nations peacekeeping.
Peacekeeping is one of the most valuable tools of
the United Nations to promote peace and security. We
must ensure that peacekeeping missions have the

09-21747

S/PV.6075

necessary mandates, resources and policy oversight to
achieve their objectives. In that regard, my
Government welcomes this initiative to review United
Nations peacekeeping and pledges to take an active
role.
In recent years, the Security Council has asked
peacekeepers to take on multiple and increasingly
complex tasks. In Haiti, Liberia, the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Darfur and
elsewhere, peacekeepers have been mandated to protect
civilians, to facilitate humanitarian access, to support
political negotiations and elections, to implement
security sector reform and disarmament, and much
more. The Secretariat has made great efforts to
implement these complex mandates. We applaud the
Secretariat for the frequency of its briefings to the
Council and for its outreach to troop-contributing
countries. We look forward to cooperating with the
Secretariat as it implements its new-horizon project, an
effort to anticipate challenges to peacekeeping
missions.
We also want to make certain that the Secretariat
has the ability to respond to the increasingly complex
mandates the Council is adopting. In that regard, the
United States supports the streamlining of United
Nations procedures for deploying and supporting
United Nations missions.
Despite all of our concerted efforts to improve
peacekeeping practice, we cannot say, more than eight
years after the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) was issued,
that we have fully succeeded in institutionalizing its
call for clear, credible and achievable mandates. As one
means of approaching that standard, my Government
believes that the Council should include specific
benchmarks, whenever possible, when creating new
peacekeeping mandates. We believe that such
benchmarks would greatly improve mandate clarity,
and we believe that they can be articulated without
overlooking the unique circumstances that give rise to
each peacekeeping operation.
Clearly-stated strategic goals would greatly
enhance the capacity of the United Nations to
undertake effectively complex peace operations and to
review those operations once undertaken, to ensure that
they contribute to the strategic objectives sought by the
Council.
The Council should carefully review these
mandates periodically to determine whether missions

09-21747

have fulfilled their objectives or outlived their
usefulness. Member States must also ensure that these
missions are cost-effective and efficient. And we must
continue to demand that peacekeepers meet ethical
standards, particularly regarding sexual exploitation
and abuse.
My Government believes that improving United
Nations peacekeeping performance demands that we
help improve the operational capacity of available
peacekeeping troops. Too often, Member States that are
willing to assume the responsibility and risk inherent in
peacekeeping deployment find that the domestic
training and equipment available to their troops are
inadequate to the task at hand. Some Member States,
including the United States, make bilateral efforts to
train and equip troops of troop-contributing countries.
But this effort needs to be far more systematic and
greater in scale if we are to meet the ever-increasing
demand for effective peacekeeping troops.
Also, peacekeepers can only be one part of a
larger effort of political reconciliation and economic
development that will ensure their ultimate success and
eventual departure. United Nations peacekeepers
cannot be the solution to every problem. Peacekeepers
neither fight wars nor develop economies. In the right
circumstances, and as part of an integrated solution,
Blue Hats can be the difference between endless strife
and suffering and a reasonably quick return to stability
and development.
The United States looks forward to working with
our partners on the Council, with the Secretariat, with
troop-contributing countries and with other Member
States to ensure the success of United Nations
peacekeeping.
Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
join other colleagues in wishing every success to
Ambassador Butagira of Uganda.
I would like at the outset to thank you, Mr.
President, for having convened this open debate. My
thanks go also to Under-Secretaries-General Alain Le
Roy and Susana Malcorra and Special Representative
Hédi Annabi for their briefings. I pay special tribute to
all those who have given their lives for United Nations
peacekeeping.
Last
November,
the
General Assembly
unanimously adopted its resolution 63/16, to
commemorate the sixtieth anniversary of United

27

S/PV.6075

Nations peacekeeping. These 60 years of history
encompass the tireless efforts that we the peoples of
the United Nations have made for peace and security,
and they demonstrate the firm determination of we the
peoples of the United Nations to ensure that equity and
justice prevail. Over the past 60 years, worldwide, we
have deployed 63 peacekeeping operations, with the
participation 120 countries, at a cost of some $54
billion and 2,500 lives. Today, some 110,000
peacekeeping personnel are deployed in 18 operations.
United Nations peacekeeping has become an important
means of defending world peace and strengthening
collective security.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have
experienced moments of glory, but also setbacks and
challenges. At present, world crises relating to finance,
food and energy have exacerbated the difficulties faced
by many developing countries, especially those where
peace is fragile and where there is a need for greater
investment by the international community. But there is
increasing demand for United Nations peacekeeping
operations. They are becoming larger and more
complex and require increased human and management
resources.
We must effect reform from the ground up. In my
view, we must adhere to the three principles of
peacekeeping: the so-called Hammarskjöld principles.
Indeed, we have seen that these three pillars — consent
of the country concerned, non-use of force except in
self-defence, and neutrality — remain valid and
provide a solid foundation for the success of
peacekeeping operations. They also provide common
ground for reform. It is a fact that both theory and
practice are constantly changing, and we should
explore new theories and approaches, in the light of
those three principles.
Reform should ensure sufficient resources for
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Contributions
by United Nations Members are the main source of
funding for peacekeeping operations; we must continue
to pay our contributions in full and on time. That is
crucial in order to ensure that operations are properly
carried out and can respond to the greater demand for
peacekeeping. We favour seeking new means of
financing and new approaches to mandates. Review
and monitoring will help enhance the effectiveness of
operations and to effect savings given our limited
resources. We must also devote greater attention to
preventive
diplomacy
and
to
post-conflict

28

reconstruction in order to ease the pressure being
placed upon peacekeeping and its financing.
Reform ought also to improve our capacity in
terms of contributions of contingents, including in the
areas of logistics, management and command. We
encourage more countries to participate in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. The United Nations
and the international community should also help
countries in training their personnel. We must enhance
our logistical support capacity, and we encourage the
Secretariat to explore effective means for logistical
support. We encourage countries with the means to
provide assistance to do so. We must strengthen our
management capacity; Headquarters needs able
personnel and must act in a transparent manner. On the
ground, we must select the best possible Special
Representatives and Force Commanders. Coordination
between Headquarters and the field must be
strengthened. Reform must ensure full participation by
all parties concerned.
The reform process will involve the Security
Council, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries. We must benefit from what all those
stakeholders have to offer and strengthen synergy and
cooperation. Reform should also take into account the
views of the various parties and should be in keeping
with our long-term interests. Reform also has to pay
particular attention to Africa, a continent that has
special peacekeeping needs. At present, 75 per cent of
peacekeeping personnel are deployed in Africa. In
2008, 70 per cent of peacekeeping contributions were
spent in Africa. But even with those figures, we cannot
fully satisfy Africa’s needs.
The Security Council must assume its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. At the same time, we must
encourage the African Union to play a more active role
and strengthen strategic cooperation between the two
organizations. We welcome the report submitted by the
African Union-United Nations high-level panel, and we
are ready to discuss its recommendations.
We have always played an active role in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and we shall
continue to make our contribution. To date, we have
sent 20,000 military, police and civilian personnel to
22 peacekeeping operations. At present, we have more
2,100 peacekeeping personnel working in 11

09-21747

S/PV.6075

operational areas. We are ready to continue to provide
our support to peacekeeping operations and we are
ready to work with all parties in order to contribute to
peace and human progress.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): Mr. President, in view of
your request, I shall be extremely brief. Let me first
thank you for organizing today’s debate on United
Nations peacekeeping operations. I would also like to
thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, Ms. Susana Malcorra and
Special Representative Hédi Annabi for the extensive,
thought-provoking and clear presentations they made at
the beginning of the debate.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to all the United Nations and other peacekeepers
throughout the world who risk their lives to make our
planet a more peaceful and safe place to live.
The debate today and the exercise that we are
launching is indeed timely. As a major troopcontributor, we will actively participate in the debate
and in the review process.
We will soon make available the text I was
intending to read out.
Let me also wish continued health, happiness and
success to our colleague, Francis Butagira.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, we are very grateful to Under-Secretaries-General
Alain Le Roy and Susana Malcorra and Mr. Annabi for
their presence at today’s debate and for their
statements. We would also like to take this opportunity
to wish Ambassador Butagira every success in the
future.
Without a doubt, convening this debate is a
constructive and necessary initiative, which opens the
prospect of a relevant collective discussion within the
Organization on the challenges facing peacekeeping
operations, with a view to enabling them to continue to
be an effective and crucial tool of the United Nations.
Undoubtedly, the results and recommendations that
will stem from this analysis will make it possible to
identify the areas where we need more action as well as
best practices that can be implemented in the future,
given the growing complexity of the international
situations in which United Nations peace operations
find themselves.
I would like to very briefly speak about five
aspects. The first relates to the decision-making

09-21747

process. For Mexico, the decision-making process
behind the establishment of a peacekeeping operation
is crucial to success. In adopting decisions for the
establishment and definition of mandates, it is crucial
to incorporate a comprehensive strategic vision that
considers political, logistical and financial aspects and
has clear and realistic objectives. Likewise, Mexico
believes that this process should be inclusive and
should not simply be limited to a group of countries.
This process has to be based on a solid, highlevel political approach within the Organization. That
is necessary if the Organization is to have the ability to
offer a prompt and effective response. Consensus and
genuine cooperation of the parties to a conflict that
gives rise to a peacekeeping operation are also crucial
for ensuring the operation’s viability.
Secondly, there is the question of mandates. In
our opinion, mandates must provide very specific
political guidelines that help define the conditions that
will determine the success of the mission, including the
way in which the distinct components of the mission
are integrated and unified, the nature of the
relationship with regional organizations and with the
different actors in the field, in order to achieve
effective cooperation. In this effort, we must also
consider the various components of peacekeeping
operation
mandates
—
military,
technical,
humanitarian and legal aspects, among others — which
also involve the coordination of a wide and diverse
group of actors.
Thirdly, there is the multidimensional nature of
peacekeeping operations. Undoubtedly, operations are
increasingly complex, encompassing a large number of
political, social and economic variables, which range
from the establishment of the rule of law to ensuring
the political viability of a State, taking into account the
regional and local environments. Scenarios constantly
evolve, and the nature of conflicts is always changing.
No two countries are alike, and therefore no two
peacekeeping operations can be alike.
Furthermore, it is clear that, in these
multidimensional operations, threats to peace require a
collective approach based on different types of
cooperation.
Mexico
acknowledges
that
the
cooperation between the Organization, particularly the
Security Council, and regional and subregional
organizations is increasingly necessary for collective
security, provided that regional organizations have the

29

S/PV.6075

needed legal and material capacity. The experience of
United Nations peace missions in Africa, for instance,
has highlighted the importance of having not only a
common strategic vision between the African Union
and the United Nations, but also a broader strategy
involving conflict prevention, peacekeeping and postconflict reconstruction.
In that context, it is very important that, from
outset, we ensure coordination with United Nations
programmes and agencies and with the various regional
organizations in the field. A challenge that we cannot
overlook is the fact that the lasting solution to a
conflict means that we have to go beyond military and
security measures, incorporating broader and more
effective long-term responses that address to the root
causes of a conflict and promote future stability.
Otherwise, the recurrence of conflict in a given State
will be the rule, and not the exception. Here, we agree
with Mr. Annabi.
Fourthly, there is the question of the protection of
civilians. This element is essential as we seek to
strengthen peacekeeping operations, especially when it
has special significance given the specific
circumstances. This is a sensitive subject, but it is
important to avoid the creation of vacuums between
mandates defined in Security Council resolutions and
their implementation on the ground. In this regard, we
find extremely relevant the independent study that the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and Department of Peacekeeping Operations are
carrying out on the implementation of civilian
protection mandates in peacekeeping operations, whose
objective is to review the stages of the process of
developing these mandates, and to carry out an analysis
from the stage of the negotiation of the wording of a
resolution to its implementation in the field.
Finally, there is also the issue of effective
coordination and planning for peacekeeping operations.
We believe that it is essential that the Security Council
support an effective planning and coordination
mechanism that includes a special representative of the
Secretary-General in charge of coordinating and
managing a mission’s military, civilian and
humanitarian components. It is an inescapable fact that
the complexity of peacekeeping missions requires that
they be given realistic, comprehensive and viable
mandates. However, in order not to doom them to
failure, they must also be accorded better planning,
capabilities and resources.

30

In the United Nations context, Mexico believes
that it is essential that the Security Council launch an
ongoing dialogue between the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, which is currently chaired
by Japan, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, otherwise known as the C-34, the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly, the Peacebuilding
Commission, troop-contributing countries and the
programmes and agencies of the United Nations on the
ground, especially the United Nations Development
Programme, UNICEF and the High Commissioner for
Refugees. It is also crucial to establish a permanent
dialogue with major contributors of financing for
peacekeeping operations. Along the same lines, it is
also necessary to consider the issue of the sharing of
financial responsibility between the Security Council
and the General Assembly when in comes to
peacekeeping operations, especially given the growth
in such operations.
In conclusion, it is a fact that the various current
mandates of peacekeeping operations — from
mediation and intervention functions to those of postconflict reconstruction — include tasks that are
difficult to reconcile with the resources available.
Political constraints and the financial limitations of the
Organization should therefore be taken into account at
the time mandates are established. Few things could be
more damaging to the United Nations than to establish
missions that have no chance of meeting the goals set
for them. Mexico believes that, in order to ensure the
credibility and legitimacy of the United Nations, it is
necessary to set up peacekeeping missions endowed
with the appropriate financial, political and military
resources to fulfil their mandates in the way I have
described.
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): We too wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate. We also thank Under-Secretaries-General Alain
Le Roy and Susana Malcorra and Special
Representative Hédi Annabi for their respective
statements. We also join previous speakers in
expressing the best of wishes to Ambassador Butagira
in his new responsibilities. Viet Nam associates itself
with the statement to be made later by the
representative of the Kingdom of Morocco on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
The cumulative complexity of protracted
conflicts and hot spots has overstretched the capacity
of the United Nations in the area of peacekeeping.

09-21747

S/PV.6075

There has also been a drastic change in the
environment in which peacekeeping operations are
deployed. Peacekeeping is now confronted with a
number of challenges. Most fundamental of all, it is
required to address the related challenges of personnel
management, logistical support, quality assurance,
oversight and political engagement, as well as the
durability of the political commitment of national
stakeholders, the burden-sharing of the international
community and the efficiency of coordination among a
number of United Nations agencies.
Furthermore, the abrupt surge in the number,
scope and size of peacekeeping operations and in the
demand for them has also exposed questions such as
how to better reconcile the confluence of local
peacekeeping and conflict prevention and resolution,
preventive diplomacy, peacemaking and peacebuilding
within the collective framework of preventing the
recurrence of conflict and ensuring a smooth transition
to
durable
peace,
security
and
sustainable
development.
We wish to reaffirm our strong support for the
efforts and initiatives to make peacekeeping operations
more effective and more efficient. It is our conviction
that the establishment and deployment of peacekeeping
missions should strictly observe the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and the basic principles that have evolved to
govern peacekeeping, namely, the consent of the
parties concerned, the non-use of force except in selfdefence, and impartiality. In a broader context, the
success, credibility and effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping operations continue to rest upon respect
for the fundamental principles of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of all
States and non-intervention in matters that are
essentially within their domestic jurisdiction.
Given the widening gap between the increased
demand and diversification of mandated activities, on
the one hand, and existing resources and capacities, on
the other, my delegation strongly supports efforts
aimed at enhancing the Organization’s ability to
effectively and efficiently manage peacekeeping
operations across all related phases of planning,
establishing, deploying, conducting and terminating
mission mandates.
We commend the efforts undertaken by the
Secretariat along those lines and wish to reiterate that

09-21747

any initiative to be taken should work to ensure the
greatest degree of unity of command, lines of
accountability, integration of efforts and the safety and
security of United Nations peacekeepers. In that
connection, my delegation shares the view that there is
a need to develop effective strategic oversight with a
view to improving the preparation, planning,
monitoring and evaluation of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
The President (spoke in French): I should now
like to make a relatively brief statement in my national
capacity.
First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Le Roy,
Ms. Malcorra and Mr. Annabi for participating in this
debate. At the very least, that demonstrates their clear
desire to work with the Security Council to further
improve peacekeeping procedures. In addition, along
with the representative of Turkey, I too would like to
say how much we cherish those who have died in the
service of peace.
At the outset, I would like to say just how pleased
I am that it has been possible to hold this meeting, just
a few months following David Miliband’s urgent
appeal to the Secretary-General for a fresh process of
reflection here in the Security Council. It seems to us a
promising development indeed.
I should also like to reiterate France’s great
commitment to strengthening United Nations
peacekeeping capacities. Given that we will soon have
deployed about 1,800 very well-equipped men in Blue
Helmets to peacekeeping operations, especially in
Lebanon and Chad, France is no doubt a significant
contributor. That is especially the case when one
considers the troops and contributions we have
provided to operations under United Nations mandates.
France’s annual financial contributions to United
Nations operations easily surpass €1 billion.
Beyond those numbers, we are especially
committed to peacekeeping, both because it is one the
main responsibilities of the United Nations and
because the lives of millions of men, women and
children depend upon such operations, to say nothing
of the survival and reconstruction of entire regions of
the planet.
France has always advocated improving the
outstanding tool that peacekeeping operations
constitute. We welcome the improvements that have

31

S/PV.6075

already been made, especially thanks to the exemplary
cooperation between the Secretariat and the States
members of the Council and the General Assembly, and
especially the members of the Fifth Committee. We
also welcome the establishment of the Department of
Field Support, about whose progress and hopes
Ms. Malcorra has told us. On the military front, we
welcome, inter alia, the establishment of the Strategic
Military Cell and the increase in the number of staff in
the Office of Military Affairs. In addition, we welcome
the improvement in the Council’s practices — with the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, just a few weeks
ago, as well as with the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad — with regard to
the development of mandates and the monitoring of
operations through the establishment of benchmarks.
The European Union has also always been among
the strongest supporters of the United Nations when it
has required support. I am thinking in particular of the
cases of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Chad
and Kosovo. My colleague from the Czech Republic
will soon make a statement on behalf of the European
Union, and I fully associate myself with that.
There is, of course, still a long way to go. That is
why we have launched this joint initiative with the
United Kingdom today. John Sawers has correctly
outlined it and highlighted our expectations and the
British and French positions on the issue.
I would merely like, at this stage, to make a few
comments prompted by the statements already made by
my colleagues.
It seems to me that there is a clear awareness here
of the magnitude of the questions that we must deal
with and of our collective will to tackle them. I note
that the questions raised in the French and British
non-paper have been raised on numerous occasions and
seem to be concerns shared by all of the members of
the Council. In particular, these include greater
involvement of the Council in the planning, follow-up
and evaluation of peacekeeping operations at the
strategic and technical levels; the strengthening of
dialogue and exchanges of information with the
Secretariat; the strengthening of the military expertise
of the Council; and improvement in the drafting and
development of mandates; better management of
available resources in thinking about alternatives to
troop deployments; substituting civilian for military

32

means whenever possible; the capacity for reducing
and then closing operations; and a better use of
instruments other than peacekeeping operations to
manage crisis exit strategies, for example within the
Peacebuilding Commission.
We must now define better integrated missions
for peacekeeping operations with overall coherence.
Having worked on the comprehensive reform of the
system and defined the concept of “One United
Nations”, I believe we now need to work on the
concept of “One mission”.
I also note the very clear will of the Council to
have its own practices evolve, together with the
Secretariat, in the preparation, follow-up and
evaluation of operations in the field.
Finally, this discussion also demonstrates, I
believe, the critical importance of the various
stakeholders in peacekeeping and peacebuilding: the
troop-contributing countries, the financial donors and
the various existing forums for dialogue, including the
Fifth Committee, the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Peacebuilding
Commission.
The particularly important role of regional
organizations is also a subject of consensus. We need
to better define the modalities for intervention in
cooperation with the Council. The essential element in
achieving that is to draw up a transparent and inclusive
process, conducted in cooperation with all key
partners. It is to several of such partners that I would
now, in my capacity as President of the Council, like to
give the floor.
I now give the floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Sandhu (India): Before I begin, I should
inform the Council that Ambassador Sen is indisposed
and has asked me to represent him at this debate today.
Thank you very much, Mr. President, for arranging this
debate on a critical and very visible aspect of the work
of the United Nations.
Peacekeeping is a subject that involves the larger
membership of this world body, and it is entirely
appropriate to consider how this crucial activity can be
improved, especially at the current juncture. Today,
over 140,000 personnel have been authorized to serve
as peacekeepers in 18 operations, which are deployed
across five continents, at a total budgeted cost of $7.2
billion. These statistics illustrate the size and scale of

09-21747

S/PV.6075

the task that peacekeeping involves. The thoughtful
briefings provided separately by the Under-SecretariesGeneral for Peacekeeping and for Field Support
illustrate several of the challenges in this regard. The
suggestions made by them merit greater consideration
by all stakeholders, within and outside this Council.
We associate ourselves with the statement to be
made on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement by the
representative of Morocco.
While the number of peacekeeping operations
may not have increased greatly in the past decade,
there has been an unprecedented surge in the number of
peacekeepers deployed. This surge has generated
enormous challenges, not merely because of the
numbers involved, but also because of the manner in
which some of the missions have been established, the
mandate provided to them and, not least, the tools they
have been provided with. From this standpoint, it is a
very welcome step that this Council has scheduled
today’s discussion on peacekeeping at this juncture,
and India congratulates France for doing so under its
presidency of the Council this month.
Article 24 of the Charter defines the functions
and powers of the Security Council in the maintenance
of international peace and security. That Article begins
by underscoring that these powers were being
conferred on the Council in order to ensure prompt and
effective actions by the United Nations. However,
when the Council is neither prompt nor effective in its
consideration of such challenges, it ceases to discharge
its primary responsibility. There are a number of
examples of this, which are perhaps best not elaborated
upon at this juncture, although some of them have been
mentioned by previous speakers.
It is in this context that the powers of the
Council, in the context of its operational efforts in the
maintenance of peace and security, need to be read in
consonance with Article 44 of the Charter. In the
current international context, that Article should be
read as implying that the Council should invite nonCouncil members to participate in the decisions of the
Council concerning the employment of contingents of
the member’s armed forces. Clearly, therefore, the
Charter visualized peacekeeping as a tool jointly
invented and honed by the Council and the General
Assembly. It was not intended to be an attribute of the
power accorded to the Council by the Charter.

09-21747

Regrettably, in reality, the Security Council has
completely monopolized its hold on United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The corollary of this is, of
course, the fact that the Council bears major
responsibility for the situation as it exists. It is
therefore timely for the Council to seriously undertake
an in-depth review of the situation as it obtains today,
including the question of whether it should continue to
have an exclusive monopoly in establishing and
running peacekeeping operations.
India has been a leading proponent of the view
that the mechanism of triangular consultation between
troop-contributing countries, the Council and the
Secretariat must be energized. In this context, we note
the holding of private meetings under the format
established by resolution 1353 (2001) and the increase
in the frequency of briefings by the Secretariat for
troop-contributing countries.
However, such briefings continue to be held,
quite literally, on the eve of the renewal of mission
mandates, making them pro forma exercises, as there is
little real scope for serious or meaningful discussion.
We reiterate the imperative of involving troopcontributing countries both early and fully in all
aspects and stages of mission planning. This should
include the stage of preparation and planning of the
operation, the monitoring and conduct of an operation
and, finally, the evaluation of an operation, including
the identification of lessons learned. Their views, if
found reasonable, must be reflected in mission
mandates. It must be borne in mind that, today, many
of those who have the final say in Council resolutions
often do not participate in their implementation and are
therefore not called upon to bear the brunt of criticism
when missions face difficulties if their mandate is
unrealistic or the means authorized are inadequate.
In this context, the draft concept paper circulated
in the context of today’s debate — the start of a
collaborative process — does not appear to envision
substantive collaboration in the context of the
involvement of troop-contributing countries. I must
reiterate that the experience of participating in an
operation gives troop-contributing countries a unique
ability to contribute to the planning process. Troopcontributing countries can assist the Council in making
appropriate, effective and timely decisions on
operations. The 2008 report of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations acknowledged this and
called for substantive consultations with troop-

33

S/PV.6075

contributing countries
peacekeeping operations.

during

all

stages

of

It is time that these recommendations are
implemented in letter and spirit in order to achieve
meaningful outcomes. Those should include moving
towards an integrated approach and establishing
effective strategic oversight by those Members both
inside and outside the Council with stakes in a
particular peacekeeping operation.
There are a few more specific points that I should
like to underscore. First, it must be reiterated that there
can be no peacekeeping operation when there is no
peace to keep. That is to say, peacekeeping must be
built upon a peace agreement that is credible, not the
other way around. Secondly, troops are contributed by
countries contributing to a larger cause: that of peace
in far-off lands. The safety and security of United
Nations peacekeepers must be of paramount concern to
the Organization, in whose name they serve. The tally
of sacrifice by peacekeepers in years past underscores
this concerns.
Furthermore, India fully supports implementation
of a policy of zero tolerance with regard to the conduct
and discipline of troops, including with regard to
sexual exploitation and abuse. There is a need to raise
the awareness of those entrusted with managerial and
command responsibilities and to establish standards of
conduct, training and investigation. Careful preparatory
training, in terms of a multicultural, pluralistic and
tolerant outlook, is as important as swift punitive
action once culpability is established.
It is also desirable to develop professional
training programmes for peacekeepers in consultation
with Member States. Here, too, the experience of troop
contributors with a long history of assisting in peace
operations should be fully drawn upon by an integrated
training service.
We support greater cooperation by the United
Nations in peacekeeping efforts. However, such
programmes must be in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the United Nations Charter. The United Nations
cannot absolve itself of its responsibility under the
Charter for the maintenance of international peace and
security. The real challenge before the Organization is
to strengthen peacekeeping without regionalizing it.
India stands committed to continuing to assist the
United Nations in the maintenance of international

34

peace and security. India has a proud history of
contributing to United Nations peacekeeping that dates
back to the inception of that activity in the 1950s. Over
the decades, India has contributed nearly 100,000
troops and participated in over 40 missions, including
in some of the most challenging operations. We salute
the 118 personnel of the Indian forces, as well as
peacekeepers from other countries, who have made the
supreme sacrifice in the interests of world peace while
serving in various United Nations missions.
India looks forward to constructive and
meaningful engagement with the Security Council to
carry the debate forward and to ensure fruition of our
joint efforts in this very visible activity of the United
Nations. We hope that through our collective efforts we
can evolve greater coherence and integration in the
process of identifying solutions to the challenges
facing international peacekeeping.
Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, on behalf of Ambassador Amil and the
Pakistan delegation for the opportunity to participate in
this important debate initiated under your presidency.
We align ourselves with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of Morocco on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. Let me also thank our three
briefers for their important briefings this morning.
Peacekeeping is today the biggest enterprise of
the United Nations, rightly termed its flagship activity.
It is restoring peace, bringing solace and offering hope
to millions of people afflicted by conflict and complex
crises around the world. Success in recent years has
raised expectations — and rightly so — as well as the
demand for United Nations peacekeeping. And the
ensuing challenges of making peacekeeping work even
better are equally complex and exceptional. We believe
it is the collective responsibility of Member States to
ensure a more effective and successful employment of
this tool for the maintenance of international peace and
security. It is in this spirit and context that we see the
initiative.
Pakistan brings multiple perspectives to the
debate. First, it is a leading contributor of military and
police personnel to United Nations missions over the
years. Pakistan’s current contribution of 11,135 is an
all-time high, constituting over 12 per cent of total
United Nations deployments. We have been the overall
top contributor since the advent of the surge in demand

09-21747

S/PV.6075

in 2003. A large part of our participation is in the most
difficult and complex situations in Africa.
Secondly, Pakistan is also host to one of the first
United Nations peacekeeping missions, the United
Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan,
a mission which has played an invaluable role in
confidence-building and maintaining peace and
stability in that region.
Thirdly, our field perspective is complemented by
our continuing and deep engagement in the policy
discussions on peacekeeping. In the Council itself,
Pakistan was the first to put a special focus on the issue
of surge and other growing challenges of complex
missions, in which regard a wide-ranging presidential
statement (S/PRST/2004/16) was adopted in May
2004.
Pakistan believes that the challenges facing
peacekeeping need to be addressed in a comprehensive
manner and with a common strategic vision. The
Brahimi report (S/2000/809) made a pivotal
contribution to that work and remains relevant today,
although not fully implemented.
On the initiative of the Secretary-General,
Member States approved, during the sixty-first session
of the General Assembly, a major peacekeeping reform
proposal aimed at strengthening the overall capacity to
achieve greater efficiency and effectiveness in the
implementation of mission mandates. A review of that
process is now due. Peace Operations 2010 is also
underway in parallel. In our view, any new initiative or
process, whether driven by Member States or by the
Secretariat, should be gauged in the context of its
relevance and coherence with the ongoing processes, as
well as the role and responsibilities of the relevant
United Nations bodies with regard to peacekeeping.
Our collective efforts to address the challenges
and to attain the objectives of peacekeeping cut across
a range of key issues, some of which were mentioned
by other delegations today. I would like to highlight a
few that are essential for success.
The first is the continuing need to adapt
peacekeeping and equip it for the changing
requirements. Secondly, the basic and agreed tenets of
peacekeeping must be respected. Thirdly, the identity
of United Nations peacekeeping vis-á-vis other kinds
of peace operations must be preserved. Fourthly, there
is need for equal attention in addressing inter-State

09-21747

conflicts and intra-State crises. Fifthly, a truly holistic
approach
to
conflict
prevention
must
be
operationalized, addressing the root causes of conflicts
and preventing their relapse through a fuller interface
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding and formulation of
the right exit strategies. Sixth, cooperation potential
with regional organizations within the framework of
the Charter should be exploited, making use of the
comparative advantages but without substituting the
primary role of the United Nations. Seventh, clear,
realistic and achievable mandates must be formulated
based on an objective and comprehensive analysis of
realities on the ground and provision of commensurate
resources to enable the missions to fulfil those
mandates. Eighth, and perhaps most crucial, is the
political support and collective commitment of
Member States to United Nations peacekeeping.
In our view, those overarching issues should
guide the process of any strategic oversight. The issues
listed in the presidency’s non-paper — preparation,
planning, oversight and evaluation — are right on spot.
Those are the core functions and activities that need to
be given prime attention, not only by the Council but
also in the work of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. To better perform those core
functions, some of the questions identified in the
non-paper are quite relevant.
There are three sets of priorities: first, reinforcing
interaction among all key actors; secondly, enhancing
the flow and exchange of information in all directions
and at all stages; and thirdly, improving the capacity to
generate accurate and objective analysis and
assessments and feeding them into decision-making
processes that are designed to perform the core tasks
better.
From the nature and scope of those activities, it is
obvious that they cannot be only Council-centric. As
the central body writing and reviewing peacekeeping
mandates, the Council should carry out all the
necessary internal thinking and improvement of its
working methods so that it can better carry out its
responsibilities. We welcome all efforts in that
direction. However, since mandates are to be
implemented on the ground by troop-contributing
countries — the majority of which are not members of
the Council — there is an obvious need to bring them
fully into the loop. That requires a genuine and
meaningful partnership, which should extend from the
deployment and operational aspects to a role in

35

S/PV.6075

decision-making and policy formulation. We believe
that partnership with troop-contributing countries must
also encompass their proper representation in
operational terms, as well as top managerial positions
both in the field and at United Nations Headquarters.
Member States would agree that effective
strategic oversight also requires full adherence to the
principle of unified command and control under the
United Nations. In the field, that must apply to all
peacekeeping operations. There also appears to be a
need for strategic oversight in the Secretariat, which is
still grappling with the complexities of a new structure.
The strategic objective of the Security Council is
the maintenance of international peace and security.
That is also the objective of peacekeeping. We believe
that some of the difficulties of decision-making —
where and where not to deploy, where to strengthen,
where to cut or draw down — could be overcome by
establishing peace and security as an objective and as
the main benchmark. We agree that that is easier said
than done. However, if individual interests and
expediencies could give way to that common objective,
things could be done better by the Council.
In the same vein, we believe that cost, although it
is a consideration, should not override the interest of
saving lives and preventing conflicts. There must also
be efficient management of resources. However, as
previous speakers have said, resources must not be
stretched to a limit that risks the viability and the
success of missions. The fact that, of the many possible
options, United Nations peacekeeping is the most
economical — a point that Mr. Annabi made this
morning — should make us invest more in that
enterprise through much broader sharing and
contribution on the part of all Member States.
We believe that we can meet the challenges of
peacekeeping and attain our objectives through a
cooperative and collective endeavour. We therefore
thank you, Mr. President, for consulting us. We will
remain engaged with your country and with all other
Member States in order to take our work forward.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Jordan.
Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Permit
me at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this Security Council meeting, which is
taking place at an appropriate time. Indeed, for us, it

36

means considering the manifold issues related to
peacekeeping operations.
I also wish to thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support; and Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, for
their extremely important briefings this morning.
My delegation welcomes the Franco-British
initiative, which has provided us with a concept paper
that cites a great many noteworthy ideas and
guidelines. In addition, Jordan associates itself with the
statement to be made by the representative of Morocco
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
My country, Jordan, is participating in this debate
to reaffirm its commitment to the maintenance of
international peace and security and to express its
desire to contribute to the creation of a positive
environment of peace. As a troop- and policecontributing country, we are also keen to see
cooperation
among
all
parties
involved
in
peacekeeping operations in the three areas referred to
in the concept paper: strategic and effective oversight,
overcoming resource constraints, and drawing on
lessons learned. Furthermore, my delegation intends to
participate seriously in the follow-up to this debate.
I believe that the Security Council must take
three important decisions before it decides to establish
a peacekeeping force. First, the Council must
determine the nature, scope, intensity and scale of
threats to international peace and security. That
preliminary and essential decision will serve to guide
the Council in making choices and adopting
implementation mechanisms, thus ensuring the success
of its subsequent decisions. When a decision is taken
as part of an effective and in-depth strategy, the
available options are appropriate, sound and farreaching. To that end, decisions must be based on
thorough analysis and appreciation of the threat. Thus,
the threat should be addressed as part of a strategic
approach with a regional and international dimension.
In order to do that, the Security Council may
utilize analyses by regional organizations, as well as
the expertise within the United Nations system as a
whole. In addition, an early warning system should be
developed to detect signs of regional or international
crises that could pose threats to international peace and

09-21747

S/PV.6075

security, thus providing the Council with a continuous
overview of such threats and perhaps enabling it to
prevent conflict. That would be a much more effective
tool than intervention following the outbreak of a
conflict.
The second decision concerns involvement and is
highly strategic, involving not only resources and the
peacekeeping budget, but also security and political
strategies for the whole conflict zone. A conflict may
spread to other regions and affect millions of people.
Therefore, this decision must be based on an analysis
of possible choices and repercussions, which would
help the Council in achieving the desired results in the
conflict zone.
The third decision deals with mandates. Mandates
are essential in the life cycle of peacekeeping
operations, because they act as a vehicle for the
realization of objectives and determine both the
structures and resources necessary to meet expectations
regarding troop-contributing countries and the quality
of the contributions. Mandates also determine a force’s
operational level of performance.
It is not possible to assess objectively all these
elements without first engaging in a comprehensive
strategic study. Unfortunately, it is the mandate which
gives the forces their legal and political legitimacy, and
which can guarantee the potential for success.
Therefore, there is a need for the Council to work
together with the Secretariat to adopt a graduated and
systematic approach that would include all elements of
a mandate to achieve a coherent, solid and integrated
strategy.
It is not possible to achieve success of this kind
without an overall integrated strategic assessment. The
United Nations gives nearly total responsibility for
strategic planning to the Secretariat, but we believe
that this is an extremely sensitive area in which politics
is intertwined with strategy. That is why there is a need
to go well beyond present efforts. There needs to be an
effort to create a comprehensive and complete strategy.
Member States must work together with the Secretariat
to draw up such a strategy and outline it for the
Security Council, showing the available military,
political, financial and geographic options and the
options regarding resources. Those are the elements
that the Security Council must consider before
conducting its assessment.

09-21747

Therefore, there is a need for greater interaction
between the strategic and the political facets. The
Secretariat should provide brief and clear statements
during the planning stage, which could make it
possible to sketch out the political, security and human
rights situation in and around the conflict zone, in
order to identify the major priorities for the
maintenance of international peace and security. That
approach would make it possible to answer two
important questions we find in the non-paper.
The first question relates both to Member States
receiving detailed and coherent military analysis from
the Council and to enhancing the dialogue between the
Council and the Secretariat regarding military
operations. If cooperation is carried out in an open
manner that makes provision for the participation of
the troop-contributing countries together with regional
organizations and the specialized agencies of the
United Nations, then there will be better possibilities in
the long run for achieving mature decisions that will
make it possible to achieve the Council’s strategic
objectives.
The
troop-contributing
countries
should
participate in that evaluation. That will not only serve
the strategic objectives of the Council but will also
help the States themselves in their own internal
assessments to better understand the political and
military situation of a conflict on the ground. That will
ensure coherence between military resources and the
overall objectives of the mission. Effectiveness in the
field necessarily hinges on the symbiosis between
objectives and allocated resources. In the fuel analysis,
the result can only be favourable and will provide
valuable assistance to troops on the ground, in line
with the standards set out in the concept document.
These steps can form the substance of an
integrated strategy which could result in maximum
efficiency for peacekeeping operations. Missions then
would be in a position to meet the needs and
developments of the present, as well as the growing
need for peacekeeping missions. When I commanded
the Jordanian observers in the first United Nations
Angola Verification Mission between 1989 and 1991, I
had hoped to see a Security Council delegation visit
our mission to discuss our mandate, resources and
implementation mechanisms. I noted that there was a
very significant gap within the mandate between
operational and human needs and military resources, in

37

S/PV.6075

particular regarding the protection of women and
children.
I continue to think this gap is still there and does
not allow for effective protection. I think that the
Security Council should organize annual visits to the
field to allow for a proper assessment of the
relationship and interaction between the command and
operation in the field, as shown in the concept paper. I
think the participation of the troop-contributing
countries would provide valuable assistance there.
In conclusion, political and strategic guidance by
the Council and a system of strategic planning within
the Secretariat cannot replace logistical or operational
planning. There must be a pragmatic and systematic
approach in the field, which must be carried out in
consultation with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
The environment in which peacekeeping missions
work is tense, volatile, multidimensional, chaotic and
violent. There can be total anarchy or lack of
discipline. The number-one objective of the military
command of these missions is to ensure a forceful
presence on the ground, control hostile acts and
develop trust between parties to the conflict. Such
implicit operational duties are generated by
commanders and are not found in Security Council or
Secretariat documents. We must ensure that these are
included in the operational planning process so that the
work of the mission in the field is in full harmony with
and complements the planning operation, be it political
or strategic.
If the Security Council is to achieve its political
and strategic objectives at the operational level, it must
review its entire operational planning process. We can
only benefit thereby, with a minimum use of resources.
An interactive debate must be held at the political,
strategic and operational levels before troops are
dispatched. That will ensure that the operation can
continue and have a lasting peacekeeping effect.
I reaffirm my delegation’s gratitude to you once
again, Sir, for your initiative and for the background
concept paper, and its readiness to continue to work on
this important process.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Having been actively
involved in United Nations peacekeeping activities
since 1960, Nigeria is grateful to the French presidency
of the Security Council for convening this meeting to

38

re-evaluate the enormous challenges facing United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We are delighted by
the invitation extended to our delegation and by the
concise concept paper circulated to facilitate the
discussions. We also thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support; and Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, for
their informative briefings.
Today, peacekeeping has become complex and
multidimensional in scope and nature, with a broad
range of challenges, including resource constraints,
gaps between mandates, inadequate preparation and
planning of operations, as well as ill-defined exit
strategies. Several missions are not only not selfsustaining, but lack even basic equipment, transport,
food and medical supplies. Yet, my delegation is of the
view that these constraints do not diminish the
importance of United Nations peacekeeping as a
fundamental tool for conflict resolution around the
world, particularly in Africa. As weighty as the
challenges are, we believe that they can be addressed if
the political will exists and if the following measures
are put in place.
There is a need to strengthen the triangular
cooperation between the Security Council, which
exercises strategic oversight on peacekeeping issues,
the troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat. It
is imperative that the troop-contributing countries,
which implement the mandates at the operational and
tactical levels, be involved from the conception to the
deployment of peacekeeping missions. They should
also be involved in the determination and review of
mandates. That will ensure that operations are well
conceived and administered right from the outset.
There is also an urgent need for synergy in the
performance of the duties of the special representative
of the Secretary-General and that of the force
commander in peacekeeping missions. The special
representative must be able to relate to what is
happening on the ground without impinging on the role
of the force commander. Experience has shown that,
too often, the ability of force commanders to
implement mandates is limited by the actions of special
representatives.

09-21747

S/PV.6075

Resource constraints remain the single most
important challenge to effective peacekeeping. They
dampen the morale and enthusiasm of peacekeepers
and the political will of troop-contributing countries.
Our delegation believes that neither the outsourcing of
peacekeeping activities to third parties nor the
deployment of civilian capacity in theatres of conflict
is a viable option in tackling the problems of resource
constraints. Outsourcing will create consent and
confidence issues. It will also impinge on national
ownership of the process, while civilian capacity
deployment will create security problems. What is
required is commitment and the adequate provision of
resources to strengthen existing missions, such as the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the
African Union Mission in Somalia, and to support the
establishment of potential hybrid missions in such
places as Somalia.
The downsizing or closing of existing missions is
necessary, but it should be a function of the successful
attainment of mandate benchmarks and a wellconceived exit strategy, including a peacebuilding
mechanism. Peacekeeping and peacebuilding must go
together from the beginning of an operation.
A key lesson that emerges from 60 years of
United Nations peacekeeping is that the mandate and
the welfare of peacekeepers and the enhancement of
the capacity of the United Nations to render them
unflinching support should constantly engage our
attention. United Nations peacekeeping must
continuously be rooted in impartiality, national and
local ownership and respect for established principles,
including the territorial integrity of States and the
consent of parties before the deployment of
peacekeeping forces. For maximum effectiveness,
peacekeeping mandates must be clearly defined and
robust.
In addition, resources to accomplish the
mandated tasks must be adequate and predictable.
Moreover, there should be constant and reliable
communications between the Secretariat, the field
missions and the troop-contributing countries.
Similarly, adequate predeployment training should be a
prerequisite to the successful implementation of any
mandate.
Over time, it has become apparent that those who
provide the material resources and logistics support for
peacekeeping have captured the peacekeeping process

09-21747

and relegated the welfare of peacekeepers to the
background. Nigeria calls for a change of attitude.
Attention and respect must revert to the peacekeepers,
who risk their lives in dangerous circumstances, often
without adequate logistics support, in the cause of
global peace. It is only respect and support for
peacekeepers that will encourage troop-contributing
countries to continue to commit their troops and attract
potential troop contributors.
There is a need for the Security Council to
continue to support regional and subregional
peacekeeping efforts. In particular, we call for support
for the development of a standby force capacity at the
regional and subregional levels in Africa.
Finally, Nigeria supports the call for intensified
dialogue and consultations among the Fifth Committee,
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations and the Security Council
Working Group on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations to overcome some of the identified
challenges to United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to thank you, Sir, for your
invitation and to welcome your very timely initiative to
convene a debate on the current situation of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We also thank in
particular
the
Under-Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping Operations, the Under-Secretary-General
for Field Support and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti for their valuable
briefings.
This is a sensitive period for peacekeeping
operations, with an unprecedented increase in field
operations, increasingly complex and difficult
mandates to implement, greater risks to United Nations
personnel and humanitarian workers, a deterioration in
respect for human rights, and costs that are rising in a
context of budgetary constraints and an international
financial and economic crisis.
As an example, I must mention the significant
and growing gap between the number of military and
police personnel approved under Security Council
mandates and the number of troops actually deployed
in the field. This is a clear illustration of the serious

39

S/PV.6075

difficulties facing the system. This calls for in-depth
consideration of the entire issue, but it also calls for
decisions, to try both to improve the situation in the
short term and to create sustainable conditions for the
medium and long term.
Even if interim answers can be found, there are
no magic formulas to instantly resolve these problems.
Suffice it to recall that a few years ago the
Organization engaged in a wide and profound
examination of this issue, from which important
recommendations arose. In many cases, these were
translated into concrete reforms, whose results we are
beginning to see.
It is important that the Organization continue the
reform process that was initiated, in particular by
pursuing the initiatives towards strengthening the
strategic approach of a United Nations presence in
conflict zones. This approach takes into account the
various activities that can contribute to attaining peace
processes that encompass conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
As we seek to improve the situation regarding
peacekeeping operations, we cannot forget those other
two components. The Organization has been taking
concrete steps with the goal of achieving a
comprehensive approach in order to provide stability
and peace in conflict zones. Uruguay firmly supports
the intensification of these efforts and the specific
initiatives that have been developed by the Secretariat.
These include the integrated mission planning process,
which we fully support; prevention of conflict
activities, including a strengthened role for the
Department of Political Affairs; and post-conflict
reconstruction.
Although the number of conflicts in the world has
diminished in the past few years, the cases in which a
United Nations presence has been required have
increased considerably. On the one hand, this can be
given a positive reading: that the system possesses both
legitimacy and an significant foundation of credibility.
On the other hand, it is clear that even with the best
efforts in the areas of recruitment, financial
contributions and operations management, the United
Nations system will not be able to have a peacekeeping
operation in every conflict. That reality makes
prevention and reconstruction efforts even more
crucial, as the latter is ultimately a form of prevention
as well.

40

In this respect, while activities to maintain
security are key, they are insufficient to guarantee
sustainable stability without efforts to promote the
economic and social development of the conflict zone.
Moreover, it is far less costly to prevent the emergence
or resumption of a conflict.
Uruguay is committed to these efforts, and it is
for that reason that we have so vigorously sought
membership of the Peacebuilding Commission. We
believe that the Commission is a crucial forum and a
crucial tool, through which we hope to contribute in
the best way possible on the basis of our experience on
the ground in the sphere of public security, as well as
on the basis of our experience of achieving growth
with social equity based on respect for the rule of law,
democratic values, legal empowerment and equal
opportunities for all.
Another very sensitive subject that everyone
agrees must be addressed is the mandates agreed upon
by the Security Council, particularly for operations
taking place in complex situations, which involve, inter
alia, the protection of civilians, the defence of human
rights and reconstruction. We share the concern of
those who advocate greater clarity in these mandates,
but we would also note that emphasis must be placed
on making these mandates realistic. It is our concern
that forces on the ground should have the human and
material resources needed to fulfil those mandates, so
that, as the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations
of 2000 put it, United Nations forces can “pose a
credible deterrent threat” (S/2000/809, para. 51).
Finally, I should like to address the issue of the
effective strategic oversight of peacekeeping
operations, which undoubtedly a key area for the
system’s sustainability. This is an area in which the
management of truthful and accurate information as
well as consultation and coordination among the
parties concerned are key elements for the decisions
that the Council must take, which have a direct effect
on the ground — and thus on the troops that have been
deployed. In that regard, we endorse the ideas set out
in the non-paper prepared by the United Kingdom and
France with the aim of promoting broader participation
by troop-contributing countries.
Those States, most of which are developing
countries, provide the largest part of the personnel
deployed in peacekeeping operations. But their level of
participation in the management of the operations is

09-21747

S/PV.6075

very low, and they have few opportunities to provide
inputs which could be valuable, in particular in the
preparation and planning stage, when crucial elements
must be carefully considered in order to have a
successful mission, such as the provision of adequate
human, financial and logistic resources; exit strategies;
and capacities that can provide flexibility on the
ground in case of unexpected events.
Moreover, when mandates are reviewed, firsthand information and the perspective of a country that
has troops in the field can be of great value in the
process carried out by the Council to understand the
situation and consider the opportunities and threats on
the ground.
That is why we attach central importance to an
enhanced level of exchange of information,
coordination and consultation with troop-contributing
countries during the stages I have mentioned. As we
have said during consideration of the reform of the
Security Council’s working methods, as a troopcontributing country we aspire to having a real
opportunity to express our opinion before the specifics
of an operation are defined.
In that regard, we propose the creation of a
mechanism that would make such interaction possible.
We particularly wish it to be a depoliticized and
effective mechanism that will help minimize risks and
maximize the efficiency of peacekeeping operations.
On a related subject, let me conclude by recalling
that delegations are invited to participate in the
workshop organized by the Missions of Australia and
Uruguay on the implementation of civilian protection
mandates in the context of peacekeeping operations,
which will take place on Tuesday, 27 January, at the
Millennium Hotel.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Kaiser (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia and the European Free Trade
Association country Iceland, member of the European
Economic Area, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of

09-21747

Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.
Let me begin by thanking the French presidency
of the Council and the United Kingdom delegation for
undertaking this important and very timely initiative,
which should launch a process of deliberations on a
topic that is essential not only for the Security Council,
with its special responsibility for peacekeeping, but
also for the entire United Nations system and all
Member States.
I would like to extend special thanks to UnderSecretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra and to
Special Representative Annabi for their informative
and comprehensive briefings.
The European Union (EU) fully supports the
United Nations in the field of peacekeeping. Indeed,
the last decade has been one of increased challenges in
that regard. The demand for peacekeepers has been
growing steadily since the 1990s, and this trend is
likely to continue. Moreover, the peacekeeping
operations have become more complex and challenging
in terms of planning, mandating and management.
At present, peacekeepers are needed in highly
volatile environments such as the Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Haiti. The
enormous requirements for deployable, well-trained
and adequately equipped personnel constantly remind
us that United Nations peacekeeping resources are not
unlimited. In parallel, the United Nations peacekeeping
budget has increased five times over the last ten years
and is currently bigger than the regular budget. Despite
all these difficulties, United Nations peacekeeping
operations have brought security to many destabilized
regions.
The European Union has a long-established
partnership with the United Nations in the field of
crisis management. Our long-standing cooperation —
which was formalized in the first joint United NationsEuropean Union declaration, signed on 24 September
2003 — has developed substantially over the years.
Today the EU and the United Nations work side by
side in Africa, the Middle East, Asia and the Western
Balkans.
While being active in conflict prevention and
resolution in different parts of the world, the European
Union has also successfully conducted peacekeeping
operations mandated by the United Nations and

41

S/PV.6075

consistent with its Charter. The level of support that the
European Union has been providing is perhaps best
illustrated by the current EUFOR military operation in
Chad and in the Central African Republic, or by the
first EU maritime operation, launched off the Somali
coast in December 2008 to protect the supply of
humanitarian aid to the Somali people.
The European Union member States also actively
participate in United Nations peacekeeping missions
and contribute over 40 per cent of the United Nations
peacekeeping budget. Furthermore, some 20 operations
under the European Security and Defence Policy have
been carried out so far, many under a Security Council
mandate. I wish to take this opportunity to express our
gratitude to the troop- and police-contributing
countries for their continuing commitment.
The European Union is seriously concerned at the
increasing number of fatalities among United Nations
peacekeepers and would like to stress again that attacks
against United Nations personnel are absolutely
unacceptable. The safety and security of United
Nations personnel must be given the highest priority,
and the European Union supports all possible
protective measures. At the same time, peacekeeping
troops need to demonstrate impeccable behaviour. The
European Union is gravely concerned about recent
reports of sexual abuse and exploitation by United
Nations peacekeepers. The EU fully supports the zerotolerance policy.
The sixtieth anniversary of United Nations
peacekeeping operations provides a unique opportunity
to take stock of what has been achieved. The task of
such peacekeeping operations has evolved, as has the
context in which they operate. These developments
require new approaches when formulating their
respective mandates. The objectives of each and every
operation need to be clear and realistic. The mandates
should be developed in close consultation with the
Secretariat and must be matched with adequate
resources. In that regard, we all have a common
responsibility as United Nations Member States. Clear
benchmarks and exit strategies should be developed
prior to the deployment of peacekeepers so that the
international community can monitor progress and fill
the gaps as needed.
In other words, the main elements of the
mandates should be elaborated in a systematic, wellcoordinated and realistic manner in order to ensure that

42

they are achievable. Such an approach will also
contribute to enhancing the credibility of the United
Nations.
Recently,
peacekeeping
missions
have
increasingly become multidimensional and integrated.
At least eight of the current operations have an explicit
mandate to protect civilians. The European Union
strongly believes that protection of civilians should be
an integral part of the mandate of peacekeeping
operations and that the United Nations should
strengthen its capacity to deliver in this area.
The European Union supports a comprehensive
and multifaceted approach to peacekeeping. In its
conflict-management capacities the United Nations
should focus on the root causes of conflict and put
special emphasis on supporting credible political peace
processes and immediate post-conflict peacebuilding
efforts, notably in the areas of police, the rule of law,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and
security sector reform. The European Union welcomes
the increased attention that those issues have recently
received in the Secretariat and the Security Council
and among Member States.
The monitoring capacities and the evaluation of
operations need to be strengthened. The European
Union underlines the importance of recruiting qualified
personnel in a timely manner and supports the creation
of a roster of civilian experts who could be deployed
whenever and wherever necessary.
Past experience has shown that a smooth
transition between peacekeeping and peacebuilding is
vital. In that context, the European Union underlines
the important role of the Peacebuilding Commission in
advising the Security Council on relevant issues.
United Nations peacekeeping capacities should
be deployed only when there is no other viable option,
and only for the shortest time necessary. Peacekeeping
is costly, and rebuilding peaceful and sustainable
societies after armed conflicts requires a lot of
resources. Therefore every effort the international
community undertakes in order to prevent conflicts is
worthwhile.
The European Union continues to look for more
ways to support peace and security endeavours. One of
the important tools is the EU Instrument for Stability,
with a seven-year budget of more than two billion
euros. In addition, the joint Africa-EU strategy adopted

09-21747

S/PV.6075

in 2007 has an important security component. Another
way that the EU is supporting Africa-led peace
operations is the African Peace Facility, aimed at
enhancing the institutional capacities of the African
Union and African subregional organizations in
relation to peacekeeping and prevention of armed
conflicts. The European Union aims at an effective
partnership in order to improve planning, deployment
and management of African peacekeeping operations in
a framework of predictable funding mechanisms and
clear guidelines.
Allow me to conclude by underlining once again
that United Nations peacekeeping faces many
challenges. Nearly a decade after the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809), it is time to revisit the panel’s
recommendations, review their implementation and
take a strategic look into the future. Much can be done
to improve our practice, in particular on the three
series of issues identified in the Franco-British nonpaper. We therefore welcome this timely debate in the
Security Council and are ready to carry forward this
discussion in other forums, including the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. We very
much look forward to the outcome of the process
launched today.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM), I would first like to express to you our
pleasure at participating in this very important debate,
launched by the French presidency in conjunction with
the delegation of the United Kingdom. I would also
like to assure you, Sir, of our ongoing commitment to
enriching this debate.
(spoke in English)
The Non-Aligned Movement has long-standing
positions regarding peacekeeping operations in all their
aspects, and in this respect would like to outline its
views on the issues under consideration today. The
challenges posed by the evolving nature of
peacekeeping brings to the fore its multidimensional
complexity, which requires a genuine and concerted
response by the entire membership of the United
Nations. NAM would like to express its willingness to
engage in the proposed collaborative process and, as a
first step, to provide its views on effective strategic
oversight.
From the outset, we wish to stress that, in the
context of taking a comprehensive approach to and

09-21747

with the objective of ensuring success in peacekeeping,
United Nations peacekeeping operations should be
accompanied by a parallel and inclusive peace process
that is well planned, carefully designed and supported
by the consent and adherence of the parties concerned.
In order for the operational planning process for
any peacekeeping operation to be successful, political
planning should be of utmost importance, since what is
at stake is not the planning per se, but what to plan for.
It is therefore time for the Organization to rethink the
planning process itself.
The 2006 integrated mission planning process is
an effort to provide a much-needed integration
framework for a full United Nations presence in the
field. However, such efforts are hampered by the major
and interrelated challenges of limited financial and
human resources that impair the managerial and
organizational
capacity
of
the
Organization.
Difficulties also arise from the way the deployments
are mandated or planned, especially where there is
little or no peace to keep, which is a fundamental
existential test for peacekeeping. Such an environment
requires not only adequate measures to guard against
higher risk in planning and budgeting, but also
improved engagement, communication and cooperation
among the Secretariat, the troop-contributing countries
and the Security Council.
Indeed, the NAM troop-contributing countries
provide more than 80 per cent of United Nations
peacekeeping personnel, which entitles them to be
fully involved in the planning process in all aspects
and stages of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
More frequent and substantive interaction among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the troopcontributing countries continues to be key to the full
and effective implementation of the existing
mechanisms set forth in resolution 1353 (2001) and in
the Note of the President of the Security Council dated
14 January 2002 (S/2002/56).
NAM wishes to underscore in particular that the
experience and expertise of troop-contributing
countries can be drawn upon when the Security
Council implements, extends or adjusts United Nations
peacekeeping mandates. Troop-contributing countries
are best placed to contribute to an objective assessment
of the situation on the ground. In this regard, enhanced
and better interaction between troop-contributing
countries and the Security Council Working Group on

43

S/PV.6075

Peacekeeping Operations could also contribute to a
more inclusive consultation and decision-making
process.
To meet the political, operational and managerial
challenges of peacekeeping operations, NAM would
like to reiterate that United Nations peacekeeping
operations should, from the outset, be provided with
political support, sufficient human, financial and
logistical resources, and exit strategies. Mandates need
to be achievable and therefore clearly defined. United
Nations peacekeeping operations must be part of a
comprehensive approach that addresses the root causes
of conflict in a coherent, well-planned and
comprehensive manner, with relevant political, social,
economic and developmental instruments at their
disposal. NAM further stresses that the United Nations
should give special consideration to ways of ensuring
that those efforts can continue without interruption so
as to facilitate a smooth transition to lasting peace,
security and development.
The primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security rests with the United
Nations, and the role played by regional arrangements
should not lead to the fragmentation of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, should be in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter, and
should not in any way substitute for the role to be
played by the United Nations or circumvent the full
application of the guiding principles of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. In this context, the NonAligned Movement wishes to express its support for
continuing efforts to strengthen African peacekeeping
capabilities and to emphasize the importance of the
continued implementation of the Joint Action Plan for
United Nations support to African peacekeeping
capacities in the short, medium and long terms.
NAM reiterates that peacekeeping operations
should strictly observe the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations as well
as the guiding principles that have come to govern
peacekeeping, namely, the consent of the parties, the
non-use of force except in self-defence, and
impartiality. NAM believes that the principles that
have guided United Nations peacekeeping operations
over the last five decades remain valid and relevant,
both politically and militarily.
NAM believes that the United Nations must
better manage its peacekeeping operations, focusing on

44

key areas such as the planning, deployment, decisionmaking and monitoring processes, which will allow
peacekeeping operations to succeed in the complex
environment in which they are being asked to deploy.
Finally and in conclusion, and looking back on 60
year of peacekeeping, NAM is proud to have been
represented by its members in almost every
peacekeeping operation since 1948. We will remain
engaged in advancing our common objective of
strengthening United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like to thank the
mission of France for organizing this important debate
on peacekeeping and for inviting Canada to speak in
the light of Canada’s role in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra and
Special Representative Annabi for their thoughtful and,
indeed, thought-provoking presentations this morning.
The fundamental commitment to peace and
improving the lives of others remains a cornerstone of
Canada’s foreign policy. As part of this commitment,
Canada is proud to support a wide variety of United
Nations-mandated
peace
operations,
including
supporting Afghanistan, including through extensive
civilian and military personnel; the provision of vital
equipment to African Union forces in the Sudan and
over $285 million in voluntary contributions to the
African Union Mission in Sudan and then to the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur; the provision of 100 police experts and more
than $100 million in support of security, development
and stabilization in Haiti this year. In addition to our
military and police contributions and our efforts in
terms of capacity building, Canada provides support to
all areas of United Nations missions’ mandates,
including through the deployment of Canadian
correctional, judicial and development experts.
As the Under-Secretaries-General made clear
today, United Nations peacekeeping is under increasing
strain — heavily deployed, heavily mandated and too
often under-resourced. At the same time, the global
demand for United Nations peace operations continues
to rise. The combination of existing overstretch and
increasing demand for new or expanded missions
represents a fundamental strategic challenge for the
United Nations and its Member States.

09-21747

S/PV.6075

While the underlying causes of the overstretch
challenge are complex, they can nonetheless be broken
down into a number of constituent parts, many of
which were first highlighted by the landmark report of
the Brahimi Panel (S/2000/809). Those underlying
issues represent unfinished business from the Brahimi
Panel and include the need for clear, credible and
achievable mandates, the necessary resources to
implement mandates and improved mission leadership
and doctrine.
Since the Brahimi report, the international
community has seen the deepening of some of those
challenges and the emergence of others. In Canada’s
view, five stand out as meriting particular attention. In
the interest of time, I shall only list them. The full text
of my statement is being circulated. The first challenge
is peacekeeping financing and support; second, United
Nations partnerships with regional and other
organization; third, delivering on the imperative of
protecting civilians; fourth, harnessing the preventive
capacity of the Council, and fifth, developing the
political dimensions of peace operations.
(spoke in French)
Canada strongly endorses the efforts of France
and the United Kingdom to re-assess and further
implement the Brahimi principles as a means of better
managing the Council’s heavy workload. The Council
bears special responsibility for peacekeeping
operations. It is both timely and appropriate to take a
hard look at how the Council mandates, prepares for,
plans and monitors peace operations. It is important
that the mandate of a United Nations peace operation
does not create expectations that cannot be met.
All of us have a stake in the success of the
collective security system. As we explore future
challenges, it is vital that the voices of all Member
States be heard. We must also ensure that the entire
membership can participate in the dialogue regarding
the difficulties to be overcome and potential solutions
to resolve them. In that connection, we would like to
emphasize the importance of closer cooperation among
the Council, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat.
In that regard, I am pleased to announce Canada’s
intention to launch, in cooperation with the New York
University Center on International Cooperation, an
informal series of thematic debates on effective peace
operations. That effort aims at facilitating dialogue

09-21747

outside formal United Nations structures regarding the
full range of issues confronting the peacekeeping
agenda in the years ahead. We are pleased to invite all
Member States to participate in that process of
reflection and dialogue.
Meanwhile, we continue to be prepared to work
with you, Mr. President, the members of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the
Secretariat to ensure that both current and future
challenges receive the requisite attention in United
Nations bodies.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations.
Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana (spoke in French): I
am especially pleased, Mr. President, to have been
invited to this debate on peacekeeping. We are grateful
to all those who have participated today, especially
Mr. Le Roy, Ms. Malcorra and Mr. Annabi. We fully
endorse the initiative and position put forth by France
and the United Kingdom in preparation for our debate.
We assure you, Mr. President, of our preparedness, at
every stage of the consultations, to share the
experiences and lessons learned by the African Union
in this area.
It is clear that today’s debate has raised various
questions. With regard to the growth in the number of
peacekeeping operations, the question before us is
whether to reduce the number of operations or run the
risk of being unable to address the various conflict
situations. Should we no longer address root causes?
The African Union has consistently emphasized
underlying problems, including poverty, lack of
development, challenges to democracy, lack of good
governance, complex crises and so on.
The growth in peacekeeping operations also
means the proliferation of all sorts of weapons.
Concerted efforts, especially to eliminate small arms
and light weapons, have therefore been undermined; it
is precisely those weapons that will fuel additional
conflicts, thereby creating a perpetual cycle.
Is there, at this stage, a need to reconsider the
mandates of peacekeeping forces? Should we still
expect that there is peace to keep? In any case, the
African Union did not hold back in Somalia — with
the Council’s authorization. Such considerations have
been put forth in support of an appropriate

45

S/PV.6075

interpretation of Chapters VII and VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations.
There is also the question of mobilizing donors,
troop-contributing countries and all other potential
actors, including the private sector. Experience has
shown that the willingness of countries to provide
troops is too often curtailed by the difficulties
encountered in mobilizing logistical means and
resources, which must of course meet the strict
requirements of the United Nations. The bilateral
negotiations that contributing countries must
themselves carry out with donor countries serve to
delay the deployment of troops.
How can we motivate troops on the ground, who
are the real forgers of peace? How can we ensure that
those who comprise the various missions are treated
equally, including those under regional organizations
authorized by the Security Council, such as the African
Union? By way of a concrete example: troopcontributors prefer to send their troops to Darfur rather
than to Somalia, where they are much less well paid
and where their situation is often precarious.
How are we then to rationalize the costs of
peacekeeping operations? The African Union has
frequently noted that peacekeeping operations, which
are becoming increasingly burdensome, are being often
being carried out at the expense of development efforts
and in order to advance conflict prevention.
Simplifying bureaucratic procedures and involving
local economic actors in the supply stream of
peacekeeping operations could certainly contribute to
reducing their costs.
(spoke in English)
We have witnessed a great evolution in the
cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations with the establishment of the first hybrid
operation in Darfur. The constructive engagement
between the two organizations revealed what can be
achieved through such collective efforts. The tripartite
approach to decision-making and preparation has also
shown great merit. A concrete example in this
connection is the provision of security by the Sudan for
the movement of convoys of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. It would thus be
instructive to further explore the full potential of this
tripartite approach with respect to security of
peacekeepers and mission resources.

46

This growing cooperation is also illustrated by
the African Union-United Nations panel established by
the Secretary-General to consider in-depth the
modalities of how to support a number of issues
concerning peacekeeping operations. The panel has
concluded its work, and we believe the Security
Council will soon be considering its report, which may
offer constructive ideas for enhancing peacekeeping
operations.
One of the constant practices has been the
advance role played by the African Union at the early
phases of crisis. This has been the case in Chad and the
Central African Republic, where African Union
political missions have supported efforts to prevent the
escalation of tensions and to conduct negotiations,
pending the full engagement of the international
community. In other cases, such as Burundi, Darfur
and Somalia, the African Union has, with the
authorization of this Council, deployed advanced
peacekeeping operations, which, in Burundi and
Darfur, were followed by United Nations peacekeeping
operations. In the case of Somalia, we are eager to see
such an operation take over from the African Union
Mission in Somalia in the light of resolution 1863
(2009).
It might be instructive to consider the lessons
learned, in particular with respect to the quality of
actions performed by the advance African Union
missions, since these operations ultimately constitute
the foundations of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We have witnessed the consequences of the
weakness of African Union advance missions, such as
in Somalia, where the lack of necessary strength may
result in many lost windows of opportunity to secure
lasting peace.
The strengthening of linkages between the
counterpart bodies of the African Union and the United
Nations would also be crucial for the development of
both the doctrine and field conduct of peacekeeping
operations. This includes systematic exchanges
between the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union and this Security Council; greater cooperation
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support with the African
Union Peace and Security Directorate; and general
interaction and joint programming between the African
Union Commission and the United Nations Secretariat.

09-21747

S/PV.6075

Finally, I take this opportunity to call on the
Security Council to lend its full support to the
development of the African Union peace and security
architecture, particularly within the context of the
present reflection. I also thank all those who
underscored the African Union role in particular during
this debate.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to Mr. Le Roy to make any additional observations or
respond to any questions.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Given the time, I
will be very brief. I would simply say that this debate
makes those of us in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and the Department of Field
Support (DFS) optimistic on the collective willingness
to work on questions that concern us all. I was very
pleased to see that the challenges that we are facing
were mentioned by all of the speakers and that
everyone is ready to carry out some soul-searching,
including the Security Council, just as those of us in
DPKO and DFS are. I am very pleased to see that many
speakers are ready to work on this, including Canada,
of course; Japan through the revitalization of the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations; the African Union, which we have just
heard from; the European Union, which we heard from
earlier; the Non-Aligned Movement; and the troopcontributing countries. I believe that this dialogue has
now begun. Everyone has expressed their concerns. We
have taken note of everyone’s message.
Once again, I would like to thank France and the
United Kingdom for this initiative. We hope that it will
continue. I would like to reiterate that, for our part, we
are ready to provide the Council with our own internal
observations so that we can come up with
recommendations before the end of the summer. The
more complicated ones might be provided before the
end of the year, but before the summer, we hope that
there will be recommendations on the table, which will
be approved by the Council if possible, but also by the
various bodies of the General Assembly.

09-21747

The President (spoke in
Ms. Malcorra like to add anything?

French):

Would

Ms. Malcorra: Just very briefly, I think I can
only endorse what Alain Le Roy has just said. We must
make sure that we commit ourselves fully to actively
participating in this process, because we all see that the
outcome of such a good dialogue will be positive for
our missions.
The President (spoke in French): I now turn to
Mr. Annabi, if he would like to make some comments.
Mr. Annabi (spoke in French): I would simply
like to thank you, Mr. President, once again, for having
invited me to participate in this debate.
The President (spoke in French): All that
remains is for me once again to thank Mr. Le Roy,
Ms. Malcorra and Mr. Annabi for their most useful
participation and that of all of those who have spoken
during this debate.
There are no further speakers on my list. I think
that this has been a useful and enriching debate, which
has provided many new elements to fuel the upcoming
exercise. On the basis of these exchanges and the ideas
we have heard, France, together with the United
Kingdom, now intends to distribute, as an official
document of the Security Council, a revised version of
our non-paper. On that basis, we can launch our work
over the next few months. I would reiterate that we
attach great importance to having everyone work along
these lines. We are counting on the upcoming
presidencies of the Security Council to continue this
work and organize events and discussions on it — in
short, to strengthen this exercise and refresh it.
In conclusion, a first stage could be completed by
mid-year, perhaps during the United Kingdom
presidency in August, and a presidential statement
could then be adopted in order to formally announce
the results of this exercise. That is what France and the
United Kingdom intend to do.
The meeting rose at 3 p.m.

47
