United Nations

S/PV.6170

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6170th meeting
Friday, 24 July 2009, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rugunda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Puente
Mr. Margelov
Mr. Çorman
Sir John Sawers
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the deployment of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2009/297)
Report of the Secretary-General on the deployment of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2009/352)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-42178 (E)

*0942178*

S/PV.6170

The meeting was called to order at 11 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(S/2009/297)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(S/2009/352)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Sudan and Sweden, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hassan
(Sudan) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Lidén (Sweden) took the seat reserved for him
at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation. On
behalf of the Council, I extend a warm welcome to him.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations. Members of the Council have
before them two reports of the Secretary-General on
the deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, contained in documents
S/2009/297 and S/2009/352.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the situation in Darfur. The
Council has before it the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and related issues (S/2009/352). I should
like to highlight a few key points in the report and to
share with members some more general observations
about our efforts to put an end to this crisis.
First, I wish to confirm that we are entering a
new phase in UNAMID’s deployment. Over the next
few months, we will see the arrival of five more
battalions and five more infantry companies. We are
also trying to have the final two remaining battalions
deployed by the end of the year. As far as the police are
concerned, the deployment of nine of the 11 formed
police units by December is on track, and we continue
to work to ensure that the two remaining units are also
deployed by the end of the year.

table.

This final phase of deployment is occurring at a
time when a new official will be joining the mission.
As members are aware, the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union proposed the
appointment of Lieutenant General Patrick Nyamvuba
of Rwanda as new UNAMID Force Commander. He
will assume his duties by the end of August, taking
over from General Martin Luther Agwai.

I should like to acknowledge the presence at the
Council table of His Excellency Mr. Mikhail Margelov,
Special Representative of the President of the Russian
Federation on the Sudan and Chairman of the Foreign
Relations Committee of the Council of Federation and

Permit me to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the efforts of General Agwai on behalf of the
African Union, the United Nations and, of course, the
people of Darfur. He headed the force of one of the
largest and most complex peacekeeping operations in

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Le Roy to take a seat at the Council

2

09-42178

S/PV.6170

history during its particularly difficult initial phase. We
are very grateful to him for that.
His successor will join the mission at a time when
priorities will be in the process of changing. Thus far,
by definition, the emphasis has been on deployment
and on developing methods of working with the
Government, the parties to the conflict and other
actors. While we have made much progress in each of
those areas, much certainly remains to be done. In
particular, we must not overlook the issue of visas,
which we stress at every Tripartite Committee meeting,
including the most recent. We will continue to insist
that all visas for all nationalities be issued within a
reasonable time frame.
As 2009 is moving forward with steady increases
each month in the percentage of forces deployed, the
mission will soon be able to devote less energy to
establishing itself and more to carrying out ground
operations, including the implementation of its
protection mandate.
That brings me to the second topic I should like
to stress. The Secretary-General’s report reiterates that
UNAMID is basically a protection operation. The
arrival of promised military and police assets and the
shift from deployment to operations must, above all, be
translated into more effective protection work. That
will include carrying out even more forward patrols
than those already being increasingly undertaken by
the mission, and ensuring an even more sustained
presence in and around key locations, such as camps
for internally displaced persons (IDPs), where the most
vulnerable populations live. But it will also mean
closer collaboration with the rest of the protection
community: non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
United Nations agencies and governmental forces,
which are also responsible for and engaged in civilian
protection.
I discussed this at length with my colleagues
during my stay at El Fasher two weeks ago. We agreed
that expectations are very high regarding the mission’s
performance for the rest of the year and that we must
do our utmost to meet the challenge.
The third element in the report to which I would
like to draw attention concerns the changes in the
security situation in Darfur. UNAMID is now carrying
out its mission in an environment different from that in
which it was initially mandated to function. The report
reflects those changes and the context. Very large-scale

09-42178

violence associated with civilian deaths and
displacement is no longer a major characteristic of the
crisis. Today, attacks are more localized and generally
carried out by rebels against the Government or by the
Government against rebels, or are even inter-ethnic
conflicts.
The deterioration in Chad-Sudan relations is a
significant factor in this changing environment.
Council members will recall that the 2004
humanitarian ceasefire between the Government and
rebels, which gave all of us hope for an imminent end
to the violence, was negotiated and signed at
N’Djamena. It is difficult to imagine something like
that happening today, given the tense relations between
Chad and the Sudan. The bombings of Sudanese
territory by Chadian military aircraft on 16 July did
nothing to improve the situation.
(spoke in English)
The evolution of the crisis does not in any way
diminish the tragedy of Darfur or lessen the suffering
of the 2.7 million displaced, but it does require that our
analysis and actions correspond to realities on the
ground. The United Nations will have to adapt to be
effective. This also affects mediation efforts. The
Secretary-General’s report also discusses how Joint
Chief Mediator Bassolé has worked to recalibrate his
approach to reflect the fluidity of the situation on the
ground.
Since the report was issued, one positive
development has emerged with the release by the
Justice and Equality Movement of over 60 prisoners
through the mediation of the International Committee
of the Red Cross.
A fourth area I would like to highlight relates to
the direct link between the Darfur crisis and
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). In my 17 July briefing to the
Council, I shared our serious concern regarding the
status
of
CPA
implementation.
Delays,
misunderstandings and disagreements between the
partners on key issues — including border demarcation
and the census results — continue to put the CPA at
risk. Failure of the CPA would result in a deep crisis
throughout the Sudan and the region and cause further
suffering to already vulnerable populations.
In this context, it is of course very important to
commend the parties for their conduct in their reaction

3

S/PV.6170

to the decision on Abyei taken by the Permanent Court
of Arbitration on 22 July. They should be commended
for the composure they have shown in accepting the
decision. The parties must build on their approach to
the Court’s decision to tackle other key issues and to
improve the level and quality of their collaboration.
Despite the good news surrounding Abyei, there
is still a sense of drift surrounding CPA
implementation, with direct implications for resolving
the crisis in Darfur. The uncertainty surrounding
elections provide a good example. The contested
census, large-scale displacement and volatility —
particularly in the area bordering Chad — create
enormous risks that the people of Darfur will not be in
a position to participate in the electoral process. This
would further disenfranchise millions already
disempowered by conflict.
The results of any elections would also have
enormous impact on the political dispensation in
Darfur. Elected officials would constitute a newly
minted set of stakeholders and would have to be
engaged in discussions of peacemaking in Darfur.
There is also a real risk that rebel movements may
elect to reduce their engagement in the mediation,
preferring to monitor and perhaps seek advantage from
the difficulties that the Government of National Unity
is facing on CPA implementation.
These, clearly, are only scenarios, but they
illustrate the clear linkages between the CPA and the
conflict in Darfur. It is now more important than ever
that we see both issues as parts of a whole and that we
understand both issues to be linked to the
marginalization of large portions of the population. I
can assure the Council that the Secretariat and the
African Union Commission are working together on
this basis to support the Sudanese in their efforts to
resolve the many serious challenges they face.
In this context, we very much look forward to the
recommendations to be made by the High-Level Panel
being led by President Mbeki. I met with President
Mbeki and his colleagues when I was in Addis Ababa
10 days ago. It is clear that the work they are
undertaking will make a significant contribution to our
efforts to bring lasting peace to all of the Sudan.
I have focused my remarks on highlighting
certain aspects of the Secretary-General’s most recent
report on UNAMID and Darfur. I would like to
conclude by offering some additional observations.

4

It has been more than five years since the Council
first addressed this crisis. While the situation on the
ground has changed, we are in many ways no closer to
a solution now than we were when the issue was first
taken up by this body. This is deeply distressing
because of the human suffering that has occurred in the
intervening years. It is also deeply frustrating, because
the elements of a solution have in many ways always
been clear.
The Government must make serious concessions
and illustrate its commitment to Darfur through active
investment in its people and infrastructure. The rebels
must make the interests of their people their sole
priority, compromise among themselves and agree a
serious platform for discussions. Abstaining from
dialogue is not a policy — it is only a posture. The
supporters and patrons of both the Government and the
rebel movements must once and for all refuse to
support war. Dialogue must become the only serious
option. The arms and financial support must stop
flowing. The safe havens must disappear.
Until there is sustained progress in each of these
areas, we will not see a resolution to the crisis. Instead,
we will continue to meet in this Chamber to discuss an
apparently intractable situation. The alternative is to
muster the political will and unity of purpose required
to address this crisis in all its heart-wrenching
complexity.
Ultimate responsibility for bringing peace and
stability to Darfur lies with the Sudanese. This is their
right and their obligation. The will to peace and the
sacrifices required to achieve it will come from them.
We need to continue to hold them to the highest
standard in this regard.
At the same time, the international community,
and countries in the region in particular, have a central
role to play in creating the conditions which will help
the Sudanese to address these challenges. These
conditions include the provision of concrete incentives
to the parties to reach agreement and guarantees that
new agreements will be implemented. This Council,
along with the African Union Peace and Security
Council, which pronounced itself on UNAMID earlier
this week, will continue to be called on to mobilize the
will and capacity of the parties to transcend this
conflict in the only possible way — through a
negotiated political agreement that puts an effective
end to the marginalization of Darfur.

09-42178

S/PV.6170

The President: I thank Mr. Le Roy for his
briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Margelov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I should like to thank Mr. Alain
le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his detailed briefing on the situation in
Darfur and the deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
The Secretary-General has repeatedly focused on
the indivisibility of peace in the Sudan and has noted
the need for a comprehensive approach to resolving the
conflict in Darfur and to achieving a peaceful
settlement in the country.
Our task today is to pave the way to peace in the
Sudan. This is a difficult task, especially when we
recall that the modern and most recent history of the
Sudan has seen an alternation between dependence and
independence, conflicts among provinces, religions and
ethnic groups, and almost continuous civil war. The
country today is in a state of deep civil strife. Military
activities of varying intensity are interrupted only by
brief and fragile ceasefires. These activities are
exacerbating the country’s humanitarian problems.
Experts claim that, today, the Sudan is either incapable
of feeding itself or is having great difficulty doing so.
Meeting the alimentary needs of the South alone
already requires 75,000 tons of food. The situation is
holding only because of lowered demand in the South
and the North.

nomadic populations. There is also the view that the
Janjaweed militia is forcing non-believers off their
land, which gives the conflict an ostensibly religious
dimension. Others believe that the conflict has ethnic
roots, and still others focus on natural resources and
assert that the various sides are seeking to divide
revenues from these resources.
Yet all those elements are present, which means
that a kind of civil war over economic interests is
under way in the Sudan. A number of humanitarian
organizations believe that the Sudanese Government
wishes, with the assistance of the Janjaweed, to force
African tribes out of Darfur so that they can develop
oil fields there.
I believe that all of those elements spoken of by
experts and representatives of non-governmental
organizations, and others as well, are in play in the
tragedy in the Sudan. Hence the difficulty of finding a
peaceful settlement. We are convinced that to resolve
the problems of Darfur there is no alternative to the
parties reaching comprehensive political agreements,
first and foremost on bring about security in Darfur.
The implementation of such agreements would be
supported by UNAMID.

The Sudan requires the ongoing attention of the
international community. We must strive to intensify
dialogue between the conflicting parties in Darfur and
to ensure the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement between the North and the South. For
now, there is no other way to establish peace in the
Sudan.

Today, conditions for negotiations between
Khartoum and the Justice and Equality Movement
(JEM), the main rebel group, have become
complicated. It is well known that, in February, with
the mediation of the African Union, the United Nations
and Qatar, the sides signed an Agreement of Goodwill,
which addressed the issues of exchanges of prisoners
of war and increasing international humanitarian
activity in Darfur. This was followed by the
International Criminal Court’s (ICC) issuance of a
warrant for the arrest of the President of the Sudan, the
Sudanese Government’s decision to ban the activities
of a number of humanitarian missions, JEM’s refusal to
continue negotiations and new armed conflict among
the sides in Darfur.

It is necessary to recall that the conflicts in that
country are underpinned by many factors. The reasons
for clashes are sometimes difficult to identify clearly.
For example, Khartoum officially considers the rebels
to be separatists, which defines the conflict as one
between separatists and central Government. SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon places emphasis on an
environmental problem — lack of water — in Darfur
and the resulting fighting between sedentary and

Recently in Doha, representatives of the Justice
and Equality Movement accused the Sudanese
Government of having broken off the negotiations,
saying that it was Khartoum that had failed to produce
any strategic proposals. As a result, the negotiating
process is now at an impasse. Moreover, the Qatar
agreement of good intentions lacks the signature of an
influential field commander, the opposition leader
Abdul Wahid Mohammed al-Nur. The international

09-42178

5

S/PV.6170

community must actively work to get the sides to focus
on resuming political dialogue without preconditions.
The dialogue should be truly comprehensive. It is
necessary to put pressure on rebel leaders who refuse
to participate in a settlement. A number of provisions
of Security Council decisions remain relevant, relating
to the Council’s readiness to take measures against
those who hinder progress in the peace process; we
believe that this is very important.
An agreement on the normalization of relations
with Chad was also signed at Doha, but the fact is that
it is not now being observed. There is no doubt that
stabilizing Darfur will be impossible without
strengthened trust between the Sudan and Chad. We are
gravely concerned by violations of the Sudan’s borders
and air strikes against the territory of Darfur by the
Chadian air force. We believe that both sides should
demonstrate political will in establishing goodneighbourly relations, which would be in the interest of
the entire subregion. In our view, a basis for
negotiations and the relevant mechanisms for this
normalization already exist.
But we note that the ICC’s issuance of a warrant
for the arrest of the President of the Sudan, Omer
Al-Bashir, does not contribute to a peaceful settlement
in Darfur. It is well known that the African Union
favours full guarantees for the safety and security of
the President of the Sudan: in other words, progress in
the negotiations takes priority over the judicial process,
because it is considered that activities under the slogan
of judicial fairness are undermining the ongoing peace
process. And there can be no doubt that the process is
ongoing, albeit with certain complications. The African
Union also believes that the International Criminal
Court is ignoring Arab and African efforts to resolve
the conflict in the Sudan.
In the interest of making progress towards a
peaceful settlement in Darfur while ensuring fairness
and observance of the norms of international law,
Russia understands the approach of the African Union,
the League of Arab States and the Non-Aligned
Movement to resolving this political and legal
problem. In our view, what is important is making
comprehensive progress towards a settlement and
ensuring the country’s territorial integrity. We are
particularly concerned about the general elections
planned in the Sudan for April 2010. Time is
inexorably moving on, and the process of preparation
for those elections is at an impasse. In that connection,

6

a key task is to ensure that the elections are held.
Successful elections should bring Sudanese society
together. They are also a prerequisite for the next step:
the 2011 referendum on the status of Southern Sudan,
which, essentially, is the principal element of the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
With respect to implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, we welcome the
settlement of one of the most complex problems: the
conflict over the administrative borders of the Abyei
region. We are pleased that Khartoum and Juba both
agreed to the decision by the Permanent Court of
Arbitration at The Hague and have reaffirmed their
commitment to its unfailing implementation. We view
this as a very important step forward. We consider that
the decision should contribute to preserving the unity
of the Sudan, which is of paramount importance for
ensuring long-term stability in the country and
throughout the African continent.
I wish in conclusion to commend UNAMID for
its activities. I have repeatedly observed its work in the
field, and I can say that it is effective. We view the
Mission as an important integral component of the
process of settling the problems of Darfur. It is of
particular importance that during the reporting period it
was thanks to the activities of peacekeepers it was
possible to avoid numerous casualties during armed
clashes between the parties to the conflict in Darfur,
and also to provide humanitarian assistance to the
civilian population.
Let me share a personal impression: in 2009 El
Fasher and Nyala were completely different cities from
those I saw in 2007; the feeling is completely different
there. To a large extent, the feeling one gets when
arriving today can be attributed to the activities of
UNAMID.
I wish in particular to thank the United Kingdom
delegation for having prepared a draft resolution on the
extension of the Mission’s mandate. The Russian
delegation is ready to continue working on that
Council decision. It is necessary to ensure a unified
approach by the Security Council to resolving the
problems of Darfur. Only in that way will it be possible
to make progress in the political dialogue among the
parties in Darfur, to deploy and ensure the
effectiveness of UNAMID and to normalize the
humanitarian situation. I wish also to emphasize that
we are looking to move ahead in all areas of a Sudan

09-42178

S/PV.6170

settlement on the sole basis of constructive and
equitable
dialogue
between
the
international
community and the Government of the Sudan, with
respect for the country’s sovereignty.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Let me
begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for
his briefing and for introducing the Secretary-General’s
very helpful report (S/2009/352). It is very welcome
that we have Mr. Margelov with us today; it is good to
have him here, and his comprehensive statement was
very helpful to the Council.
The Sudan remains at the top of the Security
Council agenda. We are focused on Darfur today, but
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement remains the
highest priority and the most urgent issue. Let me just
put on record that United Kingdom welcomes the
responses of all parties to the decision of the Permanent
Court of Arbitration on Abyei, which I think will move
the situation on the North-South process forward.
On Darfur, the Council’s strategy is focused on
four tracks: peacekeeping, political, humanitarian and
judicial. The Secretary-General’s report shows that
progress has been made on some of these but that we
still have further to go.
On the first track — peacekeeping — we
welcome the progress highlighted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on deploying the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). The improved cooperation from the
Government of the Sudan is particularly welcome. The
Secretary-General reports serious concerns still over
the slowness with which visas are being issued for
UNAMID staff despite the progress of the Tripartite
Committee, and we call on the Government of the
Sudan to solve that problem and to ensure access to the
region for UNAMID personnel and freedom of
movement within Darfur, which the Secretary-General
also highlights as a serious concern.
Overall, UNAMID’s performance still has room
to improve. It is now two years since this Council
adopted resolution 1769 (2007), and UNAMID has not
had the effect that we all wanted it to have. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s commitment to
reaching 92 per cent deployment by the end of this
year, but we are all conscious that previous such targets
have been missed. Those relate to the numbers of
personnel. The more important measure is UNAMID’s
capability to implement its mandate across Darfur, and

09-42178

I welcome Mr. Le Roy’s estimate on what proportion
of UNAMID’s design capability is now in place and
what proportion will be in place by the end of the year.
The United Kingdom agrees with the SecretaryGeneral that the protection of civilians and the
facilitation of humanitarian assistance should be the
priority tasks for UNAMID. As UNAMID becomes
more able to implement its mandate, it will also be
important for us to monitor its progress, identify where
the obstacles lie and adjust the tasking and
configuration of the force accordingly.
On the second track — the political process —
progress remains painfully slow. However effective
UNAMID becomes, it will not be able to solve
Darfur’s problems alone. UNAMID is designed as a
peacekeeping force and it needs a peace to keep. The
United Kingdom supports the African Union-United
Nations Joint Chief Mediator, Mr. Bassolé, and the
contribution of the Government of Qatar. I would like
to echo what Mr. Margelov said earlier. We urge all
parties, including rebel movements, to engage with the
Mediator without preconditions and show maximum
flexibility to resolve areas of disagreement.
On the third track — the humanitarian — as the
Secretary-General notes, the security situation in
Darfur remains volatile and the situation for civilians
deeply troubling. A staggering 4.7 million Darfuris
need humanitarian assistance, with about a third of the
population — 2.6 million people — internally
displaced and unable to return home. Banditry and
sexual violence continue to plague civilians across
Darfur, as the Secretary-General’s report notes.
It remains inexplicable why the Government of
the Sudan wanted to add to the misery of the people of
Darfur by expelling 13 international non-governmental
organizations. The Secretary-General’s report suggests
that now some 5,000 fewer international aid workers
are in Darfur than before the expulsions — a fall of
over 25 per cent. That can only complicate the delivery
of humanitarian relief. So efforts must continue to
close the gap between need and provision.
The Under-Secretary-General also commented on
the regional dimension, and we echo his call for
improved relations between Chad and the Sudan. Those
are is essential if the people of Darfur are to have a
safe and secure future. We need real cooperation
between Khartoum and N’Djamena and less trading of
accusations.

7

S/PV.6170

The fourth track is the judicial one, where
progress is needed. No one has been held to account
for the crimes of the past six years. We call again on
the Sudan to comply with resolution 1593 (2005),
relating to the International Criminal Court. To
consider article 16 of the Rome Statute for any
indictee, we would need to see concrete action for
peace by the Government of the Sudan, reflected in
changes on the ground and genuine cooperation with
the International Criminal Court.
Lastly, UNAMID’s mandate expires at the end of
this month, and, as Mr. Margelov mentioned, the
United Kingdom has circulated a draft resolution to
extend it for a further year. In line with the SecretaryGeneral’s report, the draft resolution underlines that
the protection of civilians and humanitarian relief are
the priority issues for UNAMID. In line with the
Council’s wider peacekeeping agenda, it requests the
Secretary-General to develop benchmarks and
timelines to track and measure UNAMID’s ability to
implement its mandate, as we have done with other
peacekeeping missions, such as the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan, the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad, and the United
Nations Observer Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The draft resolution expresses support
for the peace process and calls on all rebel groups to
engage, and it calls for an improvement in the
humanitarian situation, including the implementation
of the Joint Communiqué between the Government of
Sudan and the United Nations on Facilitation of
Humanitarian Activities in Darfur.
We will continue to conduct consultations with
other delegations in order to reach a broad agreement
on the draft resolution to put it to the vote next week.
Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to start by thanking Under-Secretary-General Alain
Le Roy for his presentation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2009/352). I
also welcome the presence of Mr. Mikhail Margelov of
the Russian Federation at this meeting of the Security
Council.
Mexico supports the actions taken by the United
Nations in the Sudan and Darfur, and reiterates its
conviction regarding the fundamental and crucial role
that the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the United Nations

8

Mission in the Sudan are playing in providing peace
and stability in the country. It hopes that the work of
both missions will be reflected in the improvement of
the life of the Sudanese people as a whole.
We are pleased to note the improved functioning
of the cooperation mechanisms between the
Government of the Sudan and the missions deployed
on the ground, and we hope that that trend continues so
that the missions have better opportunities to discharge
their mandates.
We recognize the great importance of the
negotiations between the Government of the Sudan and
the Justice and Equality Movement, that were held in
Doha with the purpose of assessing the implementation
of the Agreement of Goodwill and Confidence-building
for the Settlement of the Problem in Darfur, signed by
both parties last February, under the auspices of Qatar,
the United Nations and the African Union. At the same
time, we urge the parties to pursue the path of dialogue
and hope that the negotiations will resume and result in
significant agreements that contribute to the stability of
the Sudan, in particular in the light of the 2010 election.
My delegation notes with concern the risks
pointed out by Mr. Le Roy concerning the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. In that regard, we recognize the
importance of the parties complying with the decision
of the Permanent Court of Arbitration of The Hague on
the region of Abyei.
We acknowledge the work of the Joint Chief
Mediator, Mr. Bassolé, and of the African Union HighLevel Panel on Darfur headed by the former President
of South Africa, Thabo Mbeki, and we believe that the
international community should support their work so
as to maintain the current momentum of the mediation
work.
Those efforts are indispensable. Although four
years have passed since the Security Council decided
to refer the situation of Darfur to the International
Criminal Court, considering that the scope of the
conflict constituted a serious threat to international
peace and security, unfortunately the situation has not
significantly changed. Mexico reiterates its appeal to
the Government of the Sudan to take actions towards
the implementation of resolution 1593 (2005) and to
cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court,
which Mexico strongly supports, so as to end the
violence and impunity in Darfur.

09-42178

S/PV.6170

Furthermore, my delegation is following very
closely the tensions on the border between Chad and
the Sudan. We call on Chad and the Sudan to seek to
normalize their bilateral relations, take decisions that
foster a climate of trust, and abstain from supporting
the armed rebel groups operating on their territories.

I would also like to express our happiness at seeing the
presence here today of the Chairman of the Foreign
Relations Committee of the Council of Federation and
Special Representative of the President of the Russian
Federation, Mr. Mikhail Margelov. We are grateful for
his contribution to the discussion.

My delegation acknowledges the joint efforts of
the Government of the Sudan, the United Nations and
the non-governmental organizations to address the
vacuum left by the expulsion and disbanding of 16
non-governmental organizations. However, it is
necessary to recognize that the quality and the levels of
humanitarian assistance are still inadequate.

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by Sweden in its capacity as President of
the European Union.

Moreover,
Mexico
reiterates
its
strong
condemnation of the use of sexual violence in all its
forms, in particular against women and girls, who are
primarily internally displaced persons or refugees. We
urge all parties to end such acts, take concrete measures
to address those cases, and take all possible measures to
ensure that such crimes do not go unpunished.
At the same time, we support UNAMID’s work in
helping to ensure the safe return and resettlement of
displaced persons, in particular the voluntary return of
about 1,500 people to their homes in the provinces of
Donki Dreisa and Muhagiriya in southern Darfur.
We are concerned over the death sentences and
arbitrary and illegal arrest and detention as well as
cruel treatment and torture during detention by
Government security forces. My delegation strongly
supports work towards a moratorium on executions and
abolition of the death penalty. We believe that the death
penalty is one of the most fundamental violations of
human rights. As we have often said, my country
strongly rejects capital punishment.
Lastly, my delegation thanks the delegation of the
United Kingdom for its draft resolution and supports
the extension of UNAMID’s mandate for one year,
with special emphasis being placed on the importance
of the commitment of the parties directly involved in
the conflict, the international community as a whole
and the regional organizations, which should all
respect the peace agreements and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. We trust that
efforts in the region will have a positive impact on
achieving a lasting peace in the country.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for his briefing.

09-42178

Austria welcomes the progress in deployment
achieved by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), which now stands at
68 per cent, and hopes that the Mission will, in
principle, reach full deployment level by the end of the
year. We are also encouraged by the improvement in
cooperation in the framework of the Tripartite
Committee between the Government of the Sudan, the
African Union and the United Nations. In some areas,
improvements are nonetheless required, especially
concerning the issuance of visas, customs clearances
for equipment and freedom of movement of the
mission.
A negotiated political settlement of the crisis in
Darfur remains the only solution to the crisis. Austria
would like to reiterate its full support for the Joint
African Union-United Nations Mediation. We are
concerned at the lack of progress in the implementation
of the Doha agreement and call upon the signatories to
engage
in
substantive
negotiations
without
preconditions. An inclusive approach involving all
stakeholders, including civil society, is essential. From
our point of view, particular efforts should be made to
include women. Regional actors and the international
community need to make continued efforts to bring all
non-participating groups to the negotiation table.
Like others, we are also concerned by the
increased instability along the Sudan-Chad border and
by the deterioration of relations between the two
countries. We fully support all efforts by countries in
the region to ease tensions. We understand that there
are
discussions
under
way
concerning
the
implementation of the border observation plan as
outlined in the Dakar Agreement. We would welcome a
monitoring of the border, and if there can be a role for
UNAMID and the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) in
this matter, it should be positively considered.

9

S/PV.6170

The matter of Darfur cannot be viewed separately
from the other open issues concerning the Sudan. The
Permanent Court of Arbitration announced its decision
regarding the boundaries of the disputed area of Abyei
on 22 July. Both parties accepted the decision of the
Court as final and binding. That is a major step in the
implementation
of
the
Comprehensive
Peace
Agreement. Both parties need to avoid confrontation
and now have to work together to inform the population
about the decision and see to it that it is implemented.
The position of Austria on the issue of
cooperation with the International Criminal Court is
well known. At the same time, Austria welcomes the
African Union initiative to establish the High-Level
Panel on Darfur under the leadership of President
Mbeki and hopes that this initiative will also help to
address the matter of accountability. Austria believes
that the questions of judicial reform and transitional
justice mechanisms need to be addressed in any
settlement.
Small-scale but consistent returns of internally
displaced persons have been occurring in some places
in Darfur. Large-scale conflict has decreased. Security
conditions have to be created which are conducive to
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs). I make this point because the security situation
remains volatile and poses an ongoing threat to
civilians as well as to United Nations and humanitarian
staff.
Austria is concerned that banditry and sexual
violence continue to plague civilians throughout
Darfur. To protect the civilian population it will be
important to maintain the security and civilian
character of IDP camps and to prevent any recruitment
by armed groups of individuals, including children, in
or around the camps. All parties to the conflict must
show restraint and abide by their obligations to protect
the civilian population under human rights law and
international humanitarian law. We expect the
Government of the Sudan to continue to ensure the
safety and security of all United Nations personnel as
well as of humanitarian workers.
The decision by the Government of the Sudan to
expel and dissolve 16 humanitarian and human rights
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) has had a
detrimental effect on the work of UNAMID. Efforts by
the United Nations, the Government of the Sudan and
remaining NGOs have narrowed some of the gaps in

10

the humanitarian field. However, the number of aid
workers remains below pre-expulsion levels.
Particularly in remote locations, it is difficult for
humanitarian assistance to reach those in need. The
Sudanese Government has to assume its responsibility
to safeguard and provide food, shelter and health care
for the population of Darfur and other areas affected by
the expulsion of the humanitarian NGOs.
Last but not least, we would like to commend the
work done by UNAMID personnel and humanitarian
staff in Darfur under very difficult conditions. Austria
fully supports the extension of UNAMID’s mandate for
one year, until 31 July 2010. We thank the United
Kingdom for its efforts on a draft resolution on this
matter.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
initiative to convene this meeting on the situation in
Darfur. I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Alain Le Roy for his briefing. We welcome the
participation in this debate of His Excellency
Mr. Mikhail Margelov, Special Representative of the
President of the Russian Federation on the Sudan.
With respect to the political process in Darfur, my
delegation would like to welcome, once again, the
signing of the Agreement of Goodwill and ConfidenceBuilding for the Settlement of the Problem in Darfur,
which occurred in February 2009 in Doha, between the
Sudanese Government and the Justice and Equality
Movement. However, in the light of the ongoing
disagreements, there is still much to be done by the
parties to make it more effective, in creating the best
possible
conditions
for
continuing
political
negotiations.
My delegation urges the parties to work in good
faith towards a framework agreement for a complete
cessation of hostilities and the opening of substantive
negotiations to put an end to the conflict, in accordance
with the Agreement of Goodwill.
In this respect, we welcome the efforts of the
Joint African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator to
work with the parties; these support the Qatar peace
initiative to make progress in the negotiations, and we
encourage the parties to join these efforts. We also
support the initiatives to make the political dialogue as
inclusive as possible, especially on the ground, where
the armed groups have come together and shown their
intention to join the political negotiations.

09-42178

S/PV.6170

We welcome the role played by Libya in the
mediation process and the announcement made by the
leaders of several rebel groups during the 29 June 2009
Tripoli meeting to undertake a constructive dialogue
with the Sudanese Government in Doha.

The humanitarian situation continues to depend
on the security situation in the region, as well as on the
need for the parties to honour their commitments and
to create an environment conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.

We invite the international community, in
particular the members of the Security Council, to use
their influence to encourage the parties to undertake
genuine substantive political negotiations, with a view
to the signing of this agreement.

We applaud the Sudanese Government’s decision
to authorize the return of some non-governmental
organizations that had been expelled. Burkina Faso
continues to try to persuade the Sudanese Government,
which bears the responsibility to protect civilians, to
pursue its efforts, together with the United Nations, to
ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches vulnerable
populations. We also welcome the cooperation between
the Sudanese Government and United Nations agencies
with a view to finding appropriate solutions to
humanitarian issues, and we encourage the
Government to continue its efforts.

At the subregional level, continuing tension
between Chad and the Sudan, in particular the
incidents that have taken place in the past few days, as
well as the connections between rebel groups on both
sides of the borders, cannot but be a source of serious
concern. We encourage these two neighbours to
prioritize good-faith cooperation, in the framework of
the Dakar Agreement, to improve their bilateral
relations and find a solution to their differences.
We welcome the ongoing deployment of the
contingents of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). It is essential,
however, that the logistical means that the mission
needs be made available to enable it to become fully
operational and carry out its mandate. We also welcome
the good efforts of the Sudanese Government and its
commitment, in the framework of the Tripartite
Committee of the African Union, the Sudanese
Government and the United Nations, to cooperate fully
in the effective implementation of UNAMID’s mandate.
With respect to the issue of the international
warrant for the arrest of President of the Sudan issued
by the International Criminal Court, my country
reiterates the call of the African Union, the League of
Arab States and the Non-Aligned Movement for the
implementation of article 16 of the Rome Statute in
order to preserve the integrity of the political process
in Darfur and throughout the Sudan. Once again, our
position is that fighting impunity in Darfur does not
exclude the quest for peace.
We take this opportunity to welcome the
acceptance by the Governments of the South and North
Sudan of the decision of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration on settling the border dispute in the Abyei
region. We are convinced that the implementation of
this agreement in good faith by both parties will be
another element in favour of peace in Sudan.

09-42178

It is also essential that humanitarian agencies
working in Darfur and the Sudanese authorities create
excellent, trusting working relations. It is also essential
that the international community, particularly the
Security Council, continue to encourage the parties to
create conditions of trust and dialogue so as not to
weaken the political process under way.
In conclusion, my delegation would once again
like to congratulate UNAMID on its tireless efforts and
commitment, and, of course, to thank the countries
contributing troops to UNAMID. We also thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for submitting the
draft resolution before us.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): At the outset, I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Le Roy
for his comprehensive briefing. I welcome the presence
and participation of Mr. Mikhail Margelov, Special
Representative of the Russian President, in the
Council’s meeting today.
More than a year and a half have elapsed since
the inception of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and its
deployment in Darfur. In the face of enormous
challenges, UNAMID has managed to attain 68 per
cent of its authorized strength and has played an
indispensable role in improving the security situation
and facilitating humanitarian assistance in Darfur.
Through its confidence-building patrols, human rights
monitoring missions and humanitarian projects,
UNAMID has made commendable contributions to the
protection of the civilian population. The Joint Special

11

S/PV.6170

Representative’s remarks during his recent briefing of
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union,
to the effect that the security situation in Darfur had
considerably improved since the transition of authority
from the African Union Mission in Sudan to UNAMID,
testify to the viability of the international community’s
biggest investment in peacekeeping operations to date.
The increasing effectiveness of UNAMID
operations is largely attributable to the Tripartite
Mechanism of cooperation between the Sudanese
Government, the United Nations and the African
Union. It is essential to further promote cooperation
and dialogue between the parties, not only in the field
of peacekeeping, but also in humanitarian activities
aimed at redressing the adverse impact of the departure
of 13 international non-governmental organizations
early last March.
UNAMID’s mandated operations continue to be
hampered by resource constraints, as well as by the
recalcitrant attitude of many armed groups. We call
upon all able donor countries and troop-contributing
countries to extend the necessary resources to
UNAMID, especially its urgent needs in air mobility
and force enablers, in order to expedite full deployment
of the mission. Actions against the rebel groups that
sabotage and obstruct UNAMID operations must also
be strengthened.
The current situation in Darfur and the subregion
underlines the importance of UNAMID’s continued
presence. We welcome the decision on 21 July by the
African Union’s Peace and Security Council to extend
the mandate of UNAMID for another year and to
appoint a new commander for UNAMID. As the
Security Council is expected to renew UNAMID’s
mandate later this month, Viet Nam reiterates its strong
support for an early and full deployment of the
mission. It is our deep conviction that, once fully
deployed, UNAMID will contribute more effectively to
the consolidation of the security environment in its
areas of operation, as well as to the Darfur peace
process. We thank the United Kingdom delegation for
preparing a draft resolution on this matter, and look
forward to contributing to its consensus.
There is no military solution to the Darfur
conflict. Viet Nam has consistently reaffirmed its full
support for a comprehensive political solution to the
issue of Darfur. The recent resumption of talks between
the Sudanese Government and the Justice and Equality

12

Movement on implementing the Doha Agreement is a
step in the right direction, albeit with limited success
due conditions imposed by the Sudanese Government.
All parties concerned, especially the rebel movements,
must demonstrate goodwill and fully engage in
constructive dialogue and peace talks without
preconditions under the auspices of the Joint Chief
Mediator, Mr. Djibrill Bassolé.
Tension in the Chad-Sudan border areas continues
to threaten regional peace and security, as well as
UNAMID’s operations. We call upon all parties
concerned and regional States to exercise the utmost
restraint, resolve their differences peacefully and engage
fully in dialogue to defuse the current crisis in Darfur.
Conscious of the organic relationship between
peace and justice in Darfur, we would like to reiterate
our concern, also expressed by the African Union, the
League of Arab Nations and the Non-Aligned
Movement, about the International Criminal Court’s
arrest warrant issued against the President of the
Sudan, and call for further caution in this connection.
To succeed, mediation efforts must be better
coordinated and concerted. We highly appreciate the
close cooperation and
consultations between
Mr. Bassolé and Qatar, Libya and the African Union’s
High-Level Panel on Darfur in their common search
for a satisfactory solution to the Darfur conflict. Given
the indivisibility of peace in the Sudan and the critical
thresholds of the 2010 elections and 2011 referendum,
further and closer coordination of efforts between
UNAMID and the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
is crucial to both the Darfur peace process and the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, and thus to restoring lasting peace and
stability to Darfur and the Sudan at large.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): We welcome the
Secretary-General’s
reports
(S/2009/297
and
S/2009/352) and thank Under-Secretary General Le
Roy for his briefing. We also appreciate the presence
and contribution of His Excellency Mr. Mikhail
Margelov, Special Representative of the President of
the Russian Federation.
Turkey welcomes the progress made so far in the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The many
challenges intrinsic to the complex setting in which
that deployment is ongoing have made it hard for
UNAMID to reach full operational capability. The

09-42178

S/PV.6170

Secretary-General’s projection that UNAMID will
reach 92 per cent of its authorized strength by the end
of the year is very noteworthy. That goal must be met.
Turkey commends the significant progress
already made possible through the work of the
Tripartite Committee, comprised of the African Union
(AU), the United Nations and the Sudanese
Government. But much more needs to be done. The
coming months will show whether that mechanism is
able to reach its full potential. Alleviating operational
difficulties faced by UNAMID, whether in the
deployment and rotation of forces, the timely flow of
equipment or local restrictions on its freedom of
movement, is of immediate priority.
UNAMID is already an anchor of stability in
Darfur. Once fully operational, it can begin to help turn
back the tide. However, there can be no alternative to a
political solution to the Darfur crisis. Turkey welcomes
and fully supports the Doha process, the work of the
AU-United Nations Chief Mediator and the roles being
played by Qatar and Libya. While some important
progress has been made, a cessation of hostilities that
can lead to a lasting ceasefire has not been possible.
In the coming days and months, the Council will
have to closely monitor developments in the Doha
process and apply pressure when and where necessary.
The peace process must be inclusive of all. Certain
rebel groups must not be allowed to monopolize the
process or dictate the pace, or indeed the terms. All
groups must come to the table without preconditions
and work with the mediation and their counterparts to
bring about viable compromises. In order to facilitate a
solution, the Council has to become more involved in
the political process and make it clear to all the parties
that intransigence comes with a price.
Turkey continues to be concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Darfur. The Council has
pronounced itself clearly on developments in that
regard over the past several months, as has the
Secretary-General. We are happy to note the important
progress that has been made in filling the gaps that
have emerged in the post-4 March environment.
However, more needs to be done. In moving forward, it
is critically important to keep the humanitarian aspect
of the equation apolitical. The humanitarian aid
community, working with the United Nations and the
Sudanese Government, must be allowed to do its
crucial work and should be supported and protected.

09-42178

Developments on the Sudan-Chad border are a
source of growing concern for Turkey. Cross-border
aerial bombings, in violation of international law,
cannot be condoned. Both countries need to understand
that their interests lie not in conflict, but in
cooperation. A change of tone and approach is sorely
needed. Many agreements have been enacted and not
implemented by the two neighbouring nations. A highlevel mediation effort building on existing agreements,
that takes into consideration the complex dynamics at
play and includes the right incentives, is the way
forward for lasting political rapprochement.
In all of our efforts with regard to Darfur, be they
through UNAMID or the joint mediation effort, the
African Union continues to be a vital partner. In that
regard, Turkey believes that it will be important for the
Council to keep listening intently to the calls made by
the African Union on different and sensitive aspects of
the Darfur crisis.
We welcome the draft resolution prepared by the
delegation of the United Kingdom to extend the
mandate of UNAMID for one more year. Turkey will
continue to participate actively in the deliberations to
finalize that text, with a view to ensuring as balanced
and productive an end result as possible.
Finally, Turkey commends all UNAMID
personnel and the humanitarian aid workers on the
ground for their courage, commitment and composure
under fire. We reiterate here that they have our full
support.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Le Roy for his briefing on the latest
developments in the Sudan and the progress made in
the deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We also
welcome the presence of Mr. Mikhail Margelov,
Special Representative of the President of the Russian
Federation on the Sudan.
We are very pleased to note that, in his report
(S/2009/352) to the Security Council, the SecretaryGeneral states that progress in UNAMID’s deployment
has recently accelerated and that it is likely that the
goal of completing 92 per cent of its deployment will
be reached. We would like to express our great
appreciation for the efforts made by the Secretariat, the
African Union (AU) and the Government of the Sudan
in that regard.

13

S/PV.6170

Events have proved that the Tripartite Mechanism
is successful and effective and has played a very key
role in UNAMID’s deployment. The Mechanism will
also serve as a very important guarantee for the future
successful
implementation
of
the
UNAMID
peacekeeping functions. The parties should value this
hard-won and very effective Mechanism for
cooperation. We are convinced that, so long as the
three parties maintain their will to cooperate and the
current positive momentum, any new problems and
situations that might emerge in the peacekeeping
process in Darfur can be resolved.
Compared to the gratifying progress in the
deployment of the peace Operation, the political
process in Darfur has obviously encountered some
major obstacles. However, without sincere and serious
political negotiations among the parties, UNAMID will
continue to face the problem of whether there will be
peace for it to keep. Unfortunately, as a result of the
exorbitant demands made by some armed rebel groups
and their obstinate resistance to negotiation, the future
of the political process in Darfur is very difficult to
predict. Joint Chief Mediator Djibrill Bassolé has
travelled far and wide and actively used his good
offices to promote the Doha process. The AU, the
League of Arab States and many countries have also
made unrelenting efforts to that end. Those efforts are
generally in conformity with the policy goals of the
Security Council on the question of Darfur. They
should therefore be given the support and cooperation
of the Council.
We demand that all armed rebel groups show
more political will to participate in the Doha process.
We also call on the relevant members of the Security
Council with influence on the armed rebels to take
steps to ensure that those groups participate in the
political process in Darfur.
China has always closely followed developments
in the humanitarian situation in Darfur. We appreciate
the contributions made by the United Nations, the
Sudanese Government and the non-governmental
organizations that have been providing assistance in
Darfur to improve the humanitarian situation there. It
is our hope that the parties will continue to strengthen
their cooperation on the basis of mutual respect and
consultation on an equal footing so that humanitarian
relief efforts can be smoothly carried out in Darfur.
China has already provided massive humanitarian and
development assistance to Darfur. We will continue to

14

work with the rest of the international community in
helping the Sudanese Government to continuously
improve the living conditions of the people of Darfur.
The AU is a very important strategic partner of
the United Nations in resolving the Darfur issue, and
its opinions and concerns deserve the close attention of
the Security Council. China welcomes the efforts of the
African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur, under the
leadership of the former President of South Africa, to
study in depth the situation in Darfur. We look forward
to seeing the useful recommendations of the Panel on
appropriate ways to resolve such issues as impunity,
peaceful reconciliation and healing the wounds of war.
The warrant signed by the International Criminal
Court for the arrest of the President of the Sudan has
had negative effects on the political process, the
deployment of the peacekeeping Operation and
humanitarian assistance. Not long ago, the AU summit
reiterated its clear opposition to the action of the Court.
We hope that all the parties will fully respect the AU’s
position and strive to cooperate with its efforts to
safeguard the overall objective of peace in the Sudan.
UNAMID’s mandate will soon expire. We believe
that the deployment of the peacekeeping Operation in
Darfur has been carried out in very difficult
circumstances and that its achievements to date have
been hard won. That is due not only to the genuine
cooperation of the Tripartite Mechanism, but also to
the sincere and pragmatic support of the Security
Council. We hope that, this time, the draft resolution
renewing UNAMID’s mandate will be focused and not
revisit controversial issues so as not to undermine
cooperation among the parties. In order to resolve
those issues, the role of the Tripartite Mechanism
should be brought fully into play. That would both
assist the Security Council in smoothly implementing
its task of peacekeeping in Darfur and serve the longterm interests of Council members in Darfur.
To that end, The Chinese delegation will
participate actively in the consultations on the draft
resolution renewing UNAMID’s mandate. We hope that
the Security Council can adopt it as soon as possible.
Mr. Skračić (Croatia): Like others, I would like
to thank Mr. Le Roy for today’s briefing on the
situation in Darfur and elsewhere in the Sudan and to
welcome the presence of Mr. Margelov, Special
Representative of the President of the Russian
Federation on the Sudan.

09-42178

S/PV.6170

Once again, we find ourselves faced with a
dichotomy when addressing the situation in Darfur.
While we would like to welcome direct talks between
the Government of the Sudan and the Justice and
Equality Movement (JEM) — and, to some extent,
between the Sudan and Chad — we are also faced with
obstacles along that path, as well as with continued,
albeit reduced, violence. That is certainly not
commensurate with the goals that the sides are trying
to achieve in the negotiations.
Croatia welcomes the stated commitment to the
peace process on the part of both the Government of
the Sudan and JEM, as expressed by both parties. It
includes a reaffirmation of the Agreement of Goodwill
and Confidence-Building for the Settlement of the
Problem in Darfur, signed in Doha in February this
year, as well as the exchange of lists of respective
detainees and a willingness to work on the release of
prisoners. Against that backdrop, however, we are
concerned at the preconditions that each side has set
before discussing a framework agreement, with JEM
demanding a release of prisoners and the Government
insisting on a cessation of hostilities. That has led to an
impasse and to a suspension of the talks in Doha.
We are also concerned at the application of
numerous death sentences by the Government of the
Sudan and the effect that that is having on direct talks
with JEM. Both JEM and the Sudanese Government
need to understand that military action works only to
prolong this protracted conflict and to put civilians at
risk. We therefore wholeheartedly support the work
being done by Joint Chief Mediator Bassolé, including
by encouraging the rebels to come to Doha with a
united position. We also support the visit to Darfur by
the African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur, led by
former South African President Mbeki, and look
forward to its releasing its findings and making
recommendations in the near future.
Croatia concurs with the Secretary-General’s
assessment and concerns regarding the deterioration in
Chad-Sudan relations, especially in light of the
continuing support that the sides are providing each
other’s armed opposition forces. We call upon them to
refrain from such acts or acts that may lead to the
escalation of tensions and exacerbate the already tense
situation on their mutual border. We are particularly
concerned about the cross-border incursions from
Chadian territory into western Darfur. As the
Secretary-General has stated, both sides need to

09-42178

exercise maximum restraint and return to the
framework of their mutual agreements, including, but
not limited to, the Doha Agreement of 3 May this year
and the Dakar Agreement of 13 March last year. In that
regard, we would like to express our appreciation to
the Governments of Qatar and Libya for their
mediation efforts.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, my
delegation concurs with the Secretary-General’s
assessment that, although there has been an
improvement in the level of cooperation among the
Government of the Sudan, the United Nations and the
remaining
community
of
non-governmental
organizations, serious gaps remain. The consequences
of the 4 March expulsions have put a large number of
innocent, exhausted civilians at great risk, and we note
that the number of humanitarian workers has been
reduced by almost 5,000, affecting some 1.1 million
beneficiaries of food, water and sanitation aid and
1.5 million who receive health services support. We
also note that the rainy season is coming soon and that
the World Health Organization has warned of an
increased risk of water-borne diseases.
Croatia is concerned by the observation made in
the Secretary-General’s report that the mission still
faces considerable challenges to its freedom of
movement and therefore to its ability to implement its
mandate. We are also very concerned at the
bureaucratic impediments put in place by the
Government of the Sudan to obstruct the movement of
contingent-owned equipment, including the Nigerian
armed personnel carriers and Rwandan vehicles still
awaiting customs clearance. We call on the
Government of the Sudan to work diligently with
UNAMID to address and resolve those issues. The
Tripartite Mechanism now in place is a step in the right
direction towards identifying and resolving such issues.
Considering the overall precarious situation in
UNAMID’s area of responsibility, including the
continued armed clashes between the Government and
rebel movements, stagnation in the implementation of
recent initiatives, the build-up of forces and the
possibility of further clashes along the Sudan-Chad
border, we reiterate our appeal to the Council to place
greater emphasis on the regional dimension of
UNAMID’s work and to enable that mission, other
missions in the region and United Nations presences on
the ground to cooperate more closely with one another,

15

S/PV.6170

thereby making them more efficient in fulfilling their
respective and often overlapping mandates.
Finally, my delegation would also like to thank
the United Kingdom delegation for preparing and
distributing the first version of the Security Council
draft resolution on UNAMID’s extension. We stand
ready to work with other Council members on
completing this task.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
May I begin by thanking Mr. Le Roy for his latest
briefing on the situation in the Sudan and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). I welcome the presence among us of
Mr. Margelov, Special Representative of the President
of the Russian Federation on the Sudan.
Costa Rica believes that it is essential to move
ahead on four major issues, all of equal importance,
that hinder a political settlement of the conflict in the
Sudan, directly affect the living conditions of the
civilian population, and jeopardize the fulfilment of
UNAMID’s mandate.
First, relations between the Sudan and Chad
cannot remain a source of instability and endless
anguish for the civilian population, refugees and
internally displaced persons on both sides of the
border. It is time for maturity to prevail. The illegal
raids, unauthorized flights and bombardment of
neighbouring territories must cease. It is time to ensure
the full implementation of the Dakar and Doha
Agreements and for both countries to end their support
for the rebel groups that they harbour, sustain and
allow to take refuge in their territories. It is illegal, it is
done openly, and it cannot continue.
Secondly, Costa Rica hopes that by the end of the
month the Justice and Equality Movement and the
Government of the Sudan will have made progress in
their negotiations in the context of the peace process
and the implementation of the Agreement of Goodwill
and Confidence-building for the Settlement of the
Problem in Darfur. In that regard, we recognize the
work of Joint Chief Mediator Bassolé and support his
initiatives to ensure a broadly inclusive process that
brings other rebel groups into the peace process and, to
that end, establishes a consultative forum in Darfur.
We appreciate the initiatives undertaken by Qatar
and Libya, by Mr. Gration and Mr. Margelov, and by
the African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur. My

16

delegation looks forward to reading the report of the
Panel, led by President Mbeki, to be issued in August,
and welcomes its proposals on accountability for
serious crimes, accelerating the peace process in
Darfur and achieving reconciliation among the parties
in the region.
Thirdly, disarming civilians who were involved in
tribal clashes in the southern Sudan is a priority for the
international community. Costa Rica is disturbed by the
high number of victims and its potentially negative
impact on the peace processes.
Last but certainly not least, we believe that
attention must be focused on the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation caused by the action of the
Government of the Sudan against non-governmental
organizations that were responsible for providing more
than half the assistance to Darfur. We commend the
efforts of the Government of the Sudan, the nongovernmental
organizations,
the
international
community and agencies of the United Nations system
to mitigate the consequences of that regrettable
decision, but we are concerned about the sustainability
of those efforts and about their quality, which is
undoubtedly inferior to that provided before the
Government took its decision. It is essential that the
2007 joint communiqué on the facilitation of
humanitarian activities in Darfur, the main framework
for cooperation, continue to be implemented, and that
we support the work of the expanded High-Level
Committee.
We must remember that the affected humanitarian
organizations not only provided services, but also
generated an atmosphere beneficial to the safety of the
populations they served. Their expulsion created a
vacuum in civilian protection in the areas where they
were deployed. The alleviation of suffering and
protection against abuse are essential elements of
humanitarian assistance. Such concerns prompted us to
call for the preparation of a report on developments in
the humanitarian situation in the Sudan.
In the current circumstances, it is essential that
international humanitarian law, in particular with
regard to humanitarian access to victims and to the
protection of humanitarian personnel, be respected. We
regret that humanitarian personnel continue to be
robbed and kidnapped, and condemn acts of banditry
and sexual violence against the civilian population.

09-42178

S/PV.6170

Costa Rica appreciates the contribution of the
African Union to the peaceful settlement of the conflict
in Darfur, but regrets its recent decision to block the
cooperation of its members with the International
Criminal Court. Like most representatives seated at
this table, we know that this decision enjoys limited
and half-hearted support, and we trust that the African
Union, which has acted in an exemplary manner in
many areas, will remedy a decision that taints its
history and achievements.
Finally, we thank the United Kingdom for
preparing a draft resolution extending the mandate of
UNAMID, which the Security Council will shortly
adopt. We reiterate our call upon the Sudanese
authorities to cooperate fully with UNAMID and the
work of the United Nations system throughout the
Sudan. The Secretary-General’s report notes that 92 per
cent of UNAMID’s total authorized strength will soon
be in place. That will certainly improve the physical
protection of civilians. We thank those countries that
have contributed personnel to strengthen the mission at
a decisive moment. We urge the Government of the
Sudan to eliminate all obstacles to UNAMID’s
movement and patrol activities, to end all detention and
improper treatment of its national personnel, and to
remove all hindrances to the issuance of visas, as
mentioned by Mr. Le Roy. In connection with all these
issues, we acknowledge the work of the Tripartite
Mechanism of the United Nations, the African Union
and the Government of the Sudan to improve
UNAMID’s effective deployment.
The situation in the Sudan still requires the
Council’s tireless attention and a broader approach that
takes into account all the manifestations of conflict in
the Sudan. I therefore conclude by expressing our
satisfaction with the recent definitive decision taken on
the issue of the Abyei borders, and call on the parties
to respect that decision, as they have pledged to do.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for
his briefing and by expressing our gratitude to the
personnel of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), who operate in very
difficult circumstances.
I should also like to welcome Mr. Mikhail
Margelov to the Council and thank him for his helpful
comments today.

09-42178

As other speakers have noted, UNAMID has
faced serious challenges in implementing its mandate,
but despite these difficulties the mission has provided a
stabilizing presence in Darfur. I should like to highlight
four areas that we believe to be critical to the mission’s
success: outstanding deployment issues, prioritization
within UNAMID’s mandate, support for the peace
process and the 2010 elections.
First, we are pleased to see the increased
efficiency in UNAMID’s deployment at large —
progress that we attribute in part to the Tripartite
Mechanism spearheaded by Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra. We also acknowledge the increased
cooperation provided by the Government of the Sudan,
upon which UNAMID’s deployment and operational
ability depend. In this regard, however, we are troubled
by the Government of the Sudan’s continued failure to
issue visas for UNAMID personnel in a timely fashion,
as
noted
in
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2009/352). UNAMID’s success is predicated on its
having experienced staff on the ground. The pace at
which visas are being granted and the outright denial of
some visas indicate an unacceptable disregard for
UNAMID’s
status-of-forces
agreement.
The
Government of Sudan must fulfil its obligations under
that agreement and promptly clear the backlog of visas.
The Secretary-General notes that he expects that
all pledged UNAMID assets will be deployed by the
end of this year. We welcome that progress, but we
note that the assets that have been pledged constitute
only 92 per cent of UNAMID’s total authorized
strength. Certain key assets, particularly critical air
assets, have not been forthcoming from Member States.
Nonetheless, we believe we must start to focus on
measuring UNAMID’s capacity to perform its mandate
using the resources it has. We hope that in upcoming
reports the Secretary-General will be able to report
more on UNAMID’s operational effectiveness.
Secondly, we believe that the Council must
provide guidance to help UNAMID prioritize its
activities. The Secretary-General has noted that two
most important aspects of UNAMID’s mandate are
protecting civilians and facilitating humanitarian
access. We agree. The situation for civilians in Darfur
remains deeply troubling. We are particularly concerned
by the level of sexual violence against women, and we
ask the Secretary-General to work with UNAMID to
develop a comprehensive strategy to protect women and
girls from such gender-based violence.

17

S/PV.6170

No discussion of humanitarian relief can fail to
mention the 4 March expulsion by the Government of
Sudan of humanitarian organizations. Through the
considerable efforts of the United Nations and the
international community, a humanitarian crisis was
averted. But the Council cannot afford to be
complacent simply because the disaster has been
warded off through emergency measures. Sustainable
delivery of humanitarian relief remains our goal. We
must continue to monitor the situation closely, and we
will look to UNAMID to maintain its role as facilitator
for humanitarian access.
Thirdly, we fully support the dedicated efforts of
the Joint United Nations-AU Chief Mediator, Djibrill
Bassolé. My Government’s Special Envoy, Scott
Gration, will continue to work closely with the parties
in support of the Chief Mediator’s efforts to obtain a
cessation of hostilities and to push for a more inclusive
peace process.
But as long as the Governments of Sudan and
Chad are engaged in active conflict, there can be no
peace in Darfur, as underscored by such recent events
as the bombings along the Chad-Sudan border. Chad
and Sudan have the sovereign right to protect their
territorial integrity. But continued tension and rhetoric
between the two harm the peace process and undermine
stability in the region. We encourage both countries to
exercise restraint, to refrain from supporting each
other’s rebel groups and to work to pull those groups
back from the brink.
Finally, let me touch on the issue of elections.
Under the terms of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, elections are scheduled to take place in
April 2010. The Council normally discusses this issue
in the context of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan (UNMIS), but elections are a national issue and
as such must also be discussed when we talk about
Darfur. The extent to which Darfuris will be able to
participate meaningfully in the voting is a real concern.
We look forward to the United Nations elections
assessment report and hope that it will contain
information on the mechanisms necessary to help
protect Darfuri participation. The Council cannot
afford to neglect this issue.
UNAMID plays a valuable role. The United States
supports the extension of UNAMID’s mandate for an
additional 12 months, and we thank the delegation of
the United Kingdom for preparing the draft resolution.

18

Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): I wish at the outset to thank Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his briefing. I welcome Mr. Mikhail Margelov,
Special Representative of the President of the Russian
Federation. We are most grateful to him for his
statement. My thanks go also to the representative of
the Sudan for his presence here today; we look forward
to his statement.
We are following closely the deployment of
contingents from troop-contributors to the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). We note that a large number of troops has
been deployed. We pay tribute to the efforts of troopcontributing countries and the manner in which they
have worked with the Government of the Sudan.
I note also the tripartite mechanism’s great
importance for the restoration of peace. It has proven
effective in removing obstacles to peace, as indicated
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/352). I
commend the tripartite mechanism for its positive
achievements, including on the situation regarding
visas for UNAMID staff.
There has been a decline in violence in Darfur, and
we hope that this trend will continue, enabling displaced
persons to return. Despite attacks on members of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, its deployment will continue. But we note that
what is needed for peacekeeping is a political operation
that enjoys the support of all parties — which is
essential for deployment. Benchmarks for the
implementation of the Mission’s mandate will be
unrealistic and irrelevant until the Mission is deployed
at full strength and fully equipped, and until there has
been tangible progress on the political front, including a
ceasefire agreement and agreed modalities for ending
the fighting. The highest priority is to forge a
strengthened political process and to put pressure on the
rebels to unconditionally join the dialogue and the
negotiations.
Libya has a geographical, humanitarian and
cultural relationship with the Sudan — and in
particular with Darfur. We note the commitment
undertaken by President Muammar Al-Qadhafi and by
Libya to normalization. That is why we are working in
cooperation with Qatar, the Joint African Union-United
Nations Chief Mediator to ensure that negotiations
resume on all aspects of the crisis. The African Union

09-42178

S/PV.6170

High-Level Panel on Darfur recently visited Tripoli
and met with the leaders of armed forces to discuss
modalities for the resumption of dialogue in the Sudan.
Libya understands the effect of relations between
Chad and the Sudan on the humanitarian situation in
the Sudan and in Darfur. Libya is therefore pursuing its
efforts to ease tension and ensure that dialogue can
resume with a view to the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the Dakar peace
process, leading to normalization of relations between
those two countries. On the humanitarian situation, we
welcome what the Government of the Sudan has done
to ensure that humanitarian aid reaches those that need
it, to encourage and cooperate with humanitarian
organizations and to grant visas to their staff.
With regard to the International Criminal Court,
we urge the Security Council to consider the concerns
that have been voiced by the regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, which is the principal
partner of the Government in Darfur, with a view to
continuing peace efforts, especially after the arrest
warrant issued by the Court against President
Al-Bashir. We hope that the Security Council will take
steps to remove the obstacles to the peace efforts in
order to fully and permanently resolve the issue of
Darfur.
In that regard, at its latest summit, in Sirte, the
African Union adopted a resolution, in which it
expressed its deep concern that the Security Council
had not agreed to apply article 16 of the Rome Statute.
Here, we underscore the need to take into consideration
the request by the African Union, which as the primary
regional organization knows better than any other the
best approach to the priorities for the settlement of the
Darfur issue, especially since the African Union’s
commitment to settling the issue of impunity is one of
its basic tenets. The High-Level Panel on Darfur,
chaired by President Mbeki, has been set up to
investigate the human rights violations. The Panel has
visited the region three times, and we look forward to
its forthcoming report.
In May, the Group of Experts on Sudan sanctions
reported that the decision of the International Criminal
Court had encouraged certain groups and had
interrupted the dialogue or made it more difficult.
Mr. Rodolphe Adada, head of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, in his
statement to the Security Council on 27 April, said:

09-42178

“The ICC issue has dominated and polarized
Sudanese political life. It has weakened the
position of those in the Sudan who have been
working for compromise and consensus”.
(S/PV.6112, p. 2)
I do not think that that statement had a positive
effect. Let me say that the fact that certain Security
Council members did not take into account the wish of
the African Union and of the African Member States
that had signed the Rome Statute did not serve justice
but, on the contrary, had the potential to undermine the
efforts of the International Criminal Court.
There is no doubt that, after years of crisis in
Darfur, we are increasingly convinced that that dispute
cannot be settled without a comprehensive political
settlement that enjoys the support of the international
community and, above all, the Security Council, as
well as the international and regional actors. That is a
realistic precondition for restoring peace and security,
putting an end to the deprivation and the impunity and
achieving national reconciliation.
The people of Darfur are increasingly aware that
a just and lasting peace and national reconciliation and
development cannot be achieved by slogans, poverty or
an arrest warrant against the President of the Sudan,
but rather by support for peace efforts, implementation
of development projects and the strengthening of State
institutions so as to extend their administration
throughout the territory. We hope that the Security
Council will contribute to that end.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I too would like to thank Mr. Alain Le Roy for his
presentation and to welcome the presence of
Mr. Margelov in the Council.
I would like to make a few comments on various
aspects of the issue that we are considering. First of all,
in our view, the political process must remain the
priority. In that regard, we welcome the efforts of the
Chief Joint Mediator, Mr. Bassolé, and the Qatari
facilitation, and we hope that the talks suspended last
June will resume as quickly as possible.
The Sudanese Government and the Justice and
Equality Movement must fulfil the commitments made
during the signing of the declaration of intent of
17 February 2009. We hope that the talks are inclusive,
and we support the efforts made by Libya with respect
to other rebel movements.

19

S/PV.6170

We have noted the establishment by the African
Union of a High-Level Panel headed by President
Mbeki, and we will closely study its forthcoming
conclusions.
We think that the humanitarian situation remains
of concern. We welcome the efforts of United Nations
to work with the Government of the Sudan to prevent
the decision to expel 13 non-governmental
organizations last March from having too serious
consequences. However, as the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/352) notes, the fall in the number of
humanitarian workers in Darfur has harmed the quality
of the aid. In the rainy season, the health situation
could deteriorate very quickly. We therefore remain
very concerned, and we call on the Sudanese
authorities to quickly restore an environment
conducive to humanitarian activities.
Moreover, the security risks for the civilian
population must not be underestimated. We are pleased
that the violence has diminished since the
establishment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), but it must be
noted that we have moved from a situation of conflict
to less intense but generalized violence. The tension in
relations between Chad and the Sudan is also of great
concern, and we call on those two countries to
implement their commitments and to refrain from any
provocation.
On the deployment of UNAMID, we have noted
the information given by Alain Le Roy. The SecretaryGeneral underscores in his report the improved
cooperation with the Sudanese authorities for the
deployment of the operation. We welcome that, and we
hope that the objective set in the report for the
deployment of 92 per cent of the force by December
can be achieved.
However, we note that, despite the progress
brought about by the Tripartite Mechanism, the
Sudanese authorities continue to pose significant
obstacles. I am thinking in particular of the issue of
visas already mentioned by a number of delegations,
which Khartoum is slow to issue. More than 100
European personnel in particular, and others from other
regions, are waiting for visas, and that situation is
unacceptable.
More than ever, the population in Darfur needs a
credible force that can contribute to its security. The
year 2009 should see the full deployment of UNAMID

20

and also of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad, which to some extent is its
counterpart in the regions of Chad and the Central
African Republic bordering on Darfur. We call on the
Secretariat and troop-contributing countries to increase
their efforts in that regard.
We are preparing to renew UNAMID’s mandate.
We hope that the negotiations held under the auspices
of our British colleagues will soon conclude. The
discussion on UNAMID’s mandate should not be held
hostage to other difficult issues, such as those of the
fight against impunity and of the International Criminal
Court. We believe, and everyone knows, that a lasting
peace cannot be established without justice, and we
note the absence of real efforts of the Sudanese
authorities in that area.
In any case, differences of views on this issue
should not prevent us from acting collectively and with
determination on the other aspects of resolving the
crisis in Darfur. We hope that UNAMID will fully
carry out its mandate, in particular the tasks entrusted
to it as a priority, namely, protecting civilians and
providing security for humanitarian assistance.
Finally, we would conclude with a word on the
implementation of the comprehensive political
agreement as a follow-up to our consultations last
week on the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS). At this stage, we are very satisfied that the
two parties have indicated their wish to respect the
decision by the Permanent Court of Arbitration on
Abyei. We hope that the follow-up to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement will continue to be
implemented in this manner, in a spirit of cooperation
and goodwill on both sides.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Alain Le Roy for his briefing on the
current situation in Darfur. We pay tribute to the men
and women of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) for their
dedicated work in a difficult environment.
We acknowledge that the large-scale battles have
been contained. But the security situation in Darfur
remains fragile and demands our vigilance. Incidents
of violence are continuing, and UNAMID personnel,
humanitarian workers and civilians are falling victim.
We should make every effort to improve the situation.

09-42178

S/PV.6170

For ensuring security in Darfur, improved
relations between the Sudan and Chad are important.
Aerial bombing in the border area gives cause for
concern about security in the area. It is incumbent upon
all parties to bring a halt to these hostile and
belligerent activities. I urge the Contact Group on the
implementation of the Dakar Agreement to resume its
negotiations by inviting both the Sudan and Chad to
accelerate the reconciliation process.
With regard to the earlier humanitarian situation,
we are relieved that the joint collaborative efforts by the
Government, the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) worked reasonably well to fill the
gaps in delivering humanitarian assistance after the
expulsion of the international NGOs. However, there
still remain major challenges in many parts of Darfur
where the local population does not have sufficient
access to assistance. I urge the Government of the
Sudan to make further efforts in providing necessary
assistance. For its part, the international community
needs to strengthen its support.
UNAMID is expected to play an indispensable
role in stabilizing and improving the fragile security
and humanitarian situation in Darfur. UNAMID has
dedicated its efforts to the protection of civilians and
the facilitation of humanitarian assistance as the first
priority. Japan endorses and supports a greater focus by
UNAMID on civilian protection. There is a significant
number of members of the local population and
internally displaced persons spread throughout Darfur
who are in serious need of humanitarian assistance and
are waiting for a helping hand from UNAMID.
Yet the current deployment remains at less than
70 per cent of authorized strength 18 months after
inception. This makes it difficult for the mission to
implement fully its mandate and to meet high
expectations. To expedite deployment, cooperation
with the Government of the Sudan is essential. There
has been marked progress in deployment lately thanks
to the good efforts undertaken through the Tripartite
Committee comprising the Government, the African
Union and the United Nations. We hope that further
efforts will be made towards fuller deployment before
the end of the year.
In this regard, I would like to reiterate the need
for further improvement on the part of the Government
of the Sudan of measures for facilitating assistance,
such as the issuance of visas to UNAMID personnel,

09-42178

expedited customs clearance for necessary equipment
and enhanced freedom of movement for UNAMID
staff.
As the continued presence of UNAMID is
essential, we support the extension of its mandate for
another 12 months. We are grateful to the United
Kingdom for preparing the draft resolution on that
subject.
A political and negotiated solution is the only
way of resolving the Darfur problem. In that light, I
commend the Doha process under the active leadership
of Qatar as well as the mediation efforts of Joint Chief
Mediator Bassolé and the regional initiatives
undertaken by Libya and Egypt. We also commend the
valuable contributions made through the international
efforts made by many countries in sending special
envoys.
We thank Mr. Margelov for sharing his insights
with the Council today.
It is our hope that all Sudanese parties concerned,
including rebel groups, will participate in and actively
engage with those initiatives, which in turn will be
strongly supported by us. In parallel with those
international initiatives, we should underline the
importance of the local and national dialogue for peace
and coexistence. Coexistence and reconciliation can be
sought most effectively through comprehensive
dialogue involving the Government, anti-government
forces, traditional leaders, local communities and civil
society. We support the Darfur-Darfur Dialogue and
Consultation. We urge the African Union and the
United Nations, in collaboration with the Government,
to ensure that the voices of the many actors be fully
reflected in the process.
Lastly, the political process based on the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) will have a direct bearing on the
Darfur problem. We are encouraged that both parties
have accepted the ruling of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration on the Abyei border dispute and have
respected the framework of the CPA. It is our strong
wish that the positive momentum demonstrated in the
spirit of Abyei will be further maintained and will
contribute to the implementation of the remaining parts
of the CPA and to the resolution of the Darfur problem.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Uganda.

21

S/PV.6170

I join colleagues in thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his reports on the deployment of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2009/297 and S/2009/352) and
the
Under-Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Le Roy, for his briefing. I wish also to
express appreciation for the contribution to the debate
by the Special Representative of the President of the
Russian Federation, Mr. Mikhail Margelov. I also
welcome the participation of the representative of the
Sudan in the debate.
I wish also to commend UNAMID and its
leadership for the important contribution they are
making in maintaining and improving the security
situation as well as in protecting the civilians in Darfur.
In this regard, Uganda condemns continued incidents
of attacks against UNAMID and humanitarian staff.
Uganda is encouraged that the deployment of
UNAMID is making progress. We commend the
Tripartite Mechanism, which has facilitated this
process, and encourage all the parties to continue their
cooperation within the Mechanism.
Uganda would like to see a peaceful resolution of
the conflict in Darfur. We are concerned about the
continued insecurity, the lack of progress in the peace
process and the negative effect that has on the
humanitarian situation.
We commend the Joint Chief Mediator,
Mr. Bassolé, and the Government of Qatar for their
efforts, which led to the resumption of talks between
the Government of the Sudan and the Justice and
Equality Movement, which had been suspended on
18 June of this year. We call upon the Government of
the Sudan and all the opposition groups to engage in
the negotiations envisaged by the end of July without
any preconditions.
Uganda supports the work of the African Union
High-Level Panel on Darfur, led by former South
African President Thabo Mbeki, in its complementary
role in the search for peace in Darfur. Uganda
welcomes the commitment of the parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) to abide by
and peacefully implement the recent decision of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration on the final settlement
of the Abyei dispute. The resolution of the Abyei
dispute is a major step in the implementation of the
CPA.

22

The increasing tension along the border between
the Sudan and Chad is a cause for great concern.
Uganda once again calls upon the two countries to
improve their relations and to implement the various
bilateral agreements that they have reached, including
the most recent one, signed in Doha. The normalization
of relations between the Sudan and Chad is critical for
a comprehensive and lasting peace in Darfur.
Uganda supports the extension of the UNAMID
mandate. In this respect, I wish to express our
appreciation to the delegation of the United Kingdom
for providing the draft resolution for our consideration.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset, I would like to
congratulate you on your presidency of the Council for
this month. Your neighbouring and friendly State has
helped to maintain and strengthen international peace
and security, especially in our mother continent, Africa,
and in my country, the Sudan, which has strong and
eternal ties to yours.
I would also like to welcome Mr. Mikhail
Margelov, Special Representative of the President of
the Russian Federation on the Sudan. I also welcome
the
Under-Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Le Roy, and thank him for the
objective briefing with which he opened today’s
meeting, held to discuss the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2009/352) on the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
Today’s discussion of the report coincides with an
important step forward in a relevant area — the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, embodied in the decision of the Permanent
Court of Arbitration pertaining to the Abyei issue. The
two partners’ strong commitment to implementing the
decision is itself an affirmation of the Sudanese
people’s ability to overcome differences and internal
disagreements both on their own and with the help of
the international community, and it affirms and
strengthens the Sudan’s determination to choose unity.
It also further promotes the possibility of
achieving a speedy and permanent peace in Darfur,
owing in part to much-appreciated ongoing
international and regional efforts such as those exerted

09-42178

S/PV.6170

by sisterly Qatar, and arising from a unified national
position aimed at strengthening the initiative of the
people of the Sudan. Regional sponsorship has also
been forthcoming through the Arab-African initiative
and the sincere and unified endeavour to support the
Sudanese people’s efforts on the part of sisterly Libya
and Egypt. All of this has been accomplished under the
direct coordination and supervision of the Joint Chief
Mediator, Mr. Bassolé, whose mission we support and
whose success we are completely committed to.
As we have previously affirmed in this Council,
the Government of the Sudan stands by its commitment
to achieving comprehensive peace in Darfur as soon as
possible through an objective and goal-oriented
dialogue. We expect the Security Council to continue
to offer the necessary moral and political support for
the national, regional and international efforts under
way by sending strong, encouraging and supportive
messages to those at the negotiation table in order to
confirm its objective support for the option of a
political settlement. The Council should also send a
firm message to those boycotting the negotiations to
the effect that the peace train will not wait for them,
that the Council will not tolerate a military solution as
a way to fulfil their goals and demands, and that a
boycott is not an option.
However, the Security Council continues to throw
its full weight behind peacekeeping rather than
peacemaking, as if peace were supposed to emerge
from a vacuum. National and regional efforts have
been dedicated to creating this peace, and what we
need now is the Council’s support for the political
process. It is important to note that a permanent
member of this very Council, which I need not mention
by name, continues to offer safe haven in its capital to
one rebel leader who has continually and repeatedly
challenged the international will and the peace option
by boycotting the political process and endorsing an
exclusively military solution.
We appreciate the genuine and sincere efforts of
UNAMID, deployed under the leadership of UnderSecretary-General Le Roy and Under-SecretaryGeneral for Field Support Susana Malcorra. We also
appreciate the African Union endorsement in all its
logistic and technical aspects the Tripartite Mechanism
established by the Council. The latest developments
surrounding the Mechanism discussed most recently at
the sixth meeting of the Tripartite Committee held on
12 July in Khartoum. At that meeting, as at the five

09-42178

previous meetings, the complete commitment and
cooperation of the Sudanese Government in facilitating
the deployment of UNAMID were reaffirmed. The
sixth meeting of the Tripartite Committee further
confirmed that the overarching goal of the Mechanism
is to deploy 92 per cent of the mission’s troops and
forces by December 2009, and highlighted the
seriousness, cooperation and ambition that characterize
the Committee’s meetings.
As we informed the Council only a few days ago,
the last meeting of the Mechanism addressed many
important issues that have been discussed in today’s
meeting — and some that were not, such as aerial
operations, including the provision of a landing base
for tactical helicopters — such as mechanisms for
expediting deployment procedures and operations,
including the issuing of visas.
We must recall that the Sudan is a developing
country. We expect the Council to see the situation in
its entirety, rather than merely focusing on a dozen or
so persons who experienced delays in receiving visas,
as if that were the result of a Sudanese policy of noncooperation or to delay entry, which is completely
untrue. We have pledged to facilitate the deployment of
personnel. We stand by that pledge and reaffirm it
today. We will do our best to ensure that the mission
deploys as required as soon as possible.
The meeting also discussed the facilitation of
mechanisms and procedures pertaining to local
procurement for the mission and customs clearance, as
has been mentioned at today’s meeting. I simply wish
to cite examples that reveal the full picture. We hope
that the Council will first support the Tripartite
Mechanism by welcoming its achievements to date in
terms of the deployment of the Hybrid Operation.
In the context of serious cooperation with regard
to the deployment of the Operation, we would also like
to refer to the manner in which the humanitarian aspect
has been addressed. We would remind the Council that,
in recent briefings on the humanitarian situation in
Darfur, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs has stated that the implementation of the
humanitarian protocol with the United Nations is
proceeding smoothly. He has also said that the adoption
of a fast-track approach has contributed greatly to
speeding up access to those in need of humanitarian
assistance, especially after the Government of the Sudan
extended the protocol in November to facilitate the

23

S/PV.6170

operations of humanitarian agencies and organizations.
In addition, as the Council is aware, a high-level
ministerial committee is in place to focus solely on
facilitating access for humanitarian operations.

ask of the Council is that it work to overcome all
hurdles to the political process in order to enable it to
take its course. A political settlement is the primary
solution to this issue.

With regard to the references in the report to
challenges to humanitarian efforts, such as attacks on
convoys, the Security Council is fully aware that some
armed groups in Darfur have begun to target
humanitarian convoys solely to steal and loot goods. I
would also mention the various clashes between armed
groups and between cattle herders, farmers and
nomads. All of that indicates that the causes of the
conflict in Darfur are all rooted in the scarcity of water.
That of course has an impact on the security situation
and, in turn, on the lifelines of humanitarian aid. In that
regard, we emphasize the important role being played
by police units. Sudanese police forces, working in
close cooperation with the Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
continue to work in many places to establish safe
corridors and guarantee the security of humanitarian
convoys.

With regard to Chad and the situation on the
border, the Security Council has received several
letters from the Government of the Sudan. In those
letters, we have regularly informed the Council of an
ongoing series of hostile acts, cross-border attacks and
violations. On 16 July, those acts culminated in Chad’s
carrying out air raids inside Sudanese territory. We
reported that action to the Council last week. I would
like to reaffirm to the Council that the Government of
the Sudan has had enough and is running out of
patience. We are doing our best to continue to act
rationally and to exercise self-restraint in the face of
the transgressions of our neighbour Chad. However,
patience has its limits. The Sudanese Government
would also like to reaffirm that it will continue to
assert its full, indivisible and legitimate right to deal
with those acts of aggression and violations and to
respond to them in a way that ensures that they will not
be repeated and that preserves the security and safety
of the citizens of the Sudan.

As usual, some speakers have referred to the
so-called aspect of accountability. With regard to the
so-called issue of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), the Government of the Sudan, which as the
Council knows is not a party to the ICC, has a wellknown position that does not need reiterating here. It is
final and non-reversible. Major regional organizations
have taken a stand on this issue — including, as I have
mentioned, the African Union, which is both a strategic
and a basic partner for the United Nations in Darfur,
the Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, the League of Arab States, the
African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States, and
regional organizations comprising two thirds of the
Members of this Organization. All of them have issued
numerous decisions and expressed positions that have
convincingly reaffirmed that this heinous legal
decision is merely political posturing that has nothing
to do with bringing justice to Darfur or establishing
peace there. It is a decision that targets the Sudan’s
unity and integrity as an independent State.
There is no need to reaffirm again today that the
Sudanese Government has its own national judicial
system capable of achieving justice and accountability.
We hope that we do not have to continue to repeat that
at the Council. We have fully welcomed and always
cooperated with the African Union’s Panel of the Wise,
led by former South African President Mbeki. All we

24

In conclusion, I reaffirm the complete
commitment of the Sudanese Government to unlimited
cooperation with the United Nations and the African
Union in the deployment of the Hybrid Operation and
in establishing lasting peace in Darfur as soon as
possible. As we have always affirmed to the Council,
achieving a lasting and comprehensive political
settlement of the conflict in Darfur is of the utmost
priority for the Government of the Sudan.
Darfur is a historic part of the Sudan. The people
of Darfur are dear to the hearts of the Sudanese people;
indeed, they are part of the Sudanese people.
Therefore, we care deeply about their safety and
security and about ensuring that they have access to
assistance and can return to their villages and homes in
order to resume their ordinary lives.
We renew our appeal to the Security Council to
throw its full weight behind the political process and to
support this operation and this process in every
possible way in order to achieve a comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the Darfur conflict. Thus, we can
close this chapter of Sudanese history forever.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Sweden.

09-42178

S/PV.6170

Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The candidate
countries Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Montenegro and the member of the European
Economic Area Norway, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Armenia, align themselves
with this statement.
The suffering in Darfur has been allowed to go on
for too long, and a political settlement is desperately
needed. The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), which is at the heart
of our common efforts to alleviate the suffering, cannot
be a substitute for a political process; nor can it impose
peace. It is up to the parties themselves to take
concrete steps towards a political solution to the crisis.
UNAMID fulfils a central role in the efforts to
provide protection and security and to facilitate
humanitarian access in Darfur. It is encouraging that
UNAMID is expected to approach its full strength by
the end of the year. The current gaps between
deployment figures and objectives are hampering the
mission’s ability to carry out its mandate. Also, we
must ensure that the mission is adequately equipped to
carry out its priority tasks of protecting civilians and
providing security for effective humanitarian action.
The European Union notes the improved
cooperation among the United Nations, the African
Union and the Government of the Sudan through the
Tripartite Mechanism. However, obstacles remain that
hamper the effectiveness of UNAMID — for instance,
with regard to freedom of movement, administrative
hurdles in getting customs clearance for critical
equipment, and visas for UNAMID staff. At present,
nearly 100 nationals of the European Union are waiting
for their visas to be able to work for UNAMID. I took
note of what the representative of the Sudan said
regarding this issue, but I wish to reiterate that the
Government of the Sudan has the responsibility to
remove those obstacles and ensure that agreements are
implemented at the local level.
We are faced with a critical humanitarian
situation that may further deteriorate during the rainy
season. The Government of the Sudan and all parties to
the conflict must respect and adhere to international
humanitarian law and ensure safe and unhindered
access to people in need of humanitarian assistance.

09-42178

The Government’s decision in March to expel a
number of non-governmental organizations has
hampered the ability to provide humanitarian
assistance to the population in need in Darfur.
The European Union takes note of reports that a
small number of internally displaced persons have
started to return to their villages. It is important to
ensure that such returns take place in a safe, voluntary
and dignified manner, with assistance and protection in
place, and to monitor these returns.
The European Union strongly supports the joint
mediation efforts of the African Union and the United
Nations, under the leadership of Mr. Djibrill Bassolé,
for a sustainable cessation of hostilities. We regard the
multi-track approach of the mediation — which also
engages civil society in Darfur — as essential. We call
on the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) and the
Government to honour their commitments as set out in
the Doha Agreement of Goodwill.
There can be no sustainable peace without justice.
The European Union’s position on the International
Criminal Court is well known. The Court and its key
role in the promotion of international justice have our
full support. The European Union urges the
Government of the Sudan and all other parties to the
conflict to cooperate fully with the Court, in accordance
with Security Council resolution 1593 (2005).
The national elections next year provide an
opportunity for the Sudan to lay down a political path
for the future. Peaceful, transparent and credible
elections are fundamental to the consolidation of
democracy. UNAMID has a role in assisting the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan in preparing for and
organizing the elections. The European Union
welcomes the decision of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration on the determination of the boundaries of
the Abyei area. We call on the parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement to cooperate fully in
its implementation.
The dynamics of the region continue to be
marked by instability. The European Union military
operation in eastern Chad and north-eastern Central
African Republic, deployed in 2008 and transferred to
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad in March 2009, should be seen in
that context. The European Union, the Security Council
and others have called on the Sudan and Chad to
respect and fully implement their mutual commitments.

25

S/PV.6170

Recurrent cross-border attacks seem to make the
agreements meaningless. Both countries need to show
clear political will to resolve their outstanding issues.
The bringing of peace to Darfur is long overdue.
In order to promote progress, all relevant actors within
the international community need to pull in the same
direction. The aim should be to impress on the parties
the need for flexibility in the search for peace.
Ultimately, however, the responsibility lies with the
parties themselves. It is time for them to show concrete
and serious political will and a commitment to peace.
The President: I now give the floor to UnderSecretary-General Le Roy to make his concluding
remarks.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Given the lateness
of the hour, I shall be brief. I should just like to
highlight a few points that were raised and several
questions that were asked.
First of all, we are satisfied to see that there is a
consensus on the two principal objectives: the
protection of civilians and support for humanitarian
access to benefit those most in need of it. I believe that
that will be reflected in the draft resolution that the
Council will adopt shortly. Nevertheless, on the second
point, humanitarian access, I wish to stress that the
humanitarians with whom I recently met mentioned
difficulties related to the risk of kidnapping in
particular. As members are aware, there are currently
three cases of kidnapping, concerning three different
non-governmental organizations. Thus, necessarily, the
access of humanitarian workers to the most remote
places is sometimes difficult. Obviously, when we have
our full capacity, we will be able to help them more,
but this is a difficulty I wanted to highlight.
Secondly, with regard to the political process —
which was frequently mentioned — we thank everyone
for their support for Mr. Bassolé and his work. Indeed,
there was praise for the efforts of Qatar; for the efforts
of Libya, which have also made it possible to bring
together a number of the rebel groups; and for the
efforts of Egypt, which is once again contributing to the
peace process, whose discussions will be continuing,
for the moment, in Doha, Qatar. Obviously, we are
pleased that all of those initiatives are coming together.
I have noted — and I think it is important to
note — that the efforts of all those who have influence
over the rebel groups are important if this dialogue is

26

to be inclusive. In particular, we know very well that,
despite all the attempts made, Mr. Abdul Wahid’s
movement refuses to participate in the negotiations. I
believe it is important that pressure continue to be
exerted on him to join the negotiations, as other rebel
groups have done.
The regional dimension was brought up several
times. With regard to Chad and the Sudan, the United
Nations obviously continues to call for maximum
restraint and to urge that no intervention take place
from across the border.
Concerning the capacities and the deployment of
the mission — which were frequently referred to — I
should just like to make several clarifications and to
emphasize that 12 of the 18 battalions are already in
place and five others have already begun to arrive: a
second Ethiopian battalion, a second Egyptian battalion
and battalions from South Africa, Tanzania and
Burkina Faso. Some of them have already arrived, and
the rest will arrive in the coming weeks and months.
The same is true for the police units.
There was also a question about capacity, apart
from numbers. It is true that some 103 Canadian
armoured personnel carriers (APCs) were recently
withdrawn and that 62 Nigerian APCs remain at Port
Sudan. At the recent Tripartite Committee meeting, the
Sudanese authorities promised to lift all customs
restrictions on those APCs, but as we speak they
remain at Port Sudan. I appeal to the Sudanese
authorities to expedite their release, which would be
very important for the mission’s capacity.
The Tripartite Committee has also considered the
question of visas. Let me review the figures we have.
Just before the Tripartite Committee meeting, 961 visas
had been issued. Two days ago, another 120 were
issued; the backlog consists of 327 visas — 197 for
police, 47 for observers and the remainder for
international staff. As to the timeframe for those 327
visas, we had fresh assurances from the Sudanese
Government at the Tripartite Committee meeting that
they would expedite the visa-issuance process. In the
light of all the nationalities involved, it is very
important that no distinction be made among
nationalities so that the deployment of all UNAMID
personnel — civil, military and police — can take
place as soon as possible.
Mr. Mbeki’s report was also mentioned. Let me
clarify: Mr. Mbeki has indicated that his report would

09-42178

S/PV.6170

be available in September, and it will then be possible
to comment on it.
The representative of Austria asked about the
possibility of more border monitoring. For now, from
the standpoint of United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) and
UNAMID, that was not a direct part of our mandate;
also, the border is extremely long. We do not think that
either MINURCAT or UNAMID has sufficient capacity
to monitor the border properly. We know too that both
the Chadian and the Sudanese authorities see this as an
issue of national sovereignty. I do not see how
UNAMID and MINURCAT could carry out strict
monitoring of the border.

On the other hand, on something that is indeed
part of our mandate, we are increasing patrols along
the border to avert the risk of incidents. But, again, we
do not have the capacity for complete border
monitoring, and politically speaking it is not the desire
of either the Sudanese or the Chadian authorities.
Let me conclude by thanking the Council once
again for the support expressed today for UNAMID.
The President: I thank Mr. Le Roy for his
responses and clarifications.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

09-42178

27
