S/PV.8981

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8981st meeting

Monday, 28 February 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Asokan
Mr. Kelly
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 25 January 2022 from the Panel of Experts on Yemen addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/2022/50)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-27089 (E)
*2227089*

S/PV.8981

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 25 January 2022 from the Panel of
Experts on Yemen addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2022/50)
The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/158, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/50, which contains a letter dated
25 January 2022 from the Panel of Experts on Yemen
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, China, France, Gabon, Ghana, India,
Kenya, Russian Federation, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Brazil, Ireland, Mexico, Norway
The President (spoke in Russian): The draft
resolution received 11 votes in favour, none against and
4 abstentions. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 2624 (2022).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, we would like to thank the
penholder, the United Kingdom, for its efforts to
converge the views during the negotiations. We would
2/7

28/02/2022

also like to thank the Member States for their cooperation
during the short period of the negotiation process.
The United Arab Emirates welcomes the adoption
of resolution 2624 (2022) and the addition of the Houthis
to the sanctions list, as well as the imposition of an arms
embargo on this terrorist group, pursuant to resolution
2216 (2015), in response to its flagrant violations and
vicious attacks.
The purpose of the resolution is to limit the military
capacity of the Houthis and end their escalation in
Yemen and the region. The resolution also seeks to
prevent their aggressive actions against trading vessels
and their threat to international trade and navigation
routes, as well as to end the suffering of civilians in
Yemen and in the neighbouring countries caused by
their terrorist actions. We therefore call on the Houthis
to stop their cross-border terrorist attacks and return to
the negotiating table to begin a serious political process.
We reiterate that there is no military solution to the
Yemeni crisis. The only solution is through concerted
efforts to find a political solution that is Yemeni-led
and Yemeni-owned, under the auspices of the United
Nations, and in accordance with the three terms of
reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its implementation mechanism, the
outcomes of the Comprehensive National Dialogue and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015).
Mr. Asokan (India): We welcome the adoption
of resolution 2624 (2022) to extend the mandate of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014) and the Panel of Experts supporting the
Committee. India attaches great importance to the work
of the Committee and the Panel and therefore voted in
favour of the resolution.
Through the resolution, the Council has reiterated
its unequivocal condemnation of the cross-border
attacks on Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates,
particularly those targeting innocent civilians and
civilian infrastructure, and demanded the immediate
cessation of such attacks. We welcome the Council’s
action to hold Ansar Allah accountable for its acts,
through the imposition of an arms embargo on the
group. It is clear that the conflict in Yemen and the
cross-border attacks are being fuelled by the continued
supply of arms and weapons, in clear violation of the
Council’s targeted arms embargo. In that regard, we
support the resolution’s call to enhance maritime
22-27089

28/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

cooperation in the region and strengthen the Yemeni
Coast Guard to effectively detect and prevent violations
of the arms embargo.
We also underline the need to address the increasing
threat emanating from Yemen to the safe navigation of
commercial ships and merchant vessels in the Red Sea
and the Gulf of Aden. Such attacks have implications
for overall maritime security in the region and must
be deterred. The Council’s affirmation that such acts
and attacks constitute a designation criterion can also
contribute to that deterrence.
As a country with civilizational ties with Yemen,
India is pained to witness the continued suffering of
the people of Yemen due to the protracted conflict.
We reiterate our call on all parties to the conflict to
renounce military confrontation and make concrete
efforts to establish enduring peace. I reaffirm India’s
steadfast commitment to a Yemeni-led and Yemeniowned political process, with the goal of achieving
an inclusive and peacefully negotiated settlement to
the conflict.
Mr. Kelly (Ireland): My thanks go to the United
Kingdom for its work as penholder.
Ireland fully supports the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) and
regards the sanctions regime as a critical tool of the
Council to contribute to a solution to the conflict
and restore long overdue peace, security and stability
in Yemen.
For the past seven years, the devastating crisis in
Yemen has taken an immense toll on the Yemeni people.
Since the beginning of 2022, the escalation, with daily
civilian casualties, demonstrates why a politically
negotiated solution is the only path forward. It is vital
for the Yemeni people, who are on the brink of famine
and facing extreme food insecurity.
The escalation of recent months also poses a serious
threat to regional security. We strongly and unequivocally
condemn cross-border attacks on the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates by the Houthis,
targeting civilian infrastructure, in blatant violation of
international humanitarian law. Such attacks are totally
unacceptable. We offer sincere condolences to those
who have lost loved ones and solidarity to the people
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates. The persistent Houthi offensive on Ma’rib,

S/PV. 8981

home to 1 million displaced people, is reprehensible.
We call again for its immediate cessation.
Ireland abstained in the voting on resolution 2624
(2022). Our concern is not about the Houthi leadership,
whose behaviour we utterly condemn. Our concern
lies with the millions of innocent people living under
their control. Ireland has a principled position across all
Security Council files that we must avoid impediments
to humanitarian aid reaching all people in need. The
resolution adopted today designates the Houthis as a
group under the targeted arms embargo, as provided
for in resolution 2216 (2015). We fully support the
implementation of the arms embargo to halt the illicit
flow of weapons into Yemen.
We wish to underline that humanitarian and
commercial activities should not be impacted by that
designation. We have worked throughout the negotiations
on that aspect and welcome constructive engagement
on the inclusion of language in the resolution to that
end. However, Ireland remains nonetheless concerned
that the designation may result in unintended negative
humanitarian and political consequences. It will be
vital to ensure clear messaging around that point for
humanitarian and commercial actors.
There is no internationally agreed definition of the
terms “terrorism” or “terrorist group”. There was no
consensus on the use of such language in the context
of the negotiations. We remain concerned about the
fact that the use of those terms in a Security Council
resolution dealing with sanctions in Yemen may have
unintended negative consequences for the millions of
Yemeni people living under Houthi control. That is
against the backdrop of severe humanitarian funding
shortfalls and an already fragile economy.
Although counter-terrorism efforts and the
provision of humanitarian assistance are mutually
inclusive objectives, we must continue to protect the
humanitarian space. More time for due consideration
of that language and its implications would have been
very valuable. We urge States to continue to ensure that
all measures taken by them to implement resolution
2624 (2022) comply with their obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. Moreover, we
must do all that we can to ensure that attempts towards
constructive dialogue between all parties to the conflict
and the United Nations-led process, under the auspices
of the Special Envoy, are not adversely affected. Special

22-270893/7

S/PV.8981

The situation in the Middle East

Envoy Grundberg has our full support in his tireless
efforts and we call on all parties to de-escalate and
engage in good faith with him to that end.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico recognizes the value of the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2140 (2014) and the Panel of Experts
on Yemen.
Mexico abstained in the voting on resolution 2624
(2022) for the following reasons.
First, in the absence of an internationally agreed
definition of terrorism, the inclusion of the Houthis on
the sanctions list and their designation as a terrorist
organization could dilute the limits framing the
conduct of hostilities in Yemen, to the detriment of
respect for international humanitarian law. We reiterate
that the fight against terrorism must be conducted
in full compliance with international law, including
international human rights and humanitarian law.
Secondly, we are concerned about the negative
impact that such a designation could have on the work
of humanitarian actors, particularly in view of the
grave humanitarian crisis in Yemen, where two-thirds
of the population are dependent on humanitarian aid.
While the proposed sanctions against the Houthis are
limited to the application of an arms embargo and not
an asset freeze, that could have serious implications for
humanitarian operations, including those necessary to
conduct imports of essential goods. According to some
humanitarian actors, its impact will not be mitigated by
proposals to safeguard humanitarian operations and the
import of essential goods.
Thirdly, we are concerned about the implications
of the designation for the United Nations-facilitated
political process, as well as for efforts to resolve the
critical situation regarding the FSO SAFER tanker.
Fourthly, the designation of terrorist groups by the
Council has taken place within the framework of the
regime established by resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373
(2001), which we believe needs to be maintained. We
do not consider it appropriate that the mechanism for
the designation of terrorist groups should pass through
resolutions relating to sanctions regimes. Those are
two different spheres of application that should, in our
opinion, remain distinct.
On the other hand, Mexico considers the provisions
that seek to strengthen the implementation of the
4/7

28/02/2022

arms embargo to be a positive step, given that the
high availability and continuous flows of such arms
contribute to the spiral of violence that Yemen is
experiencing. The effective implementation of those
provisions will result in a reduced capacity to attack
neighbouring countries, as has been the case in recent
months with attacks against Saudi Arabia, the United
Arab Emirates and various vessels in the area, which
we firmly condemn.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): The conflict in
Yemen has reached a critical and tragic juncture. The
Houthi offensive against Ma’rib has triggered a deadly
military escalation. Last month, the spiral of violence
resulted in more than 650 civilian casualties — the
highest monthly count in more than three years.
The humanitarian situation is deteriorating, with
21 million people in need of assistance. In December,
aid agencies had to reduce food rations for more than
8 million people due to the lack of funding. From
March onwards, those rations may be further reduced
or cease altogether.
The conflict increasingly stretches beyond Yemeni
borders, with a high risk of spiralling out of control. The
recent Houthi attacks against civilian targets in Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates are deplorable
and constitute a reminder of the blatant disregard for
human life shown by the Houthis in and outside of
Yemen. Brazil reiterates its strong condemnation of
those attacks and stands in solidarity with the United
Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia and third countries,
such as India, whose nationals have also been among
the victims.
The current humanitarian crisis and regional
security threats will come to an end only with a
sustainable and inclusive peace. The Yemen sanctions
regime, like all measures of that kind, needs to be part
of a comprehensive and coherent strategy for achieving
peace. It should also be carefully calibrated to avoid
detrimental effects on the humanitarian situation.
Resolution 2624 (2022), which we have just adopted,
includes new text that seeks to support the work of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, as
well as provisions seeking to safeguard humanitarian
and economic activities. Those are valuable inclusions
and we commend other Council members for their
constructive efforts in that regard.
22-27089

28/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Brazil believes, however, that there are elements of
the text that risk setting back those shared objectives.
As we have stated before, applying an overarching
counter-terrorism framework to the conflict in Yemen
could affect the prospects of dialogue and de-escalation
at a time when they are needed the most, both for
the wider resolution of the conflict and for specific
issues, such as ongoing negotiations related to the FSO
SAFER tanker.
In the absence of a legal definition of terrorism,
the Council should proceed with caution. The
characterization of the Houthis as a terrorist group in a
Security Council resolution will have direct and, in many
cases, immediate repercussions on many national legal
systems, thereby affecting the capacity and inclination
of exporters, banks, shipping companies and other
private actors to interact with the Yemeni economy.
While more humanitarian funding is urgently
needed, aid alone cannot sustain a population of
30 million. We should strive to protect the Yemeni
economy and its vital links to the world. Similar
concerns are raised by the listing of the group as a
whole under the Yemen sanctions regime.
Finally, Brazil takes this opportunity to reiterate its
support for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
and calls upon all parties to engage constructively with
him and his office.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): We voted in favour of the
renewal of the sanctions regime established pursuant
to resolution 2140 (2014) and we did so because we are
committed to strengthening the resolution and enabling
it to respond more effectively to the evolving threat.
We note that, despite multiple diplomatic engagements,
the regrettable military escalations have undermined
efforts aimed at moving towards peace.
It is imperative to ensure that those who engage
in indiscriminate attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure in Yemen and from the territory of Yemen
into other countries in the region, such as the United
Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia, are held to account.
Measures, including sanctions, should be instituted
in order to impede their capacity and incentives to
undertake such acts. We are aware that sanctions can
have negative implications for humanitarian access. As
such, we believe that efforts can be made to ensure that
humanitarian access is not impeded.

S/PV. 8981

Kenya is alarmed about the increasing trend of
transnational groups carrying out attacks outside a
territory in which they are engaged in peace processes.
In this case, the attacks by the Houthis on civilian
targets in the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia
cross over an acceptable threshold. They contradict
the Council’s efforts to help the mediation of peace
in Yemen. It is time for the Security Council to limit
such incentives for groups that can launch cross-border
attacks as a way to draw attention to themselves and
leverage in their national positions. Sanctions such as
the ones being levelled today help reinforce to those
groups that they will need to cease their external attacks
in order to have any hope of being accepted as legitimate
political actors. The same is true for Al-Shabaab, which
the Security Council continues to treat as a political
spoiler, but what part of political spoiling is it to attack
hotel, schools and malls in Kenya?
The Houthis’ control of populations and the
manipulation of the humanitarian space must not
be given support by the Security Council. Surely,
we are aware by now that attacks on civilians and
civilian objects are some of the greatest drivers
of humanitarian crisis. Countering terrorism and
supporting humanitarian action are not in conflict with
one another. Carve-outs must be designed in order to
enable them to work together. Kenya has tried to bring
carve-outs to the Council, and we hope that in future
there will be a better hearing of them.
Humanitarian organizations must be enabled to
better operate in the space in order to avoid exploitation
by groups. Otherwise, we would be discussing the
imprisonment of entire populations in order to exploit
the humanitarian response to their crisis.
As for the concerns we are hearing about the
definition of terrorism being lacking, terrorism is
recognizable on an intuitive human level. An attack on
an airport, such as the one for which we saw evidence
in the United Arab Emirates, constitutes terrorism.
The shooting of dozens of civilians at Westgate mall in
Kenya in 2013 qualifies as terrorism whether or not the
United Nations has an official position in that regard.
Let us stand together against terrorism. Let us
lower the incentives for cross-border attacks by groups
that we are trying to push into national stabilization and
peace processes. I am very happy that resolution 2624
(2022) passed today.

22-270895/7

S/PV.8981

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by thanking
the United Kingdom for its work as the penholder on
resolution 2624 (2022). Ghana voted in support of the
resolution, extending for another 12 months the Yemen
sanctions regime and the mandate of the Panel of
Experts on Yemen, because we believe it is important
to maintain the sanctions regime in Yemen in the
current context of the difficult and worsening security,
political, economic and humanitarian situations, despite
our misgivings on aspects of paragraph 1.
Our belief that we must preserve the sanctions
regime echoes the genuine concerns that have been raised
over the unintended consequences that the language of
consent could have on the wider implications of how we
deal with terrorism, the efforts to support an inclusive
political process in Yemen, as well as the challenges
that may be posed to the humanitarian and economic
fronts in that country.
As we have said in the Council and know from the
situation in the region, a military solution to the conflict
cannot replace the need for dialogue and diplomacy.
Only a political settlement, true and inclusive Yemeniled and -owned political process facilitated by the
United Nations in support of regional actors can deliver
a comprehensive and lasting peace for the people
of Yemen.
We therefore urge the continued collective support
of the Council in the difficult task of bridging the
differences among all the parties in order to enhance
confidence-building measures and facilitate dialogue
towards the resumption of the political process.
We remain concerned about the recent military
escalations, alarming increase in civilian casualties and
air strikes on civilian infrastructure. We reiterate the
call for an immediate nationwide ceasefire and urge the
parties to end the hostilities.
Finally, let me express the hope that our differences
on this matter will not steer us away from our higher
ambition of working with the people of Yemen in order
to find a comprehensive and sustainable solution to
the crisis.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Since the beginning of the year, the situation in
Yemen has continued to deteriorate, conflicts and
confrontation have intensified and hostilities have
continued to escalate. China is deeply concerned about
those developments.
6/7

28/02/2022

We condemn all attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure, call for an immediate stop to the crossborder attacks on, and security threats to, the United
Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia and support the two
countries’ efforts to defend their national security.
Using the opportunity of this renewal resolution
and given the new developments in the situation, the
Security Council just updated sanctions measures
and the mandate of the Panel of Experts on Yemen.
China’s position on the issue of sanctions has always
been consistent. We keep a close eye on the impact
of sanctions measures and hope that resolution 2624
(2022) can lead all parties to the conflict to renounce
the military option and actively support the mediation
efforts of the Special Envoy so as to return to the right
track of political negotiations as soon as possible.
China supports the Special Envoy’s active efforts to
stay engaged with all parties in order to promote the
Yemeni peace process.
In the meanwhile, the United Nations and other
agencies should continue to carry out humanitarian
operations across Yemen in order to alleviate the
suffering of its people. We would like to reiterate that
the Panel of Experts should conduct its work in strict
accordance with the mandate conferred upon it by the
Security Council, uphold objectivity and impartiality
and provide information that is accurate and mutual.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Norway is greatly concerned
by the serious military escalation of the conflict in
Yemen, which has grave consequences for the civilian
population and infrastructure, and we remain alarmed
about the ever-worsening humanitarian situation. The
reduction of food rations for 8 million people and
the announced disruption of critical humanitarian
programmes is unacceptable.
Norway reiterates its condemnation of the crossborder attacks in the region against the United Arab
Emirates and Saudi Arabia. My country supports the
imposition of targeted sanctions that can help support
a path towards a political settlement and contribute to
the protection of civilians. Joint Council action to limit
the Houthis’ capability to carry out attacks and harm
civilians is therefore welcome. We also commend the
important work done by the Panel of Experts on Yemen
and fully support the extension of its mandate.
However, throughout the negotiations on
resolution 2624 (2022) we voiced our concern over the
introduction of terrorist labelling and designation. We
22-27089

28/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8981

remain worried that using such terminology, absent
a clear definition, may have a negative impact on
United Nations efforts to facilitate a political solution
in Yemen. Furthermore, we worry about the precedent
with regard to other conflicts on the Council’s agenda,
as well as potential legal ramifications.

The resolution emphasizes that there is no military
solution to the current conflict in Yemen. That is our
firm position. Albania believe that the text supports
an inclusive, Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned political
process, as well as the work of the mandate of the
Special Envoy.

Norway is also worried about unintended
humanitarian consequences of this new language
and that it could negatively affect United Nations
efforts to address large-scale humanitarian needs
throughout Yemen.

We look forward to the full implementation of
this resolution to further guarantee more security for
Yemen, its people and the whole region.

The resolution acknowledges the need for all parties
to engage towards a political solution and includes
language aimed at safeguarding humanitarian action
and not exacerbating the already dire humanitarian
situation. However, it stops short of addressing our key
concerns, and that is why Norway abstained.
There is no military solution to this conflict, and we
call upon all parties to prioritize the needs and interests
of the Yemeni people by fully cooperating with Special
Envoy Grundberg without delay.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Albania welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2624 (2022), which we supported.
We commend the penholder, the United Kingdom, for
the excellent work on the text and congratulate the
members of the Security Council on the outcome.
We welcome the renewal of the mandate of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014), which I am honoured to chair, and of the
Panel of Experts on Yemen. We welcome the call for
a nation-wide ceasefire, for which we have repeatedly
been calling. We welcome the clear and outright
condemnation of terrorist acts by the Houthis on
the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia. They
must not be tolerated, and the perpetrators should be
held accountable.

The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
While we supported the adoption of resolution
2624 (2022) today, at the same time we would like to
note that restrictive measures alone cannot be seen as
a way to resolve the conflict and should not result in
exacerbating the already critical humanitarian situation
in Yemen. The relevant exemptions to the sanctions
regime must work. Donors and humanitarian actors
must be given full explanations in that regard, including
through the United Nations.
In taking this decision, we were largely guided
by the outcome of the consultations between Council
members and Special Envoy Hans Grundberg on
24 February. We hope that intensified political and
diplomatic efforts will lead to peace in Yemen and
an easing of tensions in the region. We call on Hans
Grundberg to step up efforts within his mandate,
establish contacts with all the parties and present an
appropriate road map for a resolution to the Security
Council as soon as possible.
For its part, Russia will continue to do what it
can to promote a Yemeni settlement and a general
normalization in the region.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

22-270897/7
