UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/208
9 March 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 9 MARCH 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 1154 (1998) of
2 March 1998, by which the Council endorsed (in para. 1) the Memorandum of
Understanding which I signed with the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq in Baghdad
on 23 February 1998 (S/1998/166) and requested me (in para. 2) to report to the
Council as soon as possible with regard to the finalization of procedures for
presidential sites in consultation with the Executive Chairman of the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
The specific detailed procedures have now been established in accordance
with paragraph 4 (b) of the Memorandum of Understanding and are transmitted
herewith. I should appreciate it if you would bring the above to the attention
of the members of the Council.

(Signed)

98-05772 (E)

090398

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/208
English
Page 2

Annex
Procedures under paragraph 4 (b) of the Memorandum
of Understanding between the United Nations and the
Republic of Iraq of 23 February 1998

Introduction
1.
On 23 February 1998, a Memorandum of Understanding was signed between the
United Nations and the Republic of Iraq. In the Memorandum, the Government of
Iraq, inter alia, reconfirmed its acceptance of all relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, including resolutions 687 (1991) and 715 (1991). The
Government of Iraq further reiterated its undertaking to cooperate fully with
the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). The Government of Iraq also undertook to accord to UNSCOM
and IAEA immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access in conformity with all
relevant resolutions.
2.
For its part, the United Nations reiterated the commitment of all Member
States to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq. In the
performance of its mandate under the Security Council resolutions, UNSCOM
undertook to respect Iraq’s legitimate concerns relating to national security,
sovereignty and dignity.
3.
The Memorandum of Understanding contains specific provisions with respect
to the eight presidential sites in Iraq. Special procedures shall apply to the
initial and subsequent entries into those sites for the performance of mandated
tasks. A Special Group shall be established by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations in consultation with the Executive Chairman of UNSCOM and the
Director General of IAEA. The Special Group shall comprise senior diplomats
appointed by the Secretary-General and experts drawn from UNSCOM and IAEA. The
Special Group shall be headed by a Commissioner appointed by the SecretaryGeneral.
4. In carrying out its work, the Special Group shall, according to the
Memorandum of Understanding, operate under the established procedures of UNSCOM
and IAEA together with specific detailed procedures given the special nature of
the presidential sites, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.
5.
The present text constitutes those specific detailed procedures. They are
drawn up by the Secretary-General under the authority of the Memorandum of
Understanding.
Composition of the Special Group
6.
The Special Group shall comprise senior diplomats, in the capacity of
observers, appointed by the Secretary-General of the United Nations and experts
drawn from UNSCOM and IAEA in the number deemed appropriate by the Executive
Chairman of UNSCOM and the Director General of IAEA.

/...

S/1998/208
English
Page 3

Teams of the Special Group
7.
When it is determined in accordance with paragraph 13 below that there is a
need to carry out mandated tasks1 at a presidential site, a team shall be
constituted from the Special Group.
8.
The expert members of the team shall be designated by the Executive
Chairman of UNSCOM and/or the Director General of IAEA having regard to the
nature of the tasks to be performed. The Commissioner shall designate the
senior diplomatic representatives from among those appointed by the SecretaryGeneral, in no case less than two, to accompany the team.
9.
The Executive Chairman of UNSCOM and/or the Director General of IAEA shall
designate the Head of the team.
10. The team may be divided into sub-teams for the performance of specific
tasks, if the Head of the team so decides.
Functions of senior diplomats
11.

The functions of the senior diplomats shall be:

(a) To observe that the provisions of the Memorandum of Understanding and
the present specific detailed procedures are being implemented in good faith;
(b) To report on any matter they deem appropriate to the functions of the
diplomatic observers, in accordance with paragraphs 19 and 20 below.
Functions of UNSCOM/IAEA experts
12. The functions of the experts drawn from UNSCOM and IAEA who participate in
any team constituted from the Special Group shall be as already established
under their respective procedures.
Determination of the need for entry into a presidential site
13. The Executive Chairman of UNSCOM and/or the Director General of IAEA shall
determine the need, in each instance, for the performance of mandated tasks
within a presidential site.
Determination of the time and date for entry into a presidential site
14. The Executive Chairman of UNSCOM and/or the Director General of IAEA shall
determine the date and time for entry and shall so advise the Commissioner.
15. At a time determined by the Executive Chairman of UNSCOM and/or the
Director General of IAEA, the Government of Iraq shall receive a notification
from the Commissioner, or his designee, of the intention to undertake mandated
tasks within a presidential site. This notification shall indicate the number
of persons comprising the team who will participate, including the number of
diplomatic representatives accompanying the team.

/...

S/1998/208
English
Page 4

The rights of the Special Group
16. The rights of the Special Group and its teams in the conduct of their work
shall be those provided for in the relevant resolutions of the Security Council;
in the exchange of letters of May 1991 between the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq regarding the
status, privileges and immunities of the Special Commission, applicable mutatis
mutandis to IAEA; and in the plans for ongoing monitoring and verification
approved under Security Council resolution 715 (1991).
Special considerations
17. Upon entry into a presidential site, the team shall conduct itself in a
manner consonant with the nature of the site. It shall take into consideration
any observations the Iraqi representative may wish to make regarding entry into
a particular structure and then decide upon the appropriate course of action.
This shall not, however, impede the ability of the team to fulfil its tasks as
mandated under the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Reporting
18. The report called for under paragraph 4 (c) of the Memorandum of
Understanding, prepared by the Commissioner appointed by the Secretary-General,
shall be submitted by the Executive Chairman of UNSCOM to the Security Council
through the Secretary-General.
19. The senior diplomats may report directly to the Commissioner on any matter
relevant to their functions.
20. The Commissioner will discuss with the Executive Chairman of UNSCOM and/or
the Director General of IAEA any observations made by the senior diplomats,
including any matters arising from such observations that should be conveyed to
the competent Iraqi authorities. If he deems it necessary, the Commissioner may
also report any matter arising out of the work of the senior diplomats to the
Secretary-General and advise the Executive Chairman of UNSCOM and the Director
General of IAEA accordingly.
Revisions
21. These specific detailed procedures may be revised from time to time in the
light of experience in their implementation.

Notes
1

Mandated tasks under the Security Council resolutions include those in
section C of Security Council resolution 687 (1991); paragraph 3 of Security
Council resolution 707 (1991); the plans for ongoing monitoring and verification
approved by the Security Council in resolution 715 (1991); and the export/import
regime approved by the Security Council in its resolution 1051 (1996).

-----
