UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/682
15 June 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 15 JUNE 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to attach a copy of a letter dated 10 June 1999 addressed
to me by Javier Solana, Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), transmitting a copy of the military-technical agreement
concluded by NATO military authorities with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) on the procedures and modalities for the withdrawal from
Kosovo of security forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (see annex).
I should appreciate it if this letter and its annex could be brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

99-17747 (E)

150699

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1999/682
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 10 June 1999 from the Secretary-General of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General

Please find attached for your information a copy of the military-technical
agreement concluded by NATO military authorities with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) on the procedures and modalities for the
withdrawal from Kosovo of security forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1999/682
English
Page 3

Enclosure
Military-technical agreement between the international security
force (KFOR) and the Governments of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Republic of Serbia

Article I
General obligations
1.
The Parties to this agreement reaffirm the document presented by
President Ahtisaari to President Milosevic and approved by the Serb Parliament
and the Federal Government on 3 June 1999, to include deployment in Kosovo under
United Nations auspices of effective international civil and security presences.
The Parties further note that the United Nations Security Council is prepared to
adopt a resolution, which has been introduced, regarding these presences.
2.
The State governmental authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and the Republic of Serbia understand and agree that the international security
force (KFOR) will deploy following the adoption of the Security Council
resolution referred to in paragraph 1 and operate without hindrance within
Kosovo and with the authority to take all necessary action to establish and
maintain a secure environment for all citizens of Kosovo and otherwise carry out
its mission. They further agree to comply with all of the obligations of this
agreement and to facilitate the deployment and operation of this force.
3.
For purposes of the agreement, the following expressions shall have the
meanings as described below:
(a)

"The Parties" are those signatories to the agreement;

(b) "Authorities" means the appropriate responsible individual, agency or
organization of the Parties;
(c) "Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces" includes all of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and Republic of Serbia personnel and organizations with a
military capability. This includes regular army and naval forces, armed
civilian groups, associated paramilitary groups, air forces, national guards,
border police, army reserves, military police, intelligence services, federal
and Serbian Ministry of Internal Affairs local, special, riot and anti-terrorist
police, and any other groups or individuals so designated by the international
security force (KFOR) commander;
(d) The air safety zone (ASZ) is defined as a 25-kilometre zone that
extends beyond the Kosovo province border into the rest of Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia territory. It includes the airspace above the 25-kilometre zone;
(e) The ground safety zone (GSZ) is defined as a 5-kilometre zone that
extends beyond the Kosovo province border into the rest of Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia territory. It includes the terrain within that 5-kilometre zone;

/...

S/1999/682
English
Page 4

(f)
signed.
4.

Entry-into-force day (EIF) is defined as the day this agreement is

The purposes of these obligations are as follows:

(a) To establish a durable cessation of hostilities, under no
circumstances shall any forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
Republic of Serbia enter into, re-enter, or remain within the territory of
Kosovo or the ground safety zone and the air safety zone described in article I,
paragraph 3, without the prior express consent of the international security
force (KFOR) commander. Local police will be allowed to remain in the GSZ.
The above paragraph is without prejudice to the agreed return of Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and Serbian personnel, which will be the subject of a
subsequent separate agreement as provided for in paragraph 6 of the document
mentioned in paragraph 1 of this article;
(b) To provide for the support and authorization of the international
security force (KFOR) and in particular to authorize the international security
force (KFOR) to take such actions as are required, including the use of
necessary force, to ensure compliance with this agreement and protection of the
international security force (KFOR), and to contribute to a secure environment
for the international civil implementation presence and other international
organizations, agencies and non-governmental organizations (details in
appendix B).

Article II
Cessation of hostilities
1.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces shall immediately, upon entry
into force of this agreement, refrain from committing any hostile or provocative
acts of any type against any person in Kosovo and will order armed forces to
cease all such activities. They shall not encourage, organize or support
hostile or provocative demonstrations.
2.
Phased withdrawal of Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces (ground). The
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia agrees to a phased withdrawal of all Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia forces from Kosovo to locations in Serbia outside Kosovo.
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces will mark and clear minefields, booby
traps and obstacles. As they withdraw, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces
will clear all lines of communication by removing all mines, demolitions, booby
traps, obstacles and charges. They will also mark all sides of all minefields.
the entry and deployment of the international security force (KFOR) into Kosovo
will be synchronized. The phased withdrawal of Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
forces from Kosovo will be in accordance with the sequence outlined below:
(a) By EIF + 1 day, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces located in
zone 3 will have vacated, via designated routes, that zone to demonstrate
compliance (depicted on the map in appendix A to this agreement). Once it is
verified that Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces have complied with this
/...

S/1999/682
English
Page 5

subparagraph and with paragraph 1 of this article, NATO air strikes will be
suspended. The suspension will continue provided that the obligations of this
agreement are fully complied with and provided that the Security Council adopts
a resolution concerning the deployment of the international security force
(KFOR) so rapidly that a security gap can be avoided;
(b) By EIF + 6 days, all Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces in Kosovo
will have vacated zone 1 (depicted on the map in appendix A to this agreement).
Establish liaison teams with the KFOR commander in Pristina;
(c) By EIF + 9 days, all Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces in Kosovo
will have vacated zone 2 (depicted on the map in appendix A to this agreement);
(d) By EIF + 11 days, all Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces in Kosovo
will have vacated zone 3 (depicted on the map in appendix A to this agreement);
(e) By EIF + 11 days, all Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces in Kosovo
will have completed their withdrawal from Kosovo (depicted on the map in
appendix A to this agreement) to locations in Serbia outside Kosovo, and not
within the 5-kilometre GSZ. At the end of the sequence (EIF+11), the senior
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia force commanders responsible for the withdrawing
forces shall confirm in writing to the international security force (KFOR)
commander that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces have complied and
completed the phased withdrawal. The international security force (KFOR)
commander may approve specific requests for exceptions to the phased withdrawal.
The bombing campaign will terminate on complete withdrawal of Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia forces as provided under article II. The international security
force (KFOR) shall retain, as necessary, authority to enforce compliance with
this agreement;
(f) The authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republic
of Serbia will cooperate fully with the international security force (KFOR) in
its verification of the withdrawal of forces from Kosovo and beyond the ASZ/GSZ;
(g) Federal Republic of Yugoslavia armed forces withdrawing in accordance
with appendix A, i.e., in designated assembly areas or withdrawing on designated
routes, will not be subject to air attack;
(h) The international security force (KFOR) will provide appropriate
control of the borders of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in Kosovo with
Albania and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia* until the arrival of the
civilian mission of the United Nations.
3.

Phased withdrawal of Yugoslav air and air defence forces:

(a) At EIF + 1 day, no Federal Republic of Yugoslavia aircraft, fixed wing
or rotary, will fly in Kosovo airspace or over the ASZ without prior approval by
the international security force (KFOR) commander. All air defence systems,
radar, surface-to-air missiles and aircraft of the Parties will refrain from

* Turkey recognizes Macedonia by its constitutional name.
/...

S/1999/682
English
Page 6

acquisition, target-tracking or otherwise illuminating international security
force (KFOR) air platforms operating in the Kosovo airspace or over the ASZ;
(b) By EIF + 3 days, all aircraft, radars, surface-to-air missiles
(including man-portable air defence systems) and anti-aircraft artillery in
Kosovo will withdraw to other locations in Serbia outside the 25-kilometre ASZ;
(c) The international security force (KFOR) commander will control and
coordinate use of airspace over Kosovo and the ASZ commencing at EIF. Violation
of any of the provisions above, including the international security force
(KFOR) commander’s rules and procedures governing the airspace over Kosovo, as
well as unauthorized flight or activation of Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
integrated air defence within the ASZ, are subject to military action by the
international security force (KFOR), including the use of necessary force. The
international security force (KFOR) commander may delegate control of normal
civilian air activities to appropriate Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
institutions to monitor operations, deconflict international security force
(KFOR) air traffic movements and ensure smooth and safe operations of the air
traffic system. It is envisioned that control of civil air traffic will be
returned to civilian authorities as soon as practicable.

Article III
Notifications
1.
This agreement and written orders requiring compliance will be immediately
communicated to all Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces.
2.
By EIF + 2 days, the State governmental authorities of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and the Republic of Serbia shall furnish the following specific
information regarding the status of all Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces:
(a) Detailed records, positions and descriptions of all mines, unexploded
ordnance, explosive devices, demolitions, obstacles, booby traps, wire
entanglement, or physical or military hazards to the safe movement of any
personnel in Kosovo laid by Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces;
(b) Any further information of a military or security nature about Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia forces in the territory of Kosovo and the GSZ and ASZ
requested by the international security force (KFOR) commander.

/...

S/1999/682
English
Page 7

Article IV
Establishment of a Joint Implementation Commission
A Joint Implementation Commission shall be established with the deployment
of the international security force (KFOR) to Kosovo, as directed by the
international security force (KFOR) commander.

Article V
Final authority to interpret
The international security force (KFOR) commander is the final authority
regarding interpretation of this agreement and the security aspects of the peace
settlement it supports. His determinations are binding on all Parties and
persons.

Article VI
Entry into force
This agreement shall enter into force upon signature.

Appendices:
A.

Phased withdrawal of Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces from Kosovo.

B.

International security force (KFOR) operations.

For the international security
force (KFOR)
Lieutenant General Mike Jackson
Commander, KFOR

For the Governments of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the
Republic of Serbia
Colonel General Svetozar Marjanovic
General Staff of VJ
Lieutenant General Obrad Stevanovic
Ministry of Internal Affairs
of the Republic of Serbia

9 June 1999

/...

Phased withdrawal of Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces,
routes and assembly areas

S/1999/682
English
Page 8

Appendix A

/...

S/1999/682
English
Page 9

Appendix B
International security force (KFOR) operations

1.
Consistent with the general obligations of the military-technical agreement
the State governmental authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
Republic of Serbia understand and agree that the international security force
(KFOR) will deploy and operate without hindrance within Kosovo and with the
authority to take all necessary action to establish and maintain a secure
environment for all citizens of Kosovo.
2.
The international security force (KFOR) commander shall have the authority,
without interference or permission, to do all that he judges necessary and
proper, including the use of military force, to protect the international
security force (KFOR) and the international civil implementation presence, and
to carry out the responsibilities inherent in this military-technical agreement
and the peace settlement which it supports.
3.
Neither the international security force (KFOR) nor any of its personnel
shall be liable for any damages to public or private property that they may
cause in the course of duties related to the implementation of this agreement.
The Parties will agree on a status-of-forces agreement as soon as possible.
4.

The international security force (KFOR) shall have the right:

(a) To monitor and ensure compliance with this agreement and to respond
promptly to any violations and restore compliance, using military force if
required. This includes necessary actions to:
(i)

Enforce withdrawals of Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces;

(ii)

Enforce compliance following the return of selected Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia personnel to Kosovo;

(iii)

Provide assistance to other international entities involved in the
implementation or otherwise authorized by the Security Council;

(b) To establish liaison arrangements with local Kosovo authorities and
with Federal Republic of Yugoslavia/Serbian civil and military authorities;
(c) To observe, monitor and inspect any and all facilities or activities
in Kosovo that the international security force (KFOR) commander believes has or
may have military or police capability, or may be associated with the employment
of military or police capabilities, or are otherwise relevant to compliance with
this agreement.
5.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this agreement, the Parties
understand and agree that the international security force (KFOR) commander has
the right and is authorized to compel the removal, withdrawal or relocation of
specific forces and weapons, and to order the cessation of any activities
whenever the international security force (KFOR) commander determines a
/...

S/1999/682
English
Page 10

potential threat to either the international security force (KFOR) or its
mission, or to another party. Forces failing to redeploy, withdraw, relocate or
to cease threatening or potentially threatening activities following such a
demand by the international security force (KFOR) shall be subject to military
action by the international security force (KFOR), including the use of
necessary force, to ensure compliance.

-----
