V.

Resolntions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

6. Endorses the request made by the Economic and
Social Council in paragraph 6 of its resolution 2124
(LXIII).

107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

32/191.

Sperific action related to the particular
needs of the land-locked developing
countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2971 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972, 3169 (XXVIII) of 17 December 1973,
3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974, 3311
(XXIX) of 14 December 1974, 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 and 31/157 of 21 December 1976,
Bearing in mind Trade and Devclopment Board resolution 109 (XIV) of 12 September 1974, 172 in which
the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development was requested to take appropriate and positive action on thc relevant recommendations of the Group of Experts on the Transport
Infrastructure for Land-locked Developing Countries,
Recalling also resolutions 63 (III) of 19 May 1972 173
and 98 (IV) of 31 May 1976 174 of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development,
Bearing in mind the other resolutions and decisions
adopted by the United Nations and its related agencies
envisaging special action in favour of the land-locked
developing countries,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 2127 (LXIII) of 4 August 1977,
Concerned with the slow progress being made in the
implementation of specific action in favour of those
countries,
Recalling the provisions of its resolution 31/ 157 and
other relevant resolutions of the United Nations with
respect to the exercise of the right of land-locked developing countries to free access to and from the sea,
as well as their right to freedom of transit,
1. Rea[firms the right of free access to and from
the sea of the developing land-locked countries, as well
as their right of freedom of transit;

2. Invites the developed countries, other States and
international organizations and financia! institutions to
implement specific action for the benefit of such countries, as envisaged in resolutions 63 (III) and 98 (IV)
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and other resolutions adopted by the United
Nations;
3. Urges members of the international community
to provide land-locked developing countries with technical and financia! assistance in the form of grants or
concessional loans for the construction, improvement
172 Jbid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplemcnt No. I 5 (A/9615/
Rev.1 ) , annex I.
1 73 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexcs (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.II.D.4),
annex LA.
17 4 /bid., Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10 and corrigendurn),
part one. sect. A.

119

and maintenance of their transport and transit infrastructure and facilities;
4. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and other agencies within the United Nations system to take effective
mea~ures in order to provide increased resources to
meet the technical assistance needs of the land-locked
developing countries;
5. Confi,rms paragraph 6 of Economic and Social
Council resolution 2127 (LXIII).
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

32 .'192.

Rever!'le transfer of technolo~y

Thc General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
thc Programme of Action on thc Establishment of a
New Tnternational Economic Order and 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 Dccember 197 4 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Bearing in mind its resolution 3017 (XXVII) of
18 December 1972 on the outflow of trained personnel
from developing to developed countries,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resoIution 1904 (LVII) of 1 August 1974 on the outflow
of trained personnel from developing to developed
countries, in which the Council, inter alia, recommended
that countries which benefit from the ''brain drain",
particularly those which gain most from the "brain
drain" from developing countries, should consider the
adoption of measures which would help, directly or
indirectly, to diminish the gravity of the problem,
Rea{firming its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 Septembcr 1975 on development and international economic co-operation, in which it emphasized, in section
III, paragraph 1O, the urgent need to formulate national
and international policies to avoid the "brain drain"
and to obviate its adverse effects,
Endorsing resolution 87 (IV) of 30 May 1976 of
the Unitcd Nations Confcrence on Trade and Devclopment174 concerning the strengthening of the technological capacity of developing countries and, in particular, paragraph 18 thereof, in which the Conference
recommended that ali countries, particularly those benefiting from the "brain drain", should, in the light of
the studies assessing the magnitudc, composition, causes
and effects of thc outflow of trained personnel from the
developing countries which were called for in resolution 2 (I) of 5 Deccmbcr 1975 of the Committee on
Transfer of Technology, 1 7 G consider what measurcs
might be nccessary to deal with the problems posed
by such an outflow,
Conscious that the development process of the developing countries, particularly thcir capacity to strengthen
their domestic tcchnolog:cal potential, is crucially dependent on the supply of highly trained pcrsonnel, and
17 " See Of]icial Records of tlze Trade al'ld Development
Board, Seventlz Special Session, Supp/ement No. 4 (TD/B/
593), annex l.

120

General Assemhly-Thirty-second Ses~ion

that the outflow of such personnel represents a significant loss to those countries,
Taking into account the fact that a Group of Governmental Experts on Reverse Transfer of Technology will
be convened by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Confercnce 011 Trade and Development in accordance with resolution 2 (1) of the Committee on
Transfer of Technology,
Taking note of the constructive proposal made by
His Royal Highness Crown Prince Hassan bin Talal of
Jordan at the sixty-third session of the International
Labour Conference on 1O Junc 1977, concerning the
establishment of an international labour compensatory
facility to compensate labour-cxporting countries for
their loss of highly trained personnel,
1. Recommends that the Mcmber States conccrned
and the competent international organizations should,
as a matter of urgency, give due consideration to the
formulation of policies with a view to mitigating the
adverse consequences associated with the "brain drain";
2. Urges the developing countries to make a thorough evaluation at the national level of the special
characteristics of the "brain drai11" problem;
3. Also urges the developing countries to give immediate consideration to the modalities for promoting
collective self-reliance among themselves with a view
to using and developing their human resources on the
basis of mutual advantage within the broader framework of co-operation in the field of trade, technology
and capital;
4. Further urges the dcveloped countries to support
measures designed to e11courage the absorption of
trained personnel within the developing countries and
to support the activities of the international organizations aimed at finding solutions to this problem without
prejudice to existing international agreemcnts;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the International Labour Organisation
and bearing in mind the recommendations made by
the Group of Governmental Experts on Reverse Transfer of Technology, to undertake an in-depth study of
the "brain drain" problem. taking into account specific
proposals made on this subjcct, including the proposal
referred to in the eighth preambular paragraph abovc;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the
results of the study to the Economic and Social Cou11cil at its sixty-fifth session and, through it, to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session, taking into
account the relevant work being undertaken in other
parts of the United Nations system.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
32/193.

United Nations Negotiating Conference
on a Common Fund under the lntegrated Programme for Commodities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order and 3362 (S-VII)

of 16 September 1975 on devclopment and international
economic co-operation,
Recalling rcsolution 93 (IV) of 30 May 1976 of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development17u on the Integrated Programme for Commodi~ics
and thc agreed time-table in that rcsolution concernmg
ncgotiation of a cornmon fund and for the complction
of all preparatory mcctings and negotiations on individual commodities,
Noting the intcnsive work at the thrce prcparatory
mcctings, held u11dcr the auspices of thc United Nations
Confere11cc on Trade and Development during the
period from November 1976 to March 1977, to provide
the necessary technical basis for the United Nations
Negotiating Conference on a Common Fund under the
Integrated Programmc for Commodities,
Concerned that the first part of the Negotiating Conference, hcld from 7 March to 2 April 1977, failed to
produce any rcsult,
Noting the agreemcnt of Governments that a common
fund should be cstablished as a ncw entity to serve as
a key instrument in attaining the agrced objectives of
the Integrated Programme for Commodities, as embodied in resolution 93 (IV) of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, the agreement
that the specific purpose and objectivcs of a common
fund, as well as its othcr constituent elcments will
continue to be ncgotiated in the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and the pledge to
secure a successful conclusion at the second part of
the Negotiating Co11ferencc, which was scheduled to
be held from 7 November to 2 Dccember 1977 at the
plcnipotentiary level,
Deeply concerned that the second part of the Negotiating Conference had to be suspended on 1 December
1977 because of failurc to agrec on even thc basic elements of a common fund which would makc it a key
instrument of the Integratcd Programme for Commodities, in clear contradiction of the commitments made at
the Conference on lnternational Economic Co-operation, hcld in Paris, and subsequently reaffirmed within
the United Nations Confercnce 011 Trade a11d Dcvelopment,
Mindful of the scrious repercussions which this lack
of result will havc on the current negotiations on individual commodities and on the implementation of thc
J11tegratcd Programme for Commodities as a wholc,
Acutely aware that the failure of the negotiations
on a common fund will adversely affect the coursc of
international economic co-operation, with serious conscquenccs for thc future rclationships bctwcc11 developcd
and devcloping countries,
Noting also that the developing countrics a11d many
developed countries are agreed on those basic elements
of a common fund which will indeed make it a key
instrument for attaining the agreed objectives of the
Integratcd Programme for Commodities, and expressing
appreciation to those countries which have announced
plcdges to thc common fund,
176 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference 011
Trade and Deve/opment, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.
