UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES.VERBAUX OFFICIELS

FOURTH YEAR

No. 5

QUATRIEME ANNEE

No 5

FOUR HUNDRED AND FIRST
MEETING

QUATRE.CENT-UNIEME
SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Monday, 17 January 1949, at 3 p.tn.

Tenlle a Lake Success, New-York,
le fundi 17 janvier 1949, 15 heures.

President: General McNAUGHTON (Canada).

President' Le general McNi\1JGFlTON (Canada).

Present: The representatives of the followitlg
Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ul(rajni~n Soviet Socialist Repuhlic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, "United Kingdom, United Stltes of America.

Presents: Les represent,-mts des pays suivants'
Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cub". Egypte,
France, Norvege, Repub1iquc sOclali"ie sDvietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiqnes socialistes
sovi€tigues, Royaume·Uni, mats-Unis d'AmcriCjuc.

1. Provisional agenda (S/ Agenda 401)

I. Ordre du jonr provisoire
(S/Agenda 4,01)

COtmtries:

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The Indonesian question.

2. Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

a

1. Adoption de \'orc1rc du jour.
2. La qlle3f:iOl1 indonesienne.

2. Adoption <le rordre du jour
L'ordre dn jOltT est adoptc.

The PRESIDENT: I draw the attention of the
members of the Security Council to the fact that
this is the third anniversary of the first meeting
of the Security Council. It will be recalled that
the first Lneeti~g was held in London.

Le PUESlDENT (tTaduit de l'anglais): Je. rappclle aux membres du Consel! que c'est aUjoUl'd'hlli le troisU:mc allniversaire de la premien:
seance dn Conseil de securite. CeUe premiere
seance, on s'en sotlvient, s'est tellu~ a Ldndres.

3. Continuation of the discussion on the
Indonesian question

3. Suite de la discussion Bur la question
indoncsienne

On the l1witation of the President, Mr. Hood,
representative of Australia; Ml', Nisot, representative of Belgium; Sir Benegal Rama Rau,
representative of India; Mr. van Roijen, repre.wttative of the Netherlands; Mr. Ingles, representative of the Philippines; and Mr, Polar,
representative of the Rep11blic of Indonesia, took
their places at thl! Cou/1.cil table.
The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the tlsllal
custom of the Council, the· remarks of Council
members will be interpreted conscwtively; all
others, sin1l11tanfo l1s1y.
I call the attentioll of the representatives to
document 5/1213 dated 17 January 1949, which

Sur l'invitMi01~ du PfesirJr:mt, lVI. Hood, reprcSlmiant de l'Anstralie; M, Nisol, rf!pr~sentan,t
de la Beloh]?le; Si!- Benegal Rama Ran, repl'heutant de l'lnde; M. van Roijcn, 1-epreSetltant des
Pays-Bas; M. Ingles, rcpn5smtant des Philippines, et M. Palar, reprCsflttant de la Republique
d'Indonesie, prenncnt plar~ Cl la table dll C01l.seil.
Le PRl:SIDENT (iradltil de l'anglais) . Slliv<lnt
la coutumc, les interventions des membres dll
Consci1 fe.ront l'objct d'une interpretation consecntive et tOlltes les antrcs d'une interpretation
simultanee
J'attirc l'attention des representants sur le
document 5/1213, en date du 17 janvier 1949;

2
is a report received yesterda}' and circulated at
this meeting.
I am infonned that the representative of the
Netherlands wishes to have an opporhmity to
m<lke a statement on this report, btlt first I wish
ta call upon the re[)rcsentati'/e of the Republic
of Indonesia, whose name is first on the list of
speakers.

c'est un l'apPo1t re~ll hier, qui 'lient de nous
~tre distrib'ue id meme.
]'a?prends que le representan: des Pays-Bas
voudrait p;-t~CuLer des observations sur ce rapport, mais je vais d'abord donner la parole au
represcntart de la RepuDHqt:e d'Indoncsie, qui est
en tete de la lisle des orateurs,

Mr, PALA:t (Rc:public of Indonesia): In his
statement before the Security Council on 14
January [400tJ1 meetingl, the representative of
the Netherlands tried to explain to the Cocncil
the "measure in which the Security Coundl's
resolution has in fact ::,een carried out", and he
has <lone w by dealing at le:1gth with three specific points: the termi\latio:1 of hostilities, the
release of political leaders, and the granting of
:acilitie<; to the Committee of Good Offices and
the Consular Commission.

M. PAL'\R (Republique d'Indonesie) (tradllit
de l''Jnglais): Dans la declaration qu'il a :aite
devant le Conser de securite le 14 janvier [40G~me
seanceL le rep~esentant des Pays-Bas a teute
cl'exposer au Couseil "dans quel1e mesure la
resolution dtl Conseil de seeurite a effet:ti'lernent
fie appliqJee"; il a, POl1f ce faire, longuemenl
devdoppe trois points particuHers: la cessation
des hostilites, la mise en 1iberte des dirigeants
poJitiql1es el les facilites accordees la Corr.mission de bUll ufflCe~ et it la Commission c.ansuJiire.

I will not take up these ?oints again, since it
would surely be a seriOtlS lmderestimation OT the
intelligence of the Security Council and of everyone, for that !Ulltter, to assume that arguments
of the Netherlands repre~elltative have in any
way COnvinced the Council of the fact that the
Netherlands Government has complied with the
Securify Council's resolution.
None of the argUtnents put forw~rrl hy the
representative of the Netherlands can star:cl up
against the overwhelming evidence produced by
the Committee of Good Offices in Indonesia.
The facts as reported to the SeClwity Council by
the Committee of Good Office!; are clear and unRmbigl1otlS, There has beer. no compli,mce by the
Netherlands with the cease-fire order. The
political leaders have not been released, and at
the time the Netherlands reiJresentative an·
nounced that facilitic9 had been g-,mnted :0 the
military observers in the field, the fact was that no
such facilities had lceengranted. I shall therefore not elaborate on these points.

Je ne vais pas revenir Sur ces differents points,
car ce serait vraiment som-estimer l'intelli5"ence
des meI11bres dtl Conseil - et celle de tOllt le
monde - que de sUpposer que ces argUl:lents
dl1 representant des Pays-Bas aient en quoi que
ce soit n::l1ssi i convaincre le Comeil que le
Gouvernement des Pays-Bas a mis a eXeClltiOn ta
nfsolution du Consei1 de securite.
AUCl111 des arguments a'lances par re representant des Pays-Bas ne pcut tenir devant les
prcuves ecrasa:ltes gu'a fournies. la Commission
de bans duces en Indonesie. Les faits, tels que la
C01l1mis,~:on de bons offices lcosa exposes au
Conseil de securite, ne laissent subsister a.ucun
doute: les Hol1alldais ne se sont pas confannes
a l'ordre de ceSSer le feu. Les dirigeants politiglles n'ont pas ete relaches, et, all moment ou
le representant des Pays-Bus annom;ait que
l'on avait accorde des faciHtes dUX observatelll'S
militaires envDyes sur If'~ lieux, ces facilires
n'avaient point ete accordees. Je ne m'atfarderai
done pas davantage sur ces points.

In his statement, however, the Netherlands
representative has raised several points which are
a complete misrepresentation of fact and which
I cannot allow to pass withOltt comment.

D'autre part, le representant des Pays-Bas a
formute un ce~tain nombre d'observations qni denatl1l'ent completeUlent 1e3 fnits et que je ne
peux lai3ser sans commentaires.

The Securh Council will remember that I
hai"e pointed otlt several times that it is the consistent Nf'therlands policy to build up the impression in the world that the fight:ng in Illdonesia is over, that an is peacefttl and quiet and
that, in fact, no outside country need interfere
in an affair that has alreli.dy been settled. It was
in order to achieve this aim that the Netherl<l.nds
Government, from the very beginning of the miUtary attack, has imposed dOtlb;e censorsh:p, bo:h
political and t.1ilitary, on all otltc.oming news from
Indonesia.

A diverses reprises, le Conseil de secllrite s'en
souvienl, j'ai falt observel' qt:e la politiql1£> des
Pays-Bas cherche sysh~matiquement l creer
dans le monde l'jrnpression que les cOll1bats o~t
pris fin en Indonesie, gue la paix et la tl'3nqUlllite y regned pattout et qt1l'., en somme, le;;
autres pays n'ont pas
intervenir dans cette
affaire,1111i est deja regUe. C'est pOLlr cn~er cC,tt.e
iJnpres_~ian qu~, des le derlllt ces 0p~1"atiQ!lS mJl~­
taires, le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas a soltmlS
toutes les nouvel1es d'lndonesie a une double
censure, politique et militaire.

Dt1riCg the 400th meeting of the Secttrity
Council, Mr. van Roijen again tried to give a
picture of perfect onler, tranq11illity and peace
in Indonesia. In :'act, he said: " . . . there has
been no res-is:ance or enmity from the popul:4.tion
at all. There has not even been any large-scale
guerilla warfare nur is it tu be expected". To
support his point Mr. van Roijen quoted a lengthy
newspaper report. I will not indulge in reading
to the Council the rerwrts I have :-eceived £rem
my Government about the mi:itary situation, nOT
will I quote any new~paper reports, althol1gh
such reports of continued f.Lnd e'ven ir.creas:ng

A la 400eme seance du Conseil de secl1ritt\
M_ vac Roijen a ue nouveau essayc de ~rosser
1111 tableau de l'orcre parfait, de la paix et de .l~
tranquillite profondes q:li regnent et'! Indoncste
En fait, il a dit: ".. , it n'y a €u absolum ent
aUCl1ne resistance ni mC-me al:Cl1l1e hostilite de 1l:
raft c1~ la pcpulntion civile. I1 Ilf' s'est manifest.!
al1ctll1e activite. de partisans et i1 ne s'en mal1l'
festera vraisemblablement pas". A l'a?pui de
~a thc~, M. van Roijen a cite un long article d~
Journal. Je ne vais pas lire au Conseil les ren·
scignements que i 'ai re<;us de mon Gouvernemed
sur la sittlation militaire en Indonesie, et jene

a

a

3
guerilla war!ar e .are by no means lacking in th~
newspapers 111 thlS country. I want only to refer
to the latest report of the Committee of Good
O~ces [5/1212J,. !ransm itting information receIved from the mlhtal'Y observers in the field.

lirai pas non pillS d'articles de journau x; et
pOlll"tant, les articles relatant qlle l'activite des
partisi'lns subsiste et meme s'intensifie ne manCjuent p.as. clans la presse des Etats~Unis. Je me
borner~l .a me reporter au dernier rapport de la
~011lm1SS10ll d~ bons offices [5/1212 ], qui contlent des renselgnements recueillis par les observatcurs cnvoyes sur les lieux.
Cc rappott donne de la Situation un tableau
This report gives an entirely different picttlre
of the situation than that reporte d by the N ether- entierement different de cclui qu'en fait le repre~
lands represe:ltative. In fact, the impression sentant des Pays-Bas. 11 donne en effet l'impl'escreated by tillS report is one of an occupying s.ion qu'il y a en Indonesic une <lrmee d'occupaarmy completely unable to control the areas it hon absolument incapable de tenir sous son
invaded and even unable to mainta in law and contr61e les regions qtt'elle a envahies incapable
order in the towns it claims to have occupied. I meme d'assurer I'ordre public dans' 1es villes
qu 'elle se VCl.nte d'avoir occupees. J e cite:
quote:
"Les destmctions de routes ponts et biens ont
"Destru ction of roads, bridges and property
greater
much
ona
eu lieu et se produisent enc~re sur une echelle
has ken and still is h'1.king place
ands
Netherl
the
by
coup plus gnr.de que les autorites neerlan~
ated
beau
anticip
was
than
scale
have
daises ne l'avaient pr~vll. Des centaincs de ponts
military allthorities. Hundre ds of bridges
ones.
lit
importa
ete detrttits, dont de nombreux ponts impormany
ont
ng
includi
ed,
been destroy
to
t:tnts. Le trafic ferroviaire est entierement paraAll railroads are completely blocked owing
y.
propert
railroad
and
lyse en raison de la destruction des ponts, du
the. destmc tion of bridges
The numbe r of Nether lands troops in the materie! et (les installations . . . Le nombre des
zones
newly-occupied areas is insufficient to prevent trotlpe~ neerlancbises se trouvallt clans les
empepour
ant
insuffis
est
s
freely
occupee
moving
ement
from
nouvell
s
guerilla
of
roving bands
de .sc de.plaand from redorm ing aets of sabotage such as cher des bandes de guerilleros errants
de saboactes
des
livrer
se
de
et
."
nt
bridges
libreme
d
cer
repaire
destruc tion of newlytage, tels que la destruction de pants recemrnent
repares."
N'est-il pas vr::liment regrettable que la preIt is really to be regrette d that the presence of
d'observate'Jl's
a group of nel1tr::l1 observers in Indonesi::l seems sence en Indonesie d'un grOltpe les sl1cces des
mettre
compt'o
parnisse
ands
neutres
Netherl
the
of
efforts
to spoil the sincere
t les Hollandais
to create the impres sion that the Netherlands efforts sinceres qlle deploienI'armee des Paysque
sion
l'impres
and
donner
ordet·
pour
peace,
g
Army has succeeded in bringin
Bas a reussi a apporter la paix, I'ordre et la
tranqui llity to Indonesia.
tranquillite a l'Indonesie?
Se lano;ant dans ltne discussion de I'attitude
Embark ing ltpOn Cl discussior, of the attitude
, M. vnn Roijen a essaye
of the Security Council, Mr. van Roijen has tried du Consei1 de securite
geste de deft par 1eque1
du
gravite
la
er
the
d'attenu
of
e
defianc
to minimize his Govel'nment's
aux ordres du Conrepondu
a
Security Council's order by pointing to the in" son Gouvernement arguant des defaillances d'auen
,
securite
de
seil
stnmge
sllfficieneies of others. Surely this is a
ment un procede pour le mains
procedure, to say the least. I will not elaborate trui. Voila certaine
rai pas sur ce point, mais
m'etend
ne
Je
.
etrange
on this point, but J feel compelled to dwell at
oblige de m'arret er
meme
de
tout
sens
me
je
Netllerthe
points
other
some length 011 several
d'autres asser~
nombre
certain
un
a
peu
lands representative made in his reply to the quelque
s a emises
Pays~Ba
des
ntant
represe
le
que
l;
tions
Counci
the
of
stateme nts of several members
s memplusieur
de
ions
declarat
aux
they are such a complete misrepresentation of the flOur repondre
a td
rent
denatl1
ns
assertio
ces
;
Conseil
du
bres
most
the
facts that I feel I must correct some of
dans l'obligation
vois
me
je
que
faits,
les
point
base
may
l
Counci
the
that
flagrant ones in order
s des erreur.s les plus flaits decisions on an objective knowledge of the de I·edi.fier certaine
Consei1 pl1isse se fonder,
le
que
afin
grantes
ands
Netherl
the
facts involved. It is amazing that
une conn::lissance objective
sur
s,
decision
ses
Govern ment could furnish its spokesm::ln with dans
nt que le Gouvernement
stupefia
nest
faits.
des
such bad inform ation.
e son porte paro1e,
renseign
mal
si
neerlandn.is ait
Le representant dl':S Pays-Bas, en soutenant
The Nether lands represe ntative bases the rigbt
Gouverntment avait le droit - comme
of his Governmel1t to start its colonial war in que son
parlH de droit dans un te1 cas pouv::lit
l'on
si
Indone sia-if indeed there is any such right-o n
cette guerre c.oloniale en 1ndorenclre
d'entrep
areas,
these
the Nether lands sovereignty over
le principl': de la souverainete
sur
s'appuie
and he reminded the Council of article I of the nesie
ces .tert'itoires: il. a rappele a,u
clans
s
Pays~Ba
des
Additional Renvil/e Principles [S/649 , Appendes pt'll1C1peS comple·
premle:r
di.t: VIII]. What, however, is the feal position Consei1 l'articleRenville [5/649 ll/t1Icxe VI11].
un
es
mentair
of tbis Nether lands sovereignty?
Mais qu'en est-il exactement de cede llouver:alnete neerlandaise?
L'artic1e premier des principes complementair~s
Article I of the Additio nal Renville Principles
Renvl71e est I'ull de ceUK que les Bollandats
was one of the articles which both the Nether - du
les representants de la Republique etaient
et
a
lands and the Republic agreed to embody in
convenus d'introduire dans un futtlf accord polifutttre political ::lgreeme.nt between the Nether - tique imtre-les Pays-Bas et la Repl1bliqlle d'Indolands and the Reptiblic of Indonesia. Aboard the
nesie. A bard du Rcnville, nous avons signe un
Relwil/e, we signed a truce agreem ent _[5/649,
••

&

a

M

4
Appendix XI] and agreed upon eighteen political
principles, forming a basis for negotiations in
order to reach a political agreement-which we
nave not yet re<i.c:hed. It was therefore only wJlen
we had reached the political agl'~elllellt that wc
were to recognize Netherlands sovereignty over
the territory during the interim period, These
politic.,] principles were to become valid only
when such a political agreement had been read.ed.
Thus, if this first <ldc1itiO:lal political princ~ple
was to have bec:ome valid immediately, then on
the same grounds the other poLtical principles,
among which is principle 9 which contains the
provision for the independence 0: the Indonesian
people should also have become valid.
Furthermore, the following will prove that the
picture [ have just given is not just a subjective
interpre:ation of the Re1tville Truce Agreement
3:J.d its Addit:ontll Princ:iples. It was stated by
the Committee of Good Offices that their ir.terpretation was that this Rem>ille Agreement would
not in any way change the position on either side,
and in denling with the Netherlands we were and
are acting on the basis of our Proclamation· of
Indeper.dence.
It was on this basis that the RepuJJlk of
Indonesia CO:J.tinued to maintain its relations
with fr:endly countries and to establish new ones.
It felt that whenever it established these new
relatiors it was with the sole purpose of not
rendering negotiations with :he Netherlands
(;ove111ment any more difficult.

accord de treve [5/649, anne;rc XI], et nous nOllS
wmmes entelldl1S pour accepter dix-huit principes politiques devant constituer une base de
negociations pOllr abontir
la conclusion d'un
accord politique, qui, du reste, n'a PR~ encore ete
canell1. Ce n'est qu'apres la conclusion de cel
accord politiqtle que 1l0US deviolls t'econnaitre la
souvel'ainete neerlandaise sur le territoire pendant
:a periode de transition, et que ces principes politiqlles devai:::nt entrer en viglleur. D'aillellrs, s~
ce premier principe poIitique t:U:IltJIem~lltaire
devait etre applique immediatement, il faudrait
da meme coup ad:nettre la validite immediate de
tOllS les autres pl'incipes politiques et, notamment,
du neuvihne priucipe, qui reconnait l'independance du peuple indrme.sien.
Je vais maintenant prauver que et que je viens
de dire n'est pas une simple interpretation personnelle de l'Accord dH Ren'l-'ille et de ses principes complementaizoes. La Commission de hem
offices a fonnellement declare que, it son avis,
l'Accord du Renville ne modifierait en rien la
situation de part et d'autre; dans nos rapports
avec les I-Iollandds, nous n'avons cesse de nOllS
inspirer de notre proclamation d'independance.

a

Cest ainsi que la Repub!ique d'Indonesi(' a
maintenu ses relations avec des pays amis et
qu'elle en a etabli de nOl1velles. Chaqlle fois
qu'elle a et.1bli de telles rela:iQns, die s'est att,>
chee
ne pas rendre plus difficiles les negociations avec les Pays-Bas.

a

Ce 50nt les Hollandais qui ont viole l'accord.
It is the Netherlands which has violatec. the
agreement. It has tried to weaken and exhaust Jis ont essaye d'af-fai'hlir et d'eplliser la Reputhe Repllblic by maintaining a tight blockade even blique en maintenant un bloc1.ts etrojt, en doirit
against the express prcvisions of tlte Truce des c1al1ses expresses de l'ac.cord de treve. Us
Agreenent. ft has violated the Renville Agree- ont vio1e l'Accord du Renville en crcnnt ces Etats
ment ey setting up States in areas under displtte, dans des regions contestees, dont le sort dev"it
the position of which was to be determined etre fixe par voie de negoeiations, sous les austhrough negotiations under the auspices of the pices de la Commission de bans offices, et en
Committee of Good Offices and by lining up such groupant res n01.:veallX Etats avec d'autres Etnts
States witn other St:l.tes created by the Nether~ crees par les Hollandais sur les territoires qu'ils
lands on territories ocwpied by it. It has pre- occupent. Ils nor.s ont fait don d't1ne administrasented us w:th a prefabricated interim adminis- tion interhlaire prefabriquce, etablie sans qu'ait
tration set up without consultation with the
consul:ee la Commission de vons offices qui
Committee of Good Offices through whose instrll- aurait dll Hre ['instrument de sa creation.
tnenta:ity such interim govern:ne.nt should have
Ltell ~realed.
Re[londant aux remarques dlt represe:Jtant des
In replying to the points raised by the United
States delegation, Mr. van Roijen pointed 01.:t that Etats-Unis, M. van Roijen a fait observer que
this interim administration had been drawn up cette administration interimaire avait ete institu:e
with the Federalists, who represented two-thirds aver le CC:lcour~ des federations qui representtnt
(If TnConesia. This interim government, however, les deux: tiers de l'Indonesie. Cependant, ce gouis not the one envisaged in the Renville Agree- vernement interimaire n'est pas celui qui etait
ment. It is not one arrived at throtlgb negotia~ envisage dans l' Accord du RcmJiHe: ce n'est pas
tions with the Republic of Ir.donesia under the un gouverne11lmt etabli par des negotiations
auspices of the Co:nmittee of Good Of-fices but it avec \<1 Republique d'Indonesie SOltS les auspk.cs
is one arrived at in defiance of the Renville de la Cot:1ll1is.~ion de bons offices i c'est un gDll'
Agreement and by by-pElssing tnl" Commtltee; it vernement cn~e en violation de I' Accord du
has been established after discussions with repre- RCllville et sans pass er par la Comm:ssion. Ce
sentatives who came from arens under Nether- gOL:vernement est issu de discu3sions aver ies
hinds control and by representatives mainly con- represcnt:mts vellant de territoires SO\1;; contro1e
sisting of Netherlands puppets placed at the head des Pays-Bas e: est l'ceuvre de represe:rtants qui
of States and so-called autonomous areas by the etaient pour la l;lupart des homme;; de pc.i11e pl~cts
machinations of the Dutc:h politic:al rna~hitJe ill a la tete d'EtalS et de tcrritoircs dits :;J.l.1tOIlomes
par les nan~lIvres de l'apparei1 politique neerthOH' areas.
landais.
Je n'essayerai pas de rn'etendre davantage sur
I will not try to elaborate any further on the
misrepresentations tn Mr. nn Roijcn's statements les inexactitudes que contient la declaration faite
at the last meeting of the Security Council.
par M. van Roijen
la dcrnihe seance DU
Conseil.

ete

a

5
J w0111dlike to refer, however, to the statement maue by the representative of Norway
[398th meeting]. In his statement, he raised some
doubt as to the extent of control our Government
exerted on our military forces. In reading the
records of the Committee of Cood Offices, the
representative of Norway will li!1d, on the contrar)', many instances proving the control that
my Government exerts on its military forces.
"W'hell, as a result of the Renmlle Truce Agreement, otlr troops were ordered to move out of
Western Java. those ordc:rs were carried out
without hesitation, and within three weeks
35,DOO troops of the Republic withdrew to ten'itory still under Republican control. This was an
achievement whicIJ surprised the military observers of the Committee of Good Offices who,
in fact, had not e.xpected to see Rep\1blican forces
so well disciplined.

J'aimerais, en revanchc, evoquer mail1tenant
la declaration dn representant de la Norvege
[398eme stance] qui a exprime quelques doutes
quant au degre dn contr61e que not re Gouvernement exerce Sill' nos forces mi1itaire~. En lisant
les docl1ments de la Commission de bans offices,
le representant de la NOl"vcge troll vera, all contraire, maints exemples de l'autorite que men
Gouvernement exerce sur .'les forces militnire.'l.
Lorsque, en application de l'Accord de treve du
Renville, nos troupes ont l'e~u I'ordre d'iivacl1cl"
le tetTitoire occidental de Java, cet ordre a be
execute sans hesitation et, dar,s un delai de trois
semaines, 35.000 hommes des nrmees de la Repu~
bliqlle se sont retires Sllr le territoire qui etait
encore sous controle republicain. Ce resultat a
surpris les observateUl's militair~s de la Commission de bans offices. En fait, ils ne s'attendaient
pas a voil" les forces republicaines a ce point
disciplinees.

As no political solution as envisaged in the
Truce Agreement materialized, cl.ashes between
the population arid the Netherlands Army took
place. It would be a misjudgment of the situation to US$ume that these clashes between the
population and the Netherlands Army were
cuusedintentionally by Repuulican troops which
had been left behind, since there were no such
troops. The records of tIle Committee of Good
Offices will prove that the provisions of the Truce
Agreement have been fully carried out by the
Repllblic of Indonesia. These incidents cannot
be constrt:ed as instigated by infiltrations into
Netherlands occupied territory from the Republican side of the demarcation line. J have already
pointed out in one of my previous statements
[389ih meeting] that the matter of inliltration
was not political or military, but purely the
social rroblem of people wanting to join tlleir
families again aftel' their forced separation.

Dl\ fait que la solution politique envi5~gee
dans l'accord de trevc ne se realisait pas, il s'est
prodtlit des bettrts entre la population et les
troupes des Pays-Bas. Ce serait nlal juger la.
situation que d'y voir tine intervention premeditee de troepes I'epublicaines laissees dans ces
regions, car aUCllll de nos detachements ne s'y
trouvait pIns. Les rapports de la Commission de
bans offices demontrent que les dispositions de
l'accord de treve ont ete integmiement appliguees
par la Republique d'bdonesie. On ne peut con3iderer les incidents dont j'ai parle comme l'ceuvre
d'elements republicains qui se seraient infiltres,
en passant la ligne de demarcation, dans le territoire occt1pe par les HolIandais. J'ai deja fait
observer [389~J1Ie seance] que cette question des
infiltrations n'est pas un probleme politique oU
militaire, mais UIl probleme pllrement social j i1
s'agit, ell effet, de gem qni v0111aient rejoindre
lenrs families apres l1l1e seraration forcee.

The incidents to which the Netherlands continue to refer as infiltrations have nothing at
an to do with nttempts on the part of the Republic to stir 11l1rest in the ter,'jtol'jes occupied by
the Netherlands. These incidents are acts of
resistance by the population against the Netherlands military forces and their political machinery.

Les incidents que les Hollandais contint1ent n
ollalifler d'inflltrations n'ont rien a voir avec les
tentatives des Republicains pour provoquer de
l'agitation dans les territoires occupes par les
Pays-Bas. Ces incidents s'Ont des actes de resistance de la part de la population contre les forces
militaires et l'admir.istration neerlandaises.

I do not intend to state that there were no
shortcomings in the implementation of the Truce
Agreement on our part. The terrible economic
conditions brought upon us by the continuous
Netherlands blockade and the continuous tllreat
of <t military attack, a threat which became more
and more acute, did llot facilitate the task of my
Government in the discharge of its obligations,
nor have the freqtlent violations of the 1·ruce
Agreement by the N etherl.mds-for instance, the
setting up of states in disputed areas-helped my
Government. But surely, if there were any substantial reasons for the Netherlands charg-es of
violations or even of deficiencies on the part of
the Republic with regard to the impl~mentation
of the Renville Agreement, there should have
been reCQ'.lrse to the Committee of Good Offices,
Instead of acting in that way, howevel', the Neth~
erlands has done its utmost in every possible way
to misuse any difficulties and differences of
opinion for its psychological war preparations,
without making any sincere effort to reccncile
differences through the instrumentality of the
Committee of Good Offices.

Je ne vais pas pretendre que nons avons appHql1e I'accord de treve sans aucune defaillance,
L'execution par man Gouvernement de ses obligations ne lui a certes ete facilitee, ni pal" la
situation economique desastrel1se que DOUS a
value le maintien du blocus neerlandais, ni par
la menace de plus en plus imrninente d'uTIe attaque a main armee qui etait sl1spendue sur nos
tetes, ni par les violations de la treve qu'ont
frequemment commises les Hollandais et dont
la creation de nouveaux Etats dans les territoires
contestes olIre un ban exemple. Mais, si les PaysBas avaient des raisons valables d'accuser la
Republique d'avoir a maintes reprises viole ou
meme, pillS sirnplement, de ne pas avoir integralement execute les dispositions de l'Accord du
Rcnville, ils atlraient dii s'adresser a la Commission de bans offices. Loin d'agir aimi, les Hollandais ont essaye d'exploiter toutes les diffictllh~s, tOlltes les divergences d'opinion. pour
assurer la preparation psychologique de la guerre
et n'ont fait auclln effort pour arriver
tine
solution par l'entremise de la Commission de:
bons offices.

a

6
I should 110t have made this statement at all
if the Netherlands representative, after repiying
to several justified accus<ltions on the part of
members of the Security Council, had not produced a unilateral programme for political settlement [400th mreti,tgl. This unilateral programme contains the fol1<;Jwing points.: T~e
creation of an all-Indonesian federal mtenrn
government and fr~e elections for ~ representative body with a view to the establishment o.f a
Netherlands-Indonesian union and a Untted
States of Indonesia to which sovereignty will
be transferred.

Je n'aurais pas ell a faire cette declaration si
le representant des Pays-Bas, apres avair repondu
n plusieurs aCCLlsations jt1stif:u[~es £orn1utees par
des membres du Conseil de securite, n'avait pre·
sente ttn programme tmi1ateral de reglement po1itique 1400~lne seance]. Ce programme unilateral comporte la creation d'un gouvernement
federal provisoire entierement indonesien et des
elections libres en vue de la constitution d'un
organe representatif en vue d'etablir une union
neerlando-indonesienne et des Etats-Unis d'Indonesie auxque1s la souverainete serait transmise.

Que signifie ce programme? Est-ce 18, un nouveau plan pour l'avellir de l'Indonesie?
generously granted to us by the Netherlands G?V- N llllemenl. Un gouvernement federal provisoire.
ernment? By no means. An all-~ndoneslan eiltierement indonesien, I'etablissement des Etatsfederal interim government, t~e establIshment. of Unis d'Indonesie et des e.1ections libres sent prethe United States of Indonesla and the holdmg cisement 1es buts sur lesq\lels l'entente etait faite
of free elections were tlle aims agreed upon by entre les' Pays-Bas et la Republiq1.1e d'lndonesie
1
both the Netherlands and the Republic of Indo- depuis l'Accord de Linggadjati • Mais c'est a la
nesia since the Linggadjati Agreement. 1 The suite de negotiations de bonne foi entre le Gouinterim government and the United States of vernement des Pays-Bas et celui de la Republique
IndOllesia were to be brought about however, by d'Indonesie et sous les auspices de la Commission.
b01W fide negoti;ctians betwern the Netherlands de bons offices que devaient etre instaUI'es le
Government Rnd the Government of the Repub- gOl1vemement provisoire et 1es Etats-Unis d'lndo·
lic of IndoneSia under the ausriees of the Com- nesie. 11s ne devaient pas etre etablis unilaremittee of· Good Offices, and oot created unilater- ralement par le Gotlvernement des Pays-Bas et
ally by the Netherlands Government and imposed imposes au peL1ple d'Indonesie. Leur creation,
on the Indonesian people. The creation of such telle qu'elle est maintenant envisagee par le
an interim government and s~lch a United States GOLlvernement neerlandais, ne constitue en an·
of Indonesia as are now envisaged by the Nether~ wne fa~on Ime solution elll probleme indonesien,
lands Government will not by any means consti- car le peuple indonesier. refusera d'admettre que
tute a soltltion of the Indonesian problem, since c'est bien la le genre de gOllvernement provisoire
the establishment of such an interim government 'et d'Etats-Unis d'Indonesie qui etaient prevus
and such a United States of Indonesia will not d<ll1S nos accords avec les Pays-Bas. A ses yeux,
be considered by the Inclonesia people as in l'e~8,l>lissement de ce gotlvernement et de ces
accordance wilh our agreements with the Nether- Etats-Unis serait comme une consecration de la
lands. To them it would mean the consolidation guerre d'agression neerlandaise et l1ue consolidaof the Netherlands war of aggression and the tion des gains acquis par cctte agl'ession. Devant
gains acquired through that aggression. To them eet Rcte arbitraire qui signifierait pour lui la contithe imposition of such a government would mean nuation de l'agression, notre peuple se sentirait
the continuation and consolidation of that aggres- oblige de pOllfsuivre sa resistance politique et
sion, in the face of which they would feel com- militaire.
pelled to continue their political and military
resistance.
What is the significance of this programm:,?

Is this a new plan for the futm"e of IndoneSia,

Again, if it were the Netherlands plan to set
up an- interim government and establish a United
States of Indonesia through democratic and legal
processes, then why did the Netherlands refuse
even to consider the plan provided by the Australian and United States members of the Committee of Good Offices in July 1948-that plan
wh:ch isknowl1 as the Cl'itchley-Du Bois plan
IS/11i7/Add.1, AppelldLt· VI] and which provided for elections for the establishment of all
interim government and the creation of the
United Slates of Indonesia? Moreover, why did
the :t-,fether1ands at a later date avoid the discus~
sion of the Cochran plan by diverting the issue to
direct talks between the Netherlands Minister
and Premier Hatta? These talks were not, as
described by the representative of the N elherlands. a supreme effort to come to an agree~
ment, but a call-aud now I quote the description
of these talks given by the United States member
of the Committee of Good Offices. "..• for a non-·
negotiated blanket assent which would preclude

D'autre part, s'il est clans l'intention des PaysRas d'etab1ir un gouvernement provisoire et des.
Etats-Unis d'Tndonesic par des procedes legauY
et democratiques, pomquoi ant-Hs ete jusqu'a
refuser d"~xaminer le plan propose ell juillet
1948 par 1es representants de I'Australle et des
Etats-Uois a la Commission de bons offices,
COl1nu SOltS le nom de plan Critchley-Du Bois
[Sjl117/Add,1, anHt.\"C VI] qui prevoyait des
elections en vue d'etablir un gouvernement pro"
visoire et de consHuer les Etilts-Unis d'Indo·
nesie? Et plus tard, pourquoi les Pays-Bas ont~ils
elllde ]a discl1ssion du pbn Cochrnn par une
mancettvre oblique qui devait a boutir il. des con·
versations directes entre le Ministre des PaysBas et M. Hatta, Premier lV.l;inistre? Ces
conversations n'ont pas ete, COmm.e. l'a pretendl1
le representant des Pays-Bas, un supreme effort
pour parvenir a un accord, mais, et je cite maln·
tenant l'appnkiation qu'en a donne le represen·
tant des Etilts-Unis .?l la Commission de OOtlS
offices, une tentative pour obtenir: ".
. sans

1 See Political E~,"'!ts il~ thE Rep11blic of Indollesia,
Netherlands Infoflr.a.tlOll Bureau, New York.

'Voir The Political Evmls in the Republic Df I,.,~o"
d'information de. Payl"
Bas i New-York, page 34.
MS'ia, 'Publie par l~ ·BureaU

7
the possibility of bona fide negotiatIOns, rather
than effect their resumption [S/1129]
"
". . . an ultimatum providing a choice only
between surrender to the Netherlands position
on every basic issue between the parties nnd an
unnamed alternative". [5/1156J

negodation, un consentement general, ce qui empechait tontes negociations de bonne foi plutot
que d'en permettre la reprise" [S/1129], et "un
nltimatum ne laissallt le choix qu'entre une
acceptation du point de vue neerlandais S,1.lr tous
les problemes essentiels en sllspens entre lcs
parties et une solution non precisee" [S/1156].

These are the reasons why I contend that these
renewed Netherlands pledges, with time-table and
evel-ything, constitute the final sanction of the
Netherlands war of aggression rather than a
basis for the solution of the Indonesian problem.

Telles sont les raisons pour lesql1elles j'estime
qlle les promesses que nous renouvellent maintenant les Pays-Bas, rneme augmentees d'un
emploi dl1 temps et de tout le reste, constituent
la consolidation defmitive des restlltats de l'agression neerlandaise plut6t que les bases d'une SOII1tion du probH:me indonesien.

Another point mentioned by the Netherlands
representative is the provision that free elections
would be held. Free elections were provided for
'in both the Critchley-Du Bois and the Cochran
plans, but the Netherlands did not want elections
held under the supervision of the Committee of
Good Offices. It wanted its own brand of free
elections-the same type of free elections it held
in setting lip its prefabricated States in West
Java, East Java, Madura and other areas in Sumatra in violation of the Renville Trtlce Agreement. With regard to West Java, East Java and
Madura, I want to remind the Security Council
of the fact that the establishment of sl1ch States
succeeded only on the third attempt, after having
twice met with failure, and that even then the
desired result could be achieved only by the
arrest of several of the delegates who, the N etherlands feared, were too much inclined toward
the Republic, and by the machinations of the
Netherlands civil administration during the conferences. The reports of the Committee of Good
Offices on this subject bear witness to this fact.
In our opinion, free elections can be held only if
conducted and supervised by a United Nations
agency without the presence of Netherlands occupying forces and free from the machinations of
the Netherlands civil administration.

Le representant des Pays-Bas a egalement
annonce qU'il y aurait des elections libres. Le
plan Critchley-Du Bois atlssi bien que le plan
Cochran prevoyaient des elections ]ibres, mats les
Hollandais ne vOlllaient pas qu'elles aient eu lieu
SOilS la surveillance de la Commission de bons
offices. lls voulaient des eJections libres a leur
maniere, c'est~a-dire ,des elections libres du genre
de celles qu'ils ont organisees Iorsqu'ils ont constitue, en violation de l'Accord de treve du Renvillc, leurs Etats pretabriques dans les territoires
occidental et oriental de Java, a Madoura, ainsi
que dans certains atttres territoires a Sumatra.
En ce qui cOllcerne le territoire occidental de
Java, le territoire oriental de Java et Madoura,
je desire ruppeller au Conseil de secllrite que
l'etablissement de tels Etats n'a reussi ql1'au
troisieme essai, apres avoir echOlle. deux fois, et
que, meme alors, le resultat desire n'a ptt etre
attcint que grace a l'arrestation de plusieurs delegues dont les Hollandais craignaient les tendances repubHcaines trop marquees et gni.ce aux
intrigues menees par I'administration civile des
Pays-Bus pendant que se deroulaient les conversations. Les rapports de la Commission de bons
offices a. cc sujet temoignent de ce fait. A notre
avis, des elections liLJres ne peuvent avoir lieu
que si eUes sont organisees et surveillees par un
organe des Nations Unie.s, hors la presence de
troupes d'occupatiol1 neerlandaises et l'abri des
manceuvres de l'administration civile des PaysB",.

a

Great emphasis is laid by the Netherlands
representative on the transfer of sovereignty by
the Netherlands Government to the United States
of Indonesia. The meaning of this transfer,
however, would be, in the first place, a transfer
of sovereignty to a govemment'al body established
not as an expression of the will of the people,
bllt unilateral1y by the Netherlands in such a
way that Netherlands domination would be
secure,

Le representant des Pays-Bas insiste beaucoup sur le transfert de la souverainete par le
Gouvernement des Pays-Bas aux Etats-Unis
d'Indonesie. Mais ce transfert signifierait tout
d'a.bord la remise de la sOllverainete a ttn organisme gouvernemental iSSll, non pas de la volonte
du peuple, mais d'un acte unilateral des PaysBas, clont le seul but est d'assurer leu!" suprem<ltie.

Furthermore, the so-cal1ed sovereignty to be
handed over by the Netherlands to the United
States of Indonesia would not be sovereignty in
the generally accepted sense of the word, but
only what is left of sovereignty when the basic
essentials of sovereignty have been subtrt\(.:ted
and secured by the Netherlands in an Indonesian
'union which would not be, as envisaged in the
R?t~1/jfle Agreement, an instrument of joint cooperation on an equal basis between the Netherlands Government and the United States of Indonesia, but a super-State, constituting an additional
lever of control for the Netherlands. Our negotiations with the Netherlands have made it very

De plus, la pretendue souvcrainete ainsi
transferee par les Pays-Bas nux Etats-Unis
d'Indonesie ne serait pas une souve.rainete, au
sens generalement donne a Cl". terme, mais uniquement ce qui resterait de la souverainete apres
que les Hollandais l'auraient clepouillee de ses
elements essentiels pour s'en asS'urer le controle
au sein d'une union indonesienne qui ne serait
pas, comme il est prevtl dans l'Accord dn Renville, un organe de cooperation mutuelle sur le
pied d'egalite entre le Gouvernement neerlandais
et les Etats-Unis d'Indonesie, rnais un super~Etat
constituant un moyen supplementaire de domination pour les Pays-Bas. Nos negociations avec

8
lcs Pays-Eas ont montre de fa<;on tres claire qu'ils
n'ollt aucunement J' intentiol1 de c],onner aux
fl1turs Etats-Unis d'Indonesie la souverainete
sur notre territoil'e.
Le debat general sur la question indonesienne
The Security Council is now l~nishing its
general debate on the Indonesia guestion in order touche a sa fir., et le Conseil de securite va entreto begin its consideration. of any proposals ~or prendre l'examen des propositions tendant a
a possible solution of thIs case. I should hke la resoudre. Je voudrais presenter que1ques
to make some observation which, in the opinion observations qui, de l'avis de ma delegation, deof my delegation, will have to be taken into vraient etre prises en considhation par le Conseil
account by the Council in its discussion of any lorsqu'il discutera toute proposition ou toute
solution eventuelle de ce point.
possible draft or solution.
Pour le pettple indonesicn, le prob1eme est
To the Indonesian people the issue is simple
and clear-cut. A war of aggression has deprived c!'une simplicite evidCllte. Une guerre d'agression
them of their leaders and diminished their terri- 1'a prive de ses chefs et a ampute son territoire.
tory. Their defence against this aggression has Sa resistance it cette agression a He jusqu'ici
been successful and wilt be even more success- cOl1ronnee de sLlcd:s, et d'alltres succes vont
ful. In these circumstances, it -will be impossible, s.uivre. Dans ces circonstances, il est psychologiboth psychologically and politically,. fo: our Clllement et politi(juement impossible que notre
people to consider any proposal Whlcll !S not peup1e accepte d'examiner une proposition quelbased on the fullest restoration, both political and conqtle qui ne soit p.1S fondee Sllr la restauralion
territorial, of the Republic of Indonesia. Only po1itique et territoriale de la Republique eJ'Indothen will a basis be established upon which fruit- nesie. Ce n'est que sur cette base que des m!goful negotiations with the Netherlands cOl1ld take ciations utiles pottrront s'ouvrir avec les
Pays-Bas.
place.
Le retablisscment dn GOllvernelllcnt republiThe restoration of the Republican Government
as political body only, w1th some. territory, would cain, en tant qu'organe politique seulement, ne
leave our Government completely at the mercy disposJnt que d'un territoire restreint, laisserait
of the Netherlands and their peculiar conceptions notre Gouvernement entiercmcnt a 1<1 merei des
of bona fide negotiations. Under such conditions, Pays-Bas et de leur conception [larticllliere des
the Republican Government would not be in a negociations de bonne foL S'ij dcvait en etre
position to maintain the. status of the Repllblic a:nsi, le Gouvernement repllblicail1 ne serait pas
of Indonesia as a State with its own political en mesure de conserver a la Rcpublique d'lndomachinery to reflect the desires of the people and nesie le statut d'un Eta! dote de; ses propres
with its own economic machinery to provide for rouages politiques pour l'expression de la volonte
the needs of its people, or to maintain the financial populaire et de sa prop re organisation econoautonomy necessary to meet its obligations as a mique pour faire face aux besoins de la pOpllState. Under such conditions, also, there would latioll et pour mail1lenir I'autollomie fil1ancierc,
be no possibility whatsoever of conducting bona sailS laqllelle il ne pOllrrait remplir ses obligations.
fid~ negotiations free from coercion, both military
Ces conditions renc1raient egalement impossibles
and economic, and free from the continlled threat tOlltes negociatioas de bonne foi a I'abri d'ane
of a renewed military attack. In fact, under pression militaire et economigtte et de la menace
such conditions nothing would hnve been done pennanellte d'l1ne l10ttvelle attaque mililaire, En
to meet the difficulties already described by the fait, rien n'aurait ete fait poltr remedier nux
Committee of Good Offices in ~ts report of 26 difficul\es deja signalees par la Commis'sion de
December [S/1156] , in which the view is offered bans offices dans son rapport du 26 decembre
tnat:
[S/1156], aux termes duquel:
"( (l) Negotiations presuppose two parties, each
"a) TOllte negociation presllppose I'existence
Ul1coerced by the armed force of the other and de deux parties, dont attcune n'est soumise a
cach prepared to move toward the reasonable eonlrainte par les forces armces de l'autre et
viewpoint of the other," and
dont chacttne est prete a fai re des concessions a
l'opinion de l'autre si cette opinion est raisonna1lIe", eL
"(b) Politically, the people of one party,
"b) Du point de vue politiClue, la popul:Ltion
without whose support any agreement, even if de l'une des parties, dont le consentement risque
achieved, may well be unenforceable, will be re- fort d'etr indispens~ble a I'execution, sinon a
7 de to!;t accord, ne sera gtlll:re disluctant 10 accept as bona fide any negotiations in la cOnc1USlOl1
which <lgain tlley start with an area 11llder their p.os~e a consiclerer comme veritable toute nego.
control dimil\i~hed as a result of the resort to
Clatlon all cours de 1aqueUe e1le s,'es! trouvee
armed force by the other."
ampu~ee d'ulle region p1acee sous son alltante,
dl1 fall que l';\,ltI'C partie a recotlru a la fo~ce."
We have stressed time and agaia the view that
Nous avons souligne n diverses reprises que
any solution in Indonesia and any governmental
tOllte solullOn dll problcme indonesien aillsi que
structure or elections should be under the auspices
tOllte OJ'ganisation du gottvernement o~ des eleccf. the Security Council since, in our opinion,
thIS would be the only glHlfantee of arriving at tions, c!ev~aient etre entreprises sous les auspices
a stable and peaceful settlement with the Nether- du. Consell de securite, car ce serait hi, a notre
lands. I will not elaborate this point any further. aVIS, la seule garantie d'abol1tir it un reglement
I want o~Jy to stress the necessity of larger definitif et pacifique dn differer.d qui nails oppose
powers beJ~g granted to a Security Council body all~ Pays-Bas.)e ne m'attarderai pas davantage
Slll ceUe qtteshon. Je me bornerai a insister sur
In Indonesl.3.. Even if wider and decisive powers
la necessite d'accorder des pouvoirs plus etendus

clear that there is no intention on the part of
the Netherlands to give a future United States of
Indonesia sovereignty over our territory.

9
are given to the United Nations body, however,
experience has tanght us that that body will
have to work under a definite time-table in order
to obviate any possibility of delaying tactics and
evasion by the Netherlands. The records of the
Committee of Good Offices show only too clearly
to what extent the Netherlands has succeeded
in this respect in the past. It is therefore the
considered opinion of my delegation that such
a time-table should be part of the resolution
laying down the basis for a settlement.

In the event of new negotiat~ons being opened
l>etween the Netherlands and us, under the auspices ef the Security Cotmdl, the Ceundl will
understand that the same problems and the same
issues will again arise in those negotiations. It
is thcrefere our opiniell that such guarantees
should be embodied in any such resolution. It is
only such guarantees which would be able to
alleviate the feeling of insecurity with regard
to the future position of our people.
J know that sevel'al delegations are being led
in their consideration of a possible draft resolution by a calculation of the possibilities of ha,'ing
a certain resolution accepted by the Security
Council. Stlch calculations inevitably tend
towards compromise on some basic issues. I
sincerely !Jope that these calculations will not
lead the Council to adopt a resolution -which is
insufficient to cope with the situation in Indo
nesia. Tht adoption ef such a resolution would
definitely not lead to peace and stability, but
would only make the sitnation in Indonesia more
complicated.
w

Mr, VAN ROljEN' (Nethtrlands): I shall not
at the present moment reply to the different points
in the speech of the representative of the Republic of Indonesia, but will, with permission,
reservc my answer to Mr. Palar for later. I
only wish to make a brief declaration in COllnexion with the reports which have been received
concerning the circumstances under which certain
Republican leaders are being held on the island
of Bangka,
I have been authedzed to say that my Government has taken nete with deep regret of the
housing couditions and restrictions under which,
apparently, the Republican leaders in Bangka
were still being held. Further information received by my Government shows that those con~
ditions were imposed upon them in direct opposition to the instructions given by the Netherlands
Government. Severe lneasllres will be taken
against the responsiblE'! authorities Two highranking Netherlands officials are already on their
way to Bangka in ordJr to report fully on the
situation and to see to it that the instructions
given will be stlictly carried out.

In this connexion I should like to add that Mf.
Sjahrir, who is one of tIle political prisoners
being held on Sumatra, has accepted an invitation to confer with the Netherlands Prime Minister, Mr. Drees, at Batavia. Mr. Sjahrir is arriving in Batavia tomorrow,
Sir Benega1 Rama RAu (India): I wish to
intervene in the debate at this stage to make et

it l'organe dtl Conseil de securite charge d'operer
en Indonesie. 11ais nous saVOllS par experience
qu'il ne suffirait pas de le doter de larges pouvoirs
executifs; il faudrait encore que cct organe s'as
t~eiglle
ohserver dans ses travaux un emploi
du temps bien arrete, de manierea dejouer les
tactiques dilatoires ct 1es mesures de retardement
auxq'Jelles 1es Pays-Bas ponrraient recour!r. Les
comptes rendus de la Commission de bons offices
rnontrer.t abondamment comlJien, jusqu'ici, cette
tactique a reussi aux Hollandais. C'est ponrquoi
ma deJegatien considefe que la resolution qui
fixel'a les bases d'un reglement doit contenir un
programme de travail con<;lt sous cette forme.
Le Conseil comprendra que, s'il s'ouvre, sous
ses auspices, de nOl1velles negociations entre les
Pays-Bas C':t nOLlS, les memes prob1emc:s et les
memes questions se peserorit une fois de plus.
Nous estitrtons, par consequent, que cette garantie doit etre inscrite dans la resolution elle-meme,
car eUe est la seule qui puisse attenucr 1es inquietudes qu'inspire l'avellir de notre peuple.
w

a

le sais que, en examinant Ull tcl projet de
resolution, certaines delegations se preoccupent
surtOl1t des chances qu'il aura d'etre accepte par
le Conseil. De tc1s calc:uls ne peuvent manquer
de condujl'~ a un compromis sttr certains points
fondamentaux. J'espere sincerement que ces ca1culs n'amcneront pas le ConS'eil a adopter une
resolution im[Jarfaite ne permettant pas de faire
face i la situation en Indonesie. L'acloptiell d'une:
pareille resolution ne pourrait assurer ni la paix,
ni la stabilite; elle ne ferait que compliql1er la
situation actnellc.
.
M. YAN ROI]EN (Pays-Bas) (trad1dt de 1'(Jt1glais); Je n'aborderai pas maintenant les differentes questions quc le representant de la Republique d'lndonesie a sou1evees dans son discours:
qu'iJ me soit pennis de reserver a plus tard ma
reponse a M. Palar. le desire me borner a faire
une breve declaration atl sujct des rapports sur
les circonstances d<ll;s lesquelles ccrtains dirigeants republicains se trouvent dans l'ile de
Bangka.
J e suis alitorise a dire que men Gouvernement
deplore vivement les nouvelles qui lui ont etl:
communiquees toucbant les conditions de logement et les restrictions apparemment imposees
aux dirigeants re[)ublicains clans I'Be de Bangka.
Il resulte des informations c()mpli~ll1entaires
rectleillies par mon Gouvernement que ces conditions leur ont ete imposees en opposition directe
avec les instrllctions donnees par le GOLlvernernent des Pays-Bas. Des mcsures seve.res seront
prises contre 1es autorites l'esponsabJes_ Deux
fonctionnaires superieurs ncerlandais sont deja
en route pour Banka avec mission de faire un
rapport detaille sur la situation et de veiller a
Cl" que les instructions donnees 'soient executecs
strictement.
A ce propos, jevoudrais ajottter que M. Sjahrir, l'un des dirigeants politiques cIetenus f
Sumatra, a accepte. l'invitation de conferer a
Batavia avec 1·:1. Drees, Premier Ministre des
Pays-Bns. M. Sjahrir arrivera a Ratavia demain.

Sir Benegal Rama RAU (Inde) (traduit de
l'anglais): le desire intervenir dans la disct1ssion,

10
briH statement. I should, however, like to make au starle aetuel des deliberations, pO!Jr faire
a few prelimina.ry observations ir. reply 10 the une breve cltklantion. Je voudrais,neanmoins,
statement made by the representati ve of the formuler quelques observations preliminaires en
Netherlands [400th meeting] regarding Indi~'s reponse a la declaration bite par le representant
action during the negotiations in connexion wIth des Pays-Bas [400ihlle seallceJ concern::mt I'attiKashmir. He could not possibly :lave chosen a tude de l'Inde all cours des negociations relatives
worse afl<:.logy to justify his de,fence of the d~­ all Cad:emil'e. It lui eut ete difficile, assurement,
fiance of ule Security COUllCil's rcsolutio.l1 ~y h.15 d'invoqller nne comparaison mains a propos pour
Government. India has a free conscience III justifier la non-execution, par son Gotlve~nement,
regard lo Kashmir, and only the day before the de la resolution dl1 Conseil de sectlrite. L'Inde a
represent;:.tive of the N etherlanus made his state· la conscience tranqtdlle au sujet du Ctl.chemire:
ment most of the members of the Security Council d'ail1eul's, n'est-r:e pas la veille preciselnent du
expressed their great apprec~at~on Qf India's atti- jour ou le representant des Pays-Bas devait faire
t'Jde in regard to the Kashmlr Issue [399th meet- sa declaration que la plupart des mernbres dll
COrlSeil de sh:lIrite. ant exprime [eur vive approing] .
bation pour la conduite adopte.e par I'Tade dans
la question du Cachemire [39geme seance]?
Nous avons tOUjOUfS ete francs dans cette
We have always been frank in regard to these
natters. In the course of negotiation, when we affaire. Lorsque, <lU cours des negociations, nous
fOllnd th<.t we could not carry out the recommen- estimions ne pas pouvoir executer les recommandations of the Security Council we frankly stated dations du Consei1 de seCllrite, nOllS le declarions
that we cOllld not do so, and we gave t~e reasons ol1verte:nent. ~! ilHliqu<l.nt les motifs de notre
for our action. If only the representatIve of t.he attitude. Si le re[)resent<lnt des Pays-Bas s'etait
Netherlands Government had told the Secunty borne a declarer que son Gouvemement :le s'etait
Council that his GOvernment hac not complied pas codorme et ne pOllvait se conformer a la
and could not comply with the resolution! I c~r~ resolution, j'a11tais eu un certain respect pour
tainly would have Some respect for the slncenty la sincerit6 et la bonne foi, sinon peut-etre pour
and goor.! faith of his Govermncr.t. thollgh p:r- !'esprit politique, de son Gouvel':lement, Mais, ce
naps not for its statesmanship. Wh<lt r.e did, n'est pas de cette fa~on qu'il a agi: apres nous
however, was to say that his Goyernment com~ avoir affinne que son Gouvernemel1t s'etait conplied with the res:Jlution in regard to the ,release forme a la resolution concernant la mise en
of prisoners, and then he told us that the pr:soners liberte :les prisonniers, il nOllS a dit que ceux·ci
were confined to an island. I was not aware vi etaient internes clans une ile. J'ignorais les dimen~
-he dimensions of that island, but the representa- sions de cette ile, mais le representant des Phitive of the Philippines disclosed that this freedom lippines 11011S a revele ql1e la liberte de mouvelllent
was very much like that of Napoleon's on Sl. dont les internes disposaient ressemblait fori i
Helena. And even t11at statement has proved, celIe dont jOllissait Na:-,oleon a l'ile de Sainteas the representative of the Netherlands has just He1E~ne. Et meme cette declaration du representant
now admitted, to be completely bacclll"<lte.
des Pays-Bas, it vient cl'en convenir, s'est averee
compU~:elllent inexacte.
With the perrr.ission of the President, J shall
Si le President le pennet, je vais donner lecread tI. shOrt extract from ine repoti of the Com- ture d'nn bref passage du rapport de la Commismittee of Good Offices [S/1213] which has just siOn de bons offices [S/1213J, fjui vient d'etre
been circulated.
distribue:
"The ministers and officials, brought to the
;(Les Ministres et hauts fonctionnaires amenes
island by 31 December, are detained in a large dans I'ile le 31 dCcembre 1948 sont detenus dans
building. They have Que doorless bedroom, 6 un grand b.itiment. 11s ont une chambre a cou~
metres Jy 6 metres, in which are loca~ed six cher sans parte, de 6 metres sur 6 metres dam
beds. In audition, they were origina.lly allowed laquelle se trOllYCnt si't lits. Dc [Jlus, ils nvaient,
an area of 4 metres by 10 metres wired 01" fmm a l'origiT)e, a l'intc.~riel1~ d'l1ne gl'ande piece de
a large receptior. roam. Since 12 January, tl1is reception, unc superfieic de 4 metres sur 10 mewire has been removed ;lnd the entire reception tres entouree de nl de :er. Depuis le 12 janvier,
room, 19 metl"es by 16 metres, is open to their ce Jil de fel' est retire, et ils ant acces :i la piece
use. They are pe~mitted limited access to the roof enW:re, qui a 19 met!'es sur 16 metres. Tls ont
under g~ard. All windows are enclosed by wire Ult droit Iimite d'acces au toit, sous escorte. 11 y
n~ttillg as i~ the area around the door. Gttards
a du grillage a tOllies les felletres ainsi qu'autour
~re on duty in sentry boxes immediately Olltside.
de la parte. Des sentinelles monteot la garde dallS
They are not permitted to leave the wire area. des guerites situees immediatement it. l'exterieur
Up to two days before the visit oi the Committee. de, la naisoll. Les intenles ne sont pas autorises
when some additional furniture was installed, a sorti:' de I'endos. Avant que du mobilier sup"
there were only chairs a:ld two tables."
p!ementaire ait ete installe. deux jours av.ant hi
vlsi~e de lfl C3mmission, il n'y avait; que d~s
chalses et dell.... tabl~s."
This :s what they mean by :~eedom on the
Voila ce qtt'on entend par liberte de mOllvement
island.
clans cdte lie.
T wish to emIlhasize today the importance of
.Te desire souligner aujourd'hui combien il est
passing, before the 20th vf this r:1.onth, a resolll- important d'adopter avant le 20 de ee mois une
tion embodying tile views of the Security Council resolution traduisant :'opinion du Conseil de
00 the Netherlands military action in Indonesia,
secl,rite sur I'action militaire entreprise pnr 1e5
and ,the specific proposals for dealing with the ~~ys-Bas ,e~ It:donesie., et comportant des propo'
situation which has deVl>loped. As all members sltlOns preClses quant a la maniere de mettre ban

I

11
ordre il. la situation actuelle, Tous les membres
du Conseil savent, en effet, qu'une conference
reunissant de nombreux pays asiatiques e.t autres,
doit s'ou\'fir a New-Delhi le 20 jatlvier pour
examiner Ja sitllation en Indonesie et scs
repercussions.
Dans ma dedaration preIiminaire du 7 jnnIn my preliminal·y statement on 7 January
[397th 11leeti~lg], I explained that the comeners vier [397inne seance], j'ai explique que les Etats
of this Conference have no intention of going qui prendront part i ceUe conferente n'ont
outside the fno.mework of the United Nations. pas l'intelltion d'agir en marge de l'Organisation
The Government of India has always been a des Nations Unies. Le Gotlvernement de l'Inde
strong supporter of the United Nations, and it lui a toujours accorde son ferme appui, et il ne
would not do anything which would weaken this fera rien qui puisse affaiblir cette Organisation.
Organization. The object of the Conference is to La conference a pour but d'examiner les possi~
explore the possibilities of a peaceful solution, and bilites d'une solution pacifique et de renforcer
to strengthen the hand of the Secmity Council. l'autorite du Conseil de securite. Neanmoins, il
It is very important, however, fol' the representa- iiTIport~ que les membres de la conference contives to this Conference to know beforehand the naissent d'avance l'opinion du Conseil de secu~
views of the Security Council on the Indonesittn rite S\lr 1es evenements d'Indonesie et sachent
developments and what it proposes to do in order ce qt1'll se propose ele faire pour atteindre le
to reach the objective by peaceful methods. The but fiJlal par des moyens paeifiques. Le facteur
time factor, as I explained in my last speech, is temps est d'une extreme importance, ainsi que
extremely important, and I do hope that there je I'ai indique dans mon demier discours [397eme
will be no fllrther deJay in regard to the passage srJullre;, et j'espere que l'1lc1option d'une resolu·
tioll par le Conseil de securite ne sera pas retardee
of a resoJntion by the Setnrity Council.
davantage.
In my last speech [397tll meeting] I stated
All cours de tua dernier~ intervention, j'ai
that at that stage I would not like to make any declare que j e ne desirais faire actnellement
concrete suggestions concf'rning the lines nn which aucltne suggestion concrete concerntLnt le ;sens
a sollltioll should be songht, because in a matter dans \~que1 une sc']ution devrait etre recherchee,
of that sort it was very important to readl as parce que, dans des cas de ce genre, il importe
great a measure of agreement as possible before d'aboutir 11 un accord aussi large que. possible
the formal introduction of a resolntion in the avant de presenter formellemcnt Lln pro jet de
Security Council. I have had numerous discus- resolution au Conseil de secnrite. rai eu de
sions with m.any members of the Security Council nombreuses discussions avec plusieurs membres
and with the Indonesian delegation, and, with the du GltlSeil ainsi qu'avec la delegation d'Indopermission of the President, I should like to nesie, et, si le President m'y autorise, je voudrais
indicate in very rough outline, the essential points indiquer, dans leurs grandes ligpes, quels sont,
a mon avis, les elements essentiels 5I\lr lesquels
which i~ my o"pinion should be stressed.
i1 y a lieu d'insister.
D'aLurJ - l'accunl est quasi unanime sur ce
First, as is almost univcrsally rccognized, it is
imperative th.at the imprisoned leaders should be point - il est indispensable que les dirigeants
released immediately and established as an au- emprisonnes scient immediatement liheres et rethority with which the further negotiations could connns en tant qu'autorite avec laqllelle les negobe conducted. vVith these leaders in prison, no tiations ulterieures pourront etre conduites. Tant
negotiations can be effective, for any scheme tha.t que ces dirigeants seront en prison, tautes les
emerges from such negotiations would not be wEgotiations seront vaines, car l'immense majorite
accepted by the vast majority of the population, de la population, qui leur est fidele, rejetterait
which follows the imprisoned leaders. The most tout arrangement resultant de telles negociations.
perfect scheme on pilper cannot be successful Sans la cooperation et la bonne vOlonte reci~
withol1t the co-operation and good will of both proques, aucun arrangement, si parfait soit-il sur
sides. It is therefore essential that the proper le papier, n'a la moindre chance de succes. C'est
atmosphert :;hould be created for successful and pourquoi i1 est tssentiel ue creer l'atmosphere
appropriee a des negotiations fecondes et effietfecti ve negotiations.
caces.
En deuxieme lieu, comme le repres.entant de la
Secondly, as the representative of China so
ably pointed ont [398th meeting], the stage has Chine l'a si clairement fait remarquer [398eme
been reached at which the Security CO\\I1ei! should seonce 1) les circonstances exigent actuellement
take a more active part in the implementation of que le Conseil de securite participe plus activeany resolution or scheme that is passed by it. ment a la mise i execution de toute resolution
We have already had the Committee of Good et de toutes mesures qu'il pourrait adopter. Nous
Offices, which has been fLlnctioning in Indonesia disposons deja de la Commission de bons offices
in spite of formidable d.iffic~llties, for the. last qui a fonctionne en Indonesie pendant les dix~
eighteen months, and whlch IS fully acquaJnt~d huit derniers mois en depit de difficultes cOl1si~
with all the conditiojls in that country. If this d<§,rabJes et qui est parfaitement au courant de la
body could be reconstituted as a commission of situation dans ce pays. Si cet organe po,lVait etre
the Security Council and could be made the transforme en une commission dtl Conseil de
agency througl1 w~i.ch the Secu.rity Council's securite, par le h'uchement de Jaquelle les resoluresolutions and deCiSIOns are earned out, I feel tions et decisions du Conseil sc.raient mises en
that the objective would be reached more expe- cetlvre, j'estime qu'on toucherait plus rapidement
ditiously than under the procedure which has au but Qu'en appliquant la procedure suivie jllS;qu'a present.
hitherto been followed.

know, a conference of many Asian and other
countries is meeting in New Delhi on 20 January
to consider the Indonesian situation and its implications.

12
Thirdly, there should be a wit~drawal of troops
and a restoration of the al.\thonty of the Republic at the earliest possible moment. It has been
urged that, if the troops were withdrawn immediately, a vacuum would be created and the consequences, from the point of view of law an.d or?er,
might be disastrous. I suggest that thiS w\tl\drawal should take place unucr the supervision
of the new constituted commission. which wunld
be in a position to define the stages in which the
operation should take place and to ~nd.icate the
points to which the forces should be wIthdrawn
withotlt serious risk of disol'deL It is, however,
very important that the withdrawal be completed
by 1 March, as the holding of'the plebiscite should
be pr.eeeded by at least a few months of settled
administration if it is to be held in a free 3tm rJSphere. It is also impOltant that the establisbmellt
of the interim government should not take f,k.ce
in an atmosphere vitiated by the presence of
Dutch troops in areas where they are not required
for the maintenance of law and order.

Troisiemement, il y a lieu de proceder le plus
rapidemellt possible au retrait des troupes et au
n~.tablissement de l'autorite de la Republique. On
a pretendtt qlle le depart immediat des troupes
elltrainerait line vacance d'al1torite dont les conse_
quences, pour l'ordre public, pourraient etre
desastreuses. Je sl.lggere rllle ce retrait ait lieu
sous la surveil!Hnce de la commission nouvellelllent constituce, laquelle serait en mesure de
detenniner les etapes stlcc:essives de l'operation
et d'indiql1er les positions Sill' 1esqllelles les forces
poun'ak'nt etre retirees sans qu'i] en resulte Un
danger shieux POlll' le nmintien de I'ordre. I1
importe, ne,llllnoins, que le retra;! des. troupes
soit acheve pour le ler mars; en e.ffet, si l'on
veut que le plebiscite se dcrOttle clans une atmoc
sphere ele liberte, il ne. devrait avoir lieu qu'upres
quelques 1110is an moins d'aclministration sta1Jle.
n importe egalemcnt que le gOllvernement interimaire ne soit pas constitue clans nne ambi.'l.l1ce
viciee pal' la presence de troupes neerlandaises
dallS des regions Oll leur prescnce n'est pas w§:cess<'.ire pour le mainticn de l'ordre public.

Fourthly, as has heen emphasized by the replesentative Ct Indonesia, definite dates should Le
fixed for the plebiscite and for the tran.'ifer of
completc scvereignty of the United State~ oL
Indonesia. I attach very great importance la
the fixing of tllese dates, btcatlSe there would be
greater willingness to co-operate on both sides if
both sides realized that the objective would l'ave
to be reached by 11 certain date. If we did not
prescribe those dates, diffintlties would be magnified and there woulrl be a tendency to regard
difficulties as a justification for wrecking the
scheme; instead of a sincere effort to QVerCClllle
difficulties, which I feel can be accomplished by
good-will, there would be a tendency to allow
matters to drift in the hope that ultimetely
nothing would be done. As was also emphasJ!ed
by the representative of Indonesia, the COmmission should also be responsible for the eitective
supervision of the arrangements for a piebiscite
which, all agree, should be held ir. a free atmos~
phere.

EI1 qnatriemc lieu, comme l'a sonligne le repre~
sent.mt de l'IndOlH~sie, i1 faudrait fixer des dates
determinees paUl' le plebiscite et pour le transfert de la sonverainete complete aux Etats-Unis
d'Inclollesie. J'attache infinimellt d'importance
a la fixation dc ees dates, parce que les deux
parties feraient pl'ctlve d'ul1e volontc de cooperation accrue si elles se rendaient compte que le
but doit etre atteint a Hne date determinee. Si
110US n'imposio:1S pas ces dates, les difficultes ne
feraient que croitre et pourraient servir de pretexte au torpi11age des plans ctablis; au lieu de
tentcr sincerement de surmOnter 1es obstacleS' ce qni pelit etre realises, je crois. avec de la bonne
volonte - on serait amene a laisser aller les
chases duns l'espoir que tina1ement rien ne serait
accompli. Commc I'n cgalement indique le repreSentant de l'Indonesie, It\. cOll1mission devmit etre
chargee, en outn:-, de S11fveillcr les dispositions
prises ponr I'organisation CLI plebiscite, qui, de
l'avis general, devrait se derouler dans llne atmosphere de libc1te.

Finally, it is essential that any H..e[1tlbliean
government that is set np during the transition
period 'should have the necessary financial and
other resources for discharging effectively the
normal functions of government, It should not
be dependent on the Netherlands for the provision of these resources. It follows that apart
from olher measures, the eC0110mie blockade
which has. had suc~ a strangling effect On th~
et;:onomy ct IndoneSia, should be lifted.

Enfin, i1 est 3bsolnment essel"tiel que le gou~
vernement republicain cOJ'Jstitue pendant la periode de transition, quel Cju'il soit, dispose des
ressources financieres et aut res qui sont indispensables a l'exercice efficClC{' des fonctions normales d'un gouverncmenL 11 ne devrait pas etre
triblltaire des Pays-Bas pOnr se procurer Cl'S
ressources. Par consequent, au nombre des mesures a prendre a cet effet, figure la levee du hlacus
qui a si durement touche l'economie de l'Indonesie.

I have deliberately not gone into details, for
they could no doubt be dealt with by the corn.
mission if there is an agreement 0n the general
principles upon which further action ~hOllld be
based. Once again, 1 only wish to appeal to the
Securit)' Council to take up the matter immediately and to indicate at once, und clearly, how it
pT?pOSeS to deal with the Indonesian situation.

]'ai eWiberement evite de m'engager dans des
details qui pou1'l'ont indubitablement etre regles
par la commission si l'accord se fait sur les principes generaux devant servir de base a toutes 1es
dispositiollS ulterieures. ]e me bornerai a £a~re
appet, tme fois de pIns, au Conseil de secunte
pour qu'il s'attaque immediatement au probleme
et qu'il indiqu<'., sans plus tarder et clairement,
comment i1 a I'intention de venir a bout de la
Situation en lndonesie.

Guerrilla activity, us the report of the Committee of Good <?ffices shows. has. con~iderab1y increased, and 1f we anow the situatIOn to drift
there will be widespread disorder and chaos'
and there will be vel')' little chance of reaching

Le rapport de la Commission de bons offices
rnontre qlle les operations de gnerilla ont considerablement allgmente d'intensite; si nottS permettons Clue les choses aillent a la derive, le
desordre et le chaos s'<'.tendront, et il resle ra

13

a: solution by peaceful methods. Moreover, the
New Delhi Conference would meet in a totally
different atmosphere if only it knew that the
Security Council had an effective plan f01" dealing
with the Indonesian situation and that it would
not hesitate to use its powers under the Cbalter
to reach the final objective.

peu ele chances d'aboutir a une solution par des'
moyens pacifiques, D'autre part, la conference
de New-Delhi se deroulera cans Une tout
autre atmosphere si seulement les Etats representes a cette conference savent que le Conseil
de securite possede un plan efficace pour faile
face a la situation en Illdonesie et qu'il n'hesitera
pas, pom atteindre le but final, a utiliser les
rotlvoirs que lui confel'c la Charte.

Mr. JESSUP (Ul11ted States of America): I
share the desire that the Secllrity Council should
proceed as soon as possible to consider the text
of a resolution which would deal with this question of Indonesia that we now have bc:!ore us.
The st<l.tements which have been made around
this Cotmeil table in the course of these debates
do show, T believe, a very large measure of agreement on basic points, as the representative of
India has just said.

M. JESSUP (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (trad1li!
de l'anglais): Je partage le desir de voir le Conseil
de secl1rite entreprendre le plus t6t possible l'examen d'un texte de resolution traitant de la
question indonesienne, dont nous discutons
actuellement. Je cmis que les declarations prou·
vent, comme vient de le dil'e le representant de
l'Inde, que certains points fondamentallx font
l'objet d'ul1 accord assez general.

It seems to me that it would be very unfortunate if that large and gratifying measure of a~ree­
ment on principle and on many basic points ';rere
to be diluted by disagreement on any points of
detail. I also agree with tl1e statement made
this afternoon by the representative of the Republic of Indonesia thnt it WOllld be most unfortunate if the Security Council were to adopt
an insufficient resolution. I think that the 2tatements which have heen made Gy the rcpre.~enta­
tives of the parties concerned, by the members
of the Security Council and by the representatives of those non-member States who have been
invited to p,uticipate in our deliberations on this
question, have all contributed to the eventual
formulation of a Secllrity COI~neil position. T
hope tl1at this position will soon be translated
into the definite form of a resolution which could
be adopted, voted for by most, if not <:111, the
members of the Secllrity Council which would
contribute to a gentlille solution of this problem.

I1 me semble CJu'il serait tres ,regrettable qu'un
accord de principe et qu'une identite de Vl1es sur
t111 g-rand nombre de questions fondamentales,
realises da11s nne rneSllre aussi large et aussi
;;atisfaisante, soient neutralises par des divergences sur des questions de detail. Approllvant
egalement la declaration faite cet apres-midi pRr
le l'epn~sentant de la Republique d'Indonesie,
j'estime qu'il serait eminemment fachenx que le
COllseil de secl1l'ite acloptnt une resolution qui ne
serait qll'une dcmi-mesLlre. Je pense que les
de.c1<lrations faites par les representants des par~
ties inleresse-es, par les membres du Conseil de
sewrite et par les representants des Etats non
membres dn Conseil qni sont invites a participer
a nos deliberations sur cette question 011t tOlltes
facilite line prise de position par le Conseil.
J'espere qu'il va bient6t preciseI' SOl1 attitude SOilS
la forme d'une resolution qui puisse etre adoptee
sinon par tOLLS les membres du Conseil de securite, dl1 moins pal" la plnpalt d'entre enx, et qui
soit de natnre a contrib;.tel' a une verit<lb1e solu~
bon de ce probleme.
Le representant oe I'Tnde a fait mention ega·
Jement de la conference qui dait s'ouvrir clans
Son pays le 20 de ce fiois. Les Etats-Unis prenllent note avec interet et sympathie de I'initiative
prise par son Gouvernement de convoquer une
conference des Etats geographiquement voisins
de l'Indonesie, et ils esperent que les deliberations
de cette conference contribueront a soutenir les
efforts Mployes par le Conseil de secuI"ite en vue
de I'etablisse.ment d'une paix satisfaisunte et durable en Indonesie.

The representative of India has also referred
to the meeting which is to be convened in his
country on the 20th of this month, The United
States notes, with sympathetic i<lterest, the initiative taken by the Government of India in convoking a conference of the States which are
geographically neighbours of Indonesia, and
hopes that the consultations of the representatives <1.t that Conference will contribute added
support to the efforts of the Security Council to
bring about a satisfactory and a viable peace in
Indonesia.
The PRESIDENT: As T entered this Council
chamber, I was handed a communication by the
representative of the Indonesian delegation. This
commtlnieation has now been distributed to tIle
Security Council as document S/1214. I shall
ask the Assistant Secretary-General to rend it

Le PRESIDENT (tradtlit de l'anglais): Lorsque
je suis entre dans l<l salle du Comei1, le representant de l'Indonesie m'a remis une note Cjui vient
d'etre distribuee au Conseil de secllrile sous la
forme du docllment Sj1214. .Te prie Monsieur le
Secreta ire general adjoint d'en donner lecture.

Mr. SOBOLEV' (Assistant Secretary-Gelleral in
charge of the Department of Security Council
AHairs): The letter is dated 1i January 1949
addressed to the President of the Security Council
hy the representative of Indonesia. It reads as
follows:

M. SOBOLEV (Secn~taire general adjoint charge
du Departement des affaires du Conseil de securit~) (traduit de l'anglais): La lettre est datee
d\; 17 janviel" 1949 et est adressee an President
Oll COllseil de secllrite par le representant de
J'Indonesie. Elle est l'edigee comrne sllit:

"The Indonesian delegation presents its compliments and has the honour to submit the following: Owing to the rupture of communications
between the Indonesian delegation at Lake Suc-

"La delegation indonesienne presente ses com·
pliments et a l'honneur de soumettre les observations suivantes: En raison de l'intenllption des
communic.ations entre la delegation de l'Indonesie
