S/2019/229

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 March 2019
Original: English

Implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Region
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2409
(2018), by which the Council requested me to report on the implementation of the
commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. 1 It provides an overview of peace
and security developments in the Great Lakes region since the issuance of my
previous report (S/2018/886) and covers the period from 1 September 2018 to
28 February 2019.

II. Major developments
A.

Security situation
2.
The activities of foreign and domestic illegal armed groups in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, cross-border security incidents, insecurity in the Central
African Republic, sporadic fighting between Government and opposition forces in
South Sudan and clashes between the Burundian armed forces and armed groups had
a negative impact on peace and stability in the Great Lakes region during the reporting
period.
3.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, tensions were reported before and
after the elections of 30 December 2018 and included instances of protests, violence,
clashes between supporters of opposing parties and heavy-handed dispersion of
demonstrators by security forces. On a positive note, armed groups that had been very
vocal about the outcome of the elections appear to have adopted a “wait and see”

__________________
1

19-03950 (E)

In this context, the region includes the 13 signatories to the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, namely, Angola, Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Congo, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, South Africa, South Sudan, the Sudan, Uganda, t he
United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia. In addition, the following four intergovernmental
organizations act as witnesses/guarantors of the Framework: the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern African Develop ment Community and the
United Nations.

150319

*1903950*

S/2019/229

approach since the proclamation of the final results of the presidential election. In the
Kasai region, an uptrend in the number of Kamuina Nsapu militia members laying
down their weapons was recorded during the same period. In Mai-Ndombe Province,
the security situation in Yumbi territory remains of concern, after violence broke out
between the Batende and Banunu ethnic groups, which a human rights investigation
confirmed had resulted in 535 deaths.
4.
In the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, suspected members of the
Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) stepped up attacks in the Beni area, targeting
civilians, the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (FARDC) and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). At least 245 civilians, including 55 women and seven
children, were killed in attacks attributed to ADF in 2018. The group reportedly
continued to recruit followers from countries in the Great Lakes region and beyond.
On 12 November, FARDC and MONUSCO launched a joint military operation
against the group to prevent a potential attack on Beni town and to protect civilians.
A total of 13 FARDC soldiers and seven United Nations peacekeepers were killed
during the operation. On 20 November, the military spokesperson of Uganda
announced the deployment of approximately 4,000 troops along the border with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to prevent infiltration and attacks by A DF. In Ituri
Province, as dialogue on demobilization and disarmament continued between the
Government and the rebel Force de résistance patriotique en Ituri, the parties met on
20 January, discussed pre-cantonment and financial issues and agreed on a security
assessment of pre-cantonment sites, as well as meetings with provincial authorities.
Meanwhile, subgroups of the Lord’s Resistance Army have become more active in
Haut-Uélé Province, and the latter half of January saw an increase in the number of
incidents attributed to this armed group.
5.
On 15 December, FARDC arrested the spokesperson and deputy head of
intelligence of the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR), and media
sources reported their extradition to Rwanda in January. While the extradition and
repatriation of disarmed FDLR combatants weakened the group, FDLR remained
active. On 16 and 17 December, seven FARDC soldiers were reportedly killed in two
separate attacks by suspected FDLR rebels. Military operations in December and
January against an FDLR splinter group, Conseil national pour le renouveau et la
démocratie-Ubwiyunge, forced the latter to abandon positions in North Kivu and
move into South Kivu.
6.
In Burundi, the security situation remained relatively calm yet unpredict able
and was marked by isolated security incidents. On 4 September, unidentified armed
individuals attacked Nkurubuye colline in Ruyigi Province, along the border between
Burundi and the United Republic of Tanzania. On 19 October, suspected elements of
the Burundian armed group Résistance pour un état de droit au Burundi -Tabara
(RED-Tabara) attacked an army position in Bubanza Province. Burundian armed
forces captured two assailants, while the others reportedly fled into the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
7.
The security situation in the Central African Republic remained fragile. On
15 November, the Union pour la paix en Centrafrique, an armed group affiliated with
the ex-Séléka, together with armed civilians, attacked the camp for displaced persons
in Alindao. Between 70 and 100 civilians among the estimated 18,000 civilians hosted
in the camp were killed. In addition, some armed groups continued to acquire
weapons and ammunition from neighbouring countries, as reported by the Panel of
Experts on the Central African Republic in its report S/2018/1119.
8.
In South Sudan, sporadic fighting between the South Sudan People ’s Defence
Forces and opposition forces, as well as among opposition groups, continued.
2/17

19-03950

S/2019/229

Incidents of intercommunal and intracommunal violence were also reported, resulting
in civilian casualties and displacement.
9.
Cross-border security incidents were reported in the areas between Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, contributing to enhanced tensions
between Burundi and Rwanda. On 15 September, suspected elements of the Forces
nationales de libération (FNL) reportedly entered Burundi from South Kivu to attack
a border post at Gatumba. On 19 September, a local leader of the I mbonerakure, the
ruling party’s youth wing, was killed with his wife, near the border with Rwanda. The
Ministry of Public Security of Burundi attributed the attack to an armed group from
Rwanda. On 7 October, unidentified armed elements reportedly from Rwa nda killed
three civilians in Cibitoke Province in Burundi. Also, in October, FARDC reportedly
clashed with FNL in South Kivu. Furthermore, the Burundian national defence force
was reported to have entered South Kivu between November and January, in pursui t
of Burundian armed elements. Deadly clashes were also reported between the
Burundian national defence force, supported by Imbonerakure, and RED -Tabara, as
well as FNL.
10. Armed groups also staged attacks targeting Rwanda. On 10 December, the
FDLR-Forces combattantes abacunguzi made a cross-border incursion into
Busesamana village, in Rubavu district in Rwanda, and killed at least three soldiers,
according to the Government of Rwanda. On 15 December, unidentified armed
attackers, reportedly coming from Burundi, launched an attack in Kitabi Sector,
southern Rwanda, setting fire to three passenger vehicles and killing two civilians.
According to Rwanda’s military spokesperson, three of the attackers were killed,
while the rest fled to Burundi.
11. The Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo reported the
presence of an armed coalition known as “P5” associated with Rwandan opposition
groups, which was active in South Kivu and reportedly received arms and ammunition
from Burundi.
12. In September, the follow-up mechanism for the repatriation of former
combatants, launched on 24 April 2018, facilitated the repatriation of 11 disarmed
FDLR combatants to Rwanda from the Walungu transit camp, in South Kivu. In
November, another 52 disarmed FDLR combatants and dependants volunteered for
repatriation. This brought the total number of disarmed FDLR combatants repatriated
through the follow-up mechanism since April 2018 to 98.
13. Between 20 and 27 November, Congolese authorities, through bilateral
arrangements with the Government of Rwanda, repatriated 1,392 disarmed FDLR
combatants and dependants, following the closure of transit camps in Kanyobagonga,
Kisangani and Walungu, in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Furthermore, 242 FDLR elements previously detained in the Angenga prison, in
Equateur Province, were handed over to Rwanda. All disarmed combatants were
transferred to the Mutobo Demobilization and Reintegration Camp in Rwanda.
14. In another positive development, in October, cooperation between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO resulted in
the relocation out of MONUSCO premises of the remaining 51 members of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition, who had been in the care of
MONUSCO since August 2016.

B.

Political developments
15. The elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the inconclusive
inter-Burundian dialogue were key political developments during the reporting

19-03950

3/17

S/2019/229

period. Tensions between some countries and insecurity in the Central African
Republic and South Sudan also remained issues of concern.
16. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, political tensions increased ahead of
presidential, national and provincial legislative elections, which took place on
30 December. While polling unfolded in a largely peaceful atmosphere in most of the
country, the Independent National Electoral Commission postponed voting until
March 2019 in four constituencies, namely, Beni territory, Beni town, Butembo and
Yumbi, citing the Ebola outbreak and security-related concerns. On 10 January, the
Independent National Electoral Commission announced the provisional results of the
presidential election and declared opposition leader Féli x Tshisekedi the winner,
ahead of another opposition candidate, Martin Fayulu, and the candidate of the ruling
coalition, Front commun pour le Congo, Emmanuel Ramazani Shadary. The
provisional results of the presidential election were disputed by the Episc opal
Conference of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which indicated that they were
at variance with data collected through its more than 40,000 national electoral
observers. The Independent National Electoral Commission also announced the
results of legislative elections on the basis of which Front commun pour le Congo
would maintain a majority in the National Assembly, as well as in provincial
assemblies. Several challenges to the results of legislative elections will be decided
by the courts at the end of March. A legal challenge of the provisional results of the
presidential election presented by Mr. Fayulu was rejected by the Constitutional
Court, which has confirmed the results declaring the victory of Mr Tshisekedi. On
24 January, Mr. Tshisekedi was sworn in as President of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
17. Regional and international actors remained closely engaged throughout the
electoral process. On 3 November, the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) dispatched an electoral advisory mission to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which received assurances from the Government that the polls would be held
in conformity with international standards and relevant SADC principles. The African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security, Smail Chergui, visited Kinshasa from 8
to 10 November to engage Congolese stakeholders. Following a meeting on
19 November, the African Union Peace and Security Council called on the Congolese
to bridge their differences over the elections.
18. On 26 December, President Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of the Congo,
in his capacity as Chair of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
convened a joint International Conference on the Great Lakes Region -SADC summit,
at which strong concern was expressed about the tense political climate in the run-up
to the polls and all Congolese actors were called upon to exercise restraint.
19. The African Union, the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and SADC each deployed observation missions. In their
preliminary reports dated 2 January, the observation missions deployed by the African
Union and SADC noted that the elections had taken place in largely peaceful and
acceptable conditions, despite some challenges.
20. On 13 January, President Edgar Lungu of Zambia and President Sassou Nguesso
issued separate statements, in their capacities as Chairs of the SADC Organ on
Politics, Defence and Security Cooperation and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, respectively, in which they noted disputes over the results and
called for both a recount and the formation of an inclusive government.
21. On 17 January, the Double Troika of SADC held a consultation meeting at which
the role of the Congolese Constitutional Court was reaffirmed and the international
community was called upon to respect the Constitution of the Democratic Republic
4/17

19-03950

S/2019/229

of the Congo, as well as its sovereignty and territorial integrity. On the same day,
President Paul Kagame of Rwanda, in his capacity as Chairperson of the African
Union, convened a high-level consultation with some States members of the African
Union to discuss the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In the
communiqué of this high-level consultation, serious doubts were expressed about the
conformity of the provisional results of the presidential election with the votes cast
and a call was made for the suspension of the proclamation of the final results of the
elections. It was further indicated in the communiqué that a high -level delegation
would travel to Kinshasa to interact with Congolese stakeholders, with a view to
reaching a consensus on a way out of the post-electoral crisis in the country.
Following the ruling by the Constitutional Court on 19 January, which upheld the
preliminary results of the presidential election, however, the planned mission was
postponed sine die.
22. In Burundi, tensions between the Government and the opposition remained high,
with the latter denouncing continuing violations of political freedom and human
rights. Similarly, strained relations between Burundi and the East African Community
persisted over the status of the inter-Burundian dialogue.
23. Security-related incidents at the border between Burundi and Rwanda and a call
by President Nkurunziza for an extraordinary East African Community Summit on
Burundi-Rwanda relations strained ties between the two countries. During a press
conference on 14 December, President Kagame maintained that some neighbouring
countries were supporting Rwandan opposition groups, notably FDLR and the
Rwanda National Congress. He affirmed that, while Rwanda was ready to address any
security challenge at its borders, his country would not react to what he described as
provocations from Burundi. On 1 February, Rwanda took over the leadership of the
East African Community from Uganda, during an ordinary summit, at which it was
decided to postpone deliberations on the situation in Burundi.
24. In the Central African Republic, efforts continued through the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation to advance the dialogue between the Government and
armed groups. On 18 September, the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
met President Faustin Archange Touadera in Bangui and stressed the need to
accelerate the implementation of the African Initiative. From 8 to 10 January, a
ministerial delegation from the region, led by the African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security and my Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, visited
Bangui. Following the visit, talks between the Government and 14 armed groups
commenced on 24 January in Khartoum and culminated in a peace agreement signed
on 5 February.
25. In South Sudan, despite progress in the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan, signed on 12 September
in Addis Ababa, the parties have yet to meet several benchmarks, including
compliance with a permanent ceasefire and the release of political prisoners. On
16 November, the Council of Ministers of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development directed its Special Envoy to reach out to warring groups that were not
signatories to the Revitalized Agreement, so that they might also participate in its
implementation.

C.

Humanitarian situation
26. The high number of displaced persons in the Great Lakes region, notably from
Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
South Sudan, remained a major concern. As at 31 December 201 8, approximately 11.2
million people were forcibly displaced, including 7.2 million internally displaced and

19-03950

5/17

S/2019/229

more than 4 million refugees and asylum seekers. The 4 million refugees and asylum
seekers came mostly from South Sudan (2.28 million), the Democra tic Republic of
the Congo (619,500), Burundi (402,300), the Sudan (328,300) and Rwanda (236,400).
Furthermore, more than 22.7 million people needed food assistance. Uganda
remained the largest refugee host country in the region, with 1.19 million refugees,
followed by the Sudan (1.1 million) and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(534,828).
27. From 1 January to 31 December 2018 alone, some 159,000 Congolese fled to
neighbouring countries, with a particularly significant increase in refugee flows to
Uganda, Burundi, Kenya and Zambia. On 16 December, intercommunal clashes in the
province of Mai-Ndombe in the Democratic Republic of the Congo led to the largest
influx of Congolese refugees into the Republic of the Congo in almost a decade.
28. As at December, some 350,000 Burundian refugees were hosted in other
countries in the region, notably in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda,
Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania. Voluntary returns supported by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees continued, however,
and some 44,773 Burundian refugees voluntarily returned from the United Republic
of Tanzania in 2018.
29. Since October 2018, Angola has reportedly returned some 370,000 irregular
Congolese migrants to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Around 2,000 Congolese
refugees were also expelled, fuelling tensions between the two countries.
30. Another worrisome development was the latest outbreak, in August 2018, of the
Ebola virus disease in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. According to
the World Health Organization, the risk of a regional spread is very high, although no
cases have been reported in neighbouring countries to date. In response, Burundi,
Rwanda, South Sudan and Uganda, among others, have strengthened surveillance,
information exchange and contingency plans, whereas the United Republic of
Tanzania closed its borders. Response to the outbreak was hampered by continued
insecurity in the Beni area, notably owing to attacks by ADF, as well as several days
of general strikes in Beni town, in September and October 2018.
31. The underfunding of humanitarian responses continued to impact the delivery
of assistance to those in need. As at 31 December 2018, the regional refugee response
plans for Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan in 2018
were funded at 33 per cent, 34 per cent and 50 per cent, respectively.

D.

Human rights
32. Tense political processes, accompanied by shrinking political space and
restrictions on fundamental rights and freedoms, continued to mark the human rights
situation in some countries in the region. Attacks on civilians by armed groups and,
in some cases, State security forces, including sexual-based and gender-based
violence, were reported, while accountability for serious human rights violations and
respect for the rule of law remained weak. International actors, including United
Nations humanitarian actors and peacekeepers, were deliberately targeted on several
occasions.
33. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, human rights violations, including
those linked to restrictions on democratic space, continued, particularly during the
electoral campaign. On 14 December, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights denounced the violent suppression of demonstrations and the
disproportionate use of force by Congolese police and security forces. The electoral
period exacerbated various inter-ethnic tensions during the campaign as well as

6/17

19-03950

S/2019/229

following the announcement of the provisional results. There were also reports of
intimidation and harassment of journalists and human rights defenders, while some
opposition-affiliated media outlets were suspended by the authorities. Furthermore,
between 31 December and 19 January, the Government shut down access to the
Internet and text messaging throughout the country.
34. In Burundi, the reported number and scale of human rights violations, the
continued detention of political prisoners and prisoners of conscience and ongoing
restrictions on civil and political space remained matters of serious concern. Against
this backdrop, the Human Rights Council decided on 29 September 2018 to extend
the mandate of the Commission of Inquiry for another year. On 5 December, the
Government formally requested the closure of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Burundi, citing improved security, as well as
progress in managing issues related to human rights.
35. In a separate development, on 30 November, the Attorney General of Burundi
issued international arrest warrants against former President Pierre Buyoya and 16
other senior Tutsi military and civilian officials for their alleged involvement i n the
assassination of President Melchior Ndadaye in 1993. On 2 December, former
President Buyoya asserted that the decision was a political move to divert attention
from the ongoing political crisis and warned that the decision could reignite ethnic
violence between Hutus and Tutsis.
36. In the Central African Republic, serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law by armed groups continued, including killings,
abductions and destruction of property. On 18 November, Central African authorities
extradited Alfred Yekatom, a member of parliament and former anti -balaka leader, to
the International Criminal Court. On 12 December, they arrested Patrice -Edouard
Ngaïssona, the anti-balaka “National General Coordinator”, in compliance with an
arrest warrant issued by the International Criminal Court on 7 December. Both
individuals are wanted for war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
between 2013 and 2014.
37. In South Sudan, the human rights situation remained worrisome, with viol ations
perpetrated by warring parties against civilians, including women and children, in a
climate of impunity. Between 19 and 29 November, more than 150 women and girls
were attacked by unidentified individuals near Bentiu in northern South Sudan.
Experts mandated by the Human Rights Council are investigating the attacks and are
expected to present their findings to the Council in March 2019. Humanitarian
workers and assets also remained targets of violence.

III. Implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework
38. During the reporting period, my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region
continued to engage with national and regional leaders, the guarantors of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework and other partners, with a view to advancing
the implementation of national, regional and international commitments, as well as
the decisions adopted at the ninth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism, held on 8 October in Kampala.

19-03950

7/17

S/2019/229

A.

Commitments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
39. The leadership of the National Oversight Mechanism of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has been undergoing several changes, which have had a
negative impact on the monitoring of the implementation of the national commitments
in the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework by ministries and other relevant
national institutions.
40. In furtherance of the second national commitment, namely, to “consolidate State
authority, particularly in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo , including to
prevent armed groups from destabilizing neighbouring countries ”, Congolese
authorities closed FDLR transit camps in the east in November 2018 and repatriated
1,634 disarmed FDLR combatants and dependants, some of whom were previously
detained, pursuant to a bilateral agreement with Rwanda.
41. In implementation of the sixth national commitment, namely, to “further the
agenda of national reconciliation, tolerance and democratization ” and the electoral
process, MONUSCO and United Nations agencies supported the training of women
candidates and youth organizations by strengthening their communication skills, as
part of the United Nations contribution to the holding of peaceful and inclusive
elections. Several training workshops were organized acro ss the country in that
context.

B.

Commitments of the region
42. Progress was registered in strengthening cooperation between the signatories to
neutralize negative forces and repatriate disarmed foreign combatants, as indicated in
paragraphs 13 and 14. Regional leaders and organizations also continued their
engagement in support of the electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the inter-Burundian dialogue, respectively. The reporting period further
saw progress towards economic integration and judicial cooperation, although
strained relations between some countries, characterized by mutual accusations of
interference and support to armed groups, had a negative impact on cohesion and
cooperation in the region.
43. In addition to progress in the repatriation of disarmed combatants, leaders of the
region agreed, during the ninth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism, to strengthen relevant mechanisms of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, notably the Joint Follow-up Mechanism on ADF, based in
Kasese, Uganda. They further underscored the need for greater regional cooperation
towards the complete and rapid neutralization of negative forces.
44. Countries of the region also engaged bilaterally to address cross-border security
incidents. After several security incidents in disputed areas of Lake Edward, between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda, military officials from both countries
agreed in December to conduct joint border patrols in the affected areas. Following the
attack of 10 December reported in paragraph 10, Rwanda and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo established a bilateral commission to investigate the incident.
45. On the political front, on 17 October, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
South Africa met, within the framework of their binational commission, to discuss
political developments and other issues of mutual concern. Similarly, the Sudan and
Uganda convened their bilateral joint permanent commission from 5 to 7 December.
Furthermore, as previously noted, leaders and organizations in the region reached out
to the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and political actors, to
contribute to peaceful and credible elections in the country.

8/17

19-03950

S/2019/229

46. With regard to regional economic cooperation, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Republic of the Congo signed an agreement on 8 November to develop
the first road-rail bridge project linking their capital cities of Kinshasa and
Brazzaville. On 22 November, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania
committed during a meeting of the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts of the
Economic Commission for Africa to strengthen regional integration, through the
Agreement establishing the African Continental Free Trade Area, adopted by States
members of the African Union on 21 March. To date, Kenya, the Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, South Africa and Uganda have ratified the Agreement.
47. On 30 November, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia concluded
negotiations on the Kasomeno-Mwenda road project, which is expected to open an
important new regional trade corridor. With a view to streamlining border -crossing
procedures and boosting trade in the region, 12 out of 15 planned “one-stop border
posts” were completed by 1 December, through collaboration between the East
African Community and the African Development Bank. A total of 10 of these border
posts are currently operational.
48. Signatory countries to the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework also
cooperated on cases of war crimes and crimes against humanity, through the Great
Lakes Judicial Cooperation Network, which was operationalized with support from
the Office of my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region.

C.

Commitments of the international community
49. Special envoys and special representatives in the Great Lakes region engaged in
regular consultations to support peaceful and inclusive political processes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi. On 27 September, Germany, then
chair of the International Contact Group for the Great Lakes Region, and the Office
of my Special Envoy convened consultations on the Great Lakes region in New York.
Participants comprised senior officials representing countries in the region, as well as
representatives of the international community. The International Contact Group met
again on 15 and 16 November in Berlin, where consultations were held with
representatives of countries in the region and regional organizations. Discussions
focused on options to enhance regional and international cooperation to support
electoral and dialogue processes, address the threat posed by armed groups, enhance
partnership with the private sector and tackle the illicit exploitation and trade of
natural resources.
50. Furthermore, in a statement at the ninth high-level meeting of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism, the International Contact Group encouraged dialogue and the
full use of existing mechanisms to pursue the objectives of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework.
51. The implementation of the Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework, which
is aimed at aligning United Nations development and political mandates in the region,
registered progress through continuing collaboration between the Office of my
Special Envoy and United Nations country teams, agencies, funds and programmes.
On 12 December, a peace and security project in support of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region worth 10 million euros, funded by the
European Union, was launched in Bujumbura. On 19 February, the management board
of the Regional Strategic Framework met and reviewed the implementation of
ongoing projects.

19-03950

9/17

S/2019/229

IV. Implementation of the road map of my Special Envoy
A.

Support to the governing mechanisms of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework
52. Heads of State and Government of the signatory countries of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework and representatives of the guarantor institutions attended
the ninth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism on 8 October in
Kampala. The meeting, chaired by President Museveni in his capacity as incoming
Chair of the Mechanism, was preceded by a meeting of Ministers for Foreign Affairs,
held on 6 October in Kampala, and the twenty-second meeting of the Technical
Support Committee, held on 6 and 7 September in Nairobi.
53. At the initiative of my Special Envoy, the ninth high-level meeting included a
closed-door session to discuss ways to build trust among the leaders of the region.
This was in line with the outcome of the seminar organized jointly with the African
Union to mark the fifth anniversary of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, held on 26 and 27 February 2018 in Addis Ababa, an d subsequent
consultations with regional actors. Participants in the ninth high -level meeting of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism expressed concern about the activities of armed
groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and their regional
implications, noting that they remained an obstacle to building greater trust and
confidence among leaders and peoples in the region.
54. In the final communiqué of the ninth high-level meeting, the Regional Oversight
Mechanism called for a new approach to enhance regional cooperation against the
threat posed by negative forces, in particular, ADF. The Regional Oversight
Mechanism requested President Museveni to consult with the Chairs of the African
Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Regio n and the SADC Organ
on Politics, Defence and Security Cooperation, with regard to future joint actions. It
further requested the United Nations to help to mobilize support to operationalize and
strengthen the mechanisms of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
intended to enhance regional cooperation to address the threat posed by negative
forces.
55. The Regional Oversight Mechanism also requested President Sassou Nguesso,
as Chairperson of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, to consider
taking initiatives to strengthen friendship and cooperation among leaders in the
region, building on previous initiatives he had taken in that regard.
56. Participants called for continued cooperation among the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda to complete the repatriation of disarmed FDLR
combatants and their dependants from the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and of former M23 combatants and dependants from Rwanda and Uganda.
57. Participants also reviewed political and dialogue processes in Burundi, the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan
and stressed the need for inclusivity within electoral and political processes in the
region.
58. On 20 November, my Special Envoy supported the Government of Uganda in
bringing together representatives of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Republic of the Congo, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia, as
well as the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the African
Union, to discuss priority actions to implement the decisions of the ninth high -level
meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism. International partners and regional
experts also attended.

10/17

19-03950

S/2019/229

59. Participants discussed next steps to assess and strengthen existing mechanisms
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, including the Joint
Follow-up Mechanism on ADF and the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism. They
recommended a meeting of security and intelligence services of the countries affected
by armed groups to promote cooperation and improve information -sharing on such
groups. They further recommended the establishment of a working group comprising
experts and representatives of relevant ministries to ident ify cross-border economic
integration projects, building on previous efforts.
60. Following these consultations, the Technical Support Committee met on 24 and
25 January in Nairobi and agreed to identify concrete initiatives to build confidence
and enhance the sharing of information on negative forces among signatory countries.
It also discussed the strengthening of the Joint Follow-up Mechanism on ADF and
called on contributing countries to provide personnel and financial contributions.
Furthermore, participants called for a political and strategic approach to economic
integration in the region, which should, as a priority, promote natural resources as
drivers of shared prosperity.
61. My Special Envoy held additional consultations with the African Union, t he
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and SADC. On 6 February,
representatives of the guarantor organizations met at the ministerial level in Addis
Ababa. Participants welcomed renewed regional efforts to neutralize armed groups,
including a planned confidence-building initiative on security and intelligence. They
also noted the need to explore political and strategic approaches to economic
integration in the region.

B.

Good offices of the Secretary-General
62. As part of my good offices, my Special Envoy engaged with leaders in the
region, highlighting the need for frank dialogue to address issues that could jeopardize
good relations and cooperation. He further encouraged them to enhance collaboration
to improve security, combat impunity, promote judicial cooperation, advance
economic integration and promote natural resources for shared prosperity.
Promoting cooperation and confidence-building
63. Addressing mistrust between some signatories and building confidence
remained a priority for my Special Envoy during the reporting period. In that regard,
he engaged senior officials of the African Union, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and SADC, as well as senior government representatives of the
Republic of the Congo, Uganda and Zambia, in their capacities as current chairs of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and the SADC Organ
on Politics, Defence and Security Cooperation, respectively.
64. On 31 January, my Special Envoy met President Sassou Nguesso in Brazzaville
to, inter alia, follow up on the request, made to the latter dur ing the ninth high-level
meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, to take initiatives to strengthen
friendship and cooperation among leaders in the region. President Sassou Nguesso
agreed to intensify his efforts in that regard, while noting the reluct ance by some
leaders to discuss the issues fuelling mistrust among them.
Neutralization of negative forces
65. My Special Envoy promoted renewed attention and collaboration to address the
threat posed by armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Pursuant to the decisions adopted during the ninth high-level meeting of the Regional

19-03950

11/17

S/2019/229

Oversight Mechanism, he discussed with senior government representatives,
including the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uganda, the Executive Secretary of t he
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and African Union officials, how
best to promote cooperation among signatories to strengthen regional mechanisms.
66. From 10 to 14 September, my Special Envoy facilitated a sensitization and
screening mission by the dedicated follow-up mechanism to camps hosting disarmed
former M23 combatants in Rwanda. On 25 October, the Office of my Special Envoy
convened the third meeting of the follow-up mechanism in Nairobi to review and
accelerate repatriation efforts. On 30 October, the Office of my Special Envoy visited
the Rwanda Demobilization and Reintegration Commission to discuss the
reintegration of former FDLR elements repatriated through the follow-up mechanism,
as well as the imminent closure by Congolese authorities of three FDLR transit camps
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
67. During its fourth meeting, held on 24 January in Nairobi, the follow -up
mechanism adopted a timetable for screening and sensitization missions to Uganda
and Rwanda, to advance the repatriation of former M23 members, as well as a mission
to Rwanda to monitor the reintegration of former FDLR combatants and their
dependants. From 15 to 22 February, representatives of my Special Envoy, together
with representatives of the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda and Uganda, the Expanded Joint Verification Mission and MONUSCO,
visited camps hosting former M23 members in Rwanda and Uganda. Previously, from
11 to 13 February, the Office of my Special Envoy and the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region had conducted an assessment visit to the headquarters of
the follow-up mechanism on ADF, located in Kasese, Uganda. While the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has deployed a representative to serve on the mechanism, the
delayed contribution of personnel by participating States and logistical challenges
continue to hamper the operations of the follow-up mechanism.
68. These activities generated goodwill and improved cooperation among the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda on the protracted issue of
the repatriation of former combatants. This helped to create an environment
conducive to the repatriation, in November, of all disarmed FDLR combatants
previously in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, on the basis of bilateral
arrangements between Congolese and Rwandan authorities.
Support to dialogue and political processes
Democratic Republic of the Congo
69. Recognizing the importance of peaceful and credible elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, my Special Envoy engaged with regional and
international actors to promote a peaceful outcome of the electoral process. He
remained in close contact with senior government officials of Angola, the Republic
of the Congo, Uganda and Zambia, as well as senior representatives of the African
Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and SADC, to help
to ensure that coherent and coordinated messages were delivered to Congolese
stakeholders. He also held a series of consultations with representatives of the
European Union and other partners on how to support the process.
Burundi
70. My Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region extended support to my Special
Envoy for Burundi to encourage dialogue between the Government and the
opposition. In a meeting with Minister for Foreign Affairs Ezéchiel Nibigira on
25 September, my Special Envoy urged the parties to address all outstanding issues
through dialogue to pave the way for credible and inclusive electio ns in 2020 and
12/17

19-03950

S/2019/229

advised Burundi to take steps to overcome its diplomatic isolation. Meeting with the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uganda on 4 December, my Special Envoy welcomed
the ongoing mediation by President Museveni and looked forward to the next E ast
African Community summit, which, he hoped, would provide opportunities for
discussions among the leaders of the region on the way forward. He also discussed
the situation in Burundi and Burundi’s relationship with Rwanda with the Executive
Secretary of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region on 12 December.
Advancing women and peace and security
71. On 8 October, former President Catherine Samba Panza of the Central African
Republic addressed the ninth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism, on behalf of the Advisory Board of the Women’s Platform for the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework. She advocated for the meaningful participation
of women in political and peace processes in the region. Participants su bsequently
endorsed the recommendations of the women’s solidarity missions to Burundi, the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan,
undertaken by representatives of the African Union, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and the United Nations and facilitated by the Office of my
Special Envoy, which highlighted women and peace and security issues in the region.
72. The Office of my Special Envoy and the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region co-organized a meeting of gender ministers from the Great Lakes
region, which was held in Entebbe, Uganda, on 23 November. The meeting resulted
in the adoption of the regional action plan for the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). The ministers reiterated, inter alia, the commitment of their
Governments to achieve a minimum 30 per cent quota for political participation of
women by 2020.
73. On 13 February, my Special Envoy convened the tenth meeting of the Advisory
Board of the Women’s Platform in Nairobi. Participants recommended increased
regional capacity to advance the women and peace and security agenda. They
welcomed the willingness of Rwanda to share best practices in the participation and
agreed to deploy additional solidarity missions to the Sudan and the Republic of the
Congo, as well as a follow-up mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Displacement
74. Further to the decisions adopted at the eighth and ninth high-level meetings of
the Regional Oversight Mechanism, and in consultation with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, my Special Envoy continued to advocate
for the implementation of solutions to protracted refugee situations. He also continued
to engage with regional and international partners, in preparation for a ministerial
meeting on displacement scheduled for 7 March 2019, to be convened by his office
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, i n close cooperation
with other relevant United Nations entities.
Judicial cooperation
75. On 12 and 13 November, the Office of my Special Envoy, together with the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, convened the third meeting of the Great Lakes Judicial
Cooperation Network, in Kampala. Public prosecutors from the region agreed, inter
alia, on measures to strengthen judicial capacities at the national level and discussed
transborder judicial cases with the potential to impact cooperation and stability in the
region.

19-03950

13/17

S/2019/229

Natural resources
76. The Office of my Special Envoy continued to support regional efforts to curb
the illicit exploitation and trade of natural resources, with a view to eliminating
financial incentives for armed groups and criminal networks.
77. On 26 November, the Office of my Special Envoy and the Greater Virunga
Transboundary Collaboration convened a coalition-building conference in Kigali to
promote peace and security and shared natural resource management in the Greater
Virunga Landscape. The conference brought together representatives of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, as well as the diplomatic
corps, civil society and United Nations officials. Participants recognized the
importance of the Greater Virunga Transboundary Collaboration as a mechanis m for
conservation, peace and development and pledged support for its operations.
Economic cooperation
78. The Office of my Special Envoy, in close collaboration with the Rwanda
Development Board and the International Conference on the Great Lakes Reg ion,
advanced preparations for the second Private Sector Investment Conference for the
Great Lakes Region, to be held in Rwanda in November 2019.

C. Partnerships with regional organizations, international
partners and other United Nations entities
79. My Special Envoy continued to work in close partnership with regional
organizations, international partners and other United Nations entities in the region,
to advance the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
Regional organizations
80. On 14 and 15 September, my Special Envoy met with senior African Union
officials, including the Commissioner for Peace and Security, in Addis Ababa. They
reviewed developments in the region and discussed preparations for the ninth high level meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism. My Special Envoy also met
President Edgar Lungu of Zambia on 2 October, in his capacity as Chair of the SADC
Organ on Politics, Defence and Security Cooperation, and discussed peace and
security challenges in the region, notably in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
On 11 and 12 October, he participated in a high-level workshop on “Silencing the
Guns in Africa by 2020”, organized by the African Union, and shared lessons and
experiences in peacemaking in Africa, notably in the Great Lakes region.
81. Strengthening partnership with the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region was a priority for my Special Envoy during the reporting period. As detailed
above, his Office organized a series of meetings and field visits with the International
Conference on the repatriation of disarmed combatants, the neutralization of negative
forces, women and peace and security, judicial cooperation, economic integration,
natural resource management and population displacement. On 3 October, my Special
Envoy visited the Levy Mwanawasa Regional Centre for Democracy and Good
Governance based in Lusaka to discuss a range of issues, such as youth employment
and forced population displacement. On 12 December, my Special Envoy and the
Executive Secretary of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region met
in Bujumbura and agreed on joint priority activities for 2019.

14/17

19-03950

S/2019/229

International partners
82. In addition to engaging with the International Contact Group on the Great Lakes
Region, my Special Envoy held bilateral meetings with Belgian government officials
and European Union representatives in Brussels from 19 to 20 September. On
17 December, he convened donors to the Trust Fund for the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework in Nairobi to brief them on the activities
of his Office and promote support for upcoming initiatives.
83. On 19 and 20 February, my Special Envoy and the European Union Special
Coordinator for the Great Lakes region convened a regional coordination and policy
discussion in Nairobi, with a view to identifying joint actions to advance durable
peace and shared prosperity in the region.
Cooperation with other United Nations entities
84. My Special Envoy engaged with senior United Nations officials in the region,
including my Special Representative and Head of MONUSCO, my Special Envoy for
Burundi, my Special Representative for Central Africa and Head of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, to ensure effective coordination, in particular during the
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in the inter-Burundian dialogue
and in the context of relations between Burundi and Rwanda.
85. On 5 and 6 November, the Office of my Special Envoy attended a coordination
meeting of political units and peace and development advisers in Central Africa,
convened by the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and held in
Libreville. The meeting was aimed at improving information-sharing and the
coordination of United Nations actions in that region.
86. In a continuing effort to develop a shared analysis of challenges and
opportunities in the Great Lakes region, the Office of my Special Envoy convened,
on 15 February, the second meeting of political affairs units and peace and
development advisers in the Great Lakes region. On 18 February, the Office convened
the sixth biannual coordination meeting of United Nations off ices, resident
coordinators and regional directors in Nairobi, to strengthen the United Nations
response to political, security and development challenges in the region.
87. In collaboration with the Regional United Nations Development Group, my
Special Envoy also continued to promote and guide United Nations efforts to
implement the Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework, with a view to ensuring
that development responses were effectively aligned with United Nations political
engagements in the region.

V. Observations and recommendations
88. I commend the continuing efforts by the signatories to the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework, with the support of the guarantors, to resolve their
differences through dialogue and cooperation. At the same time, I am concerned about
persisting tensions between signatories, which are compounded by other factors,
notably the threat posed by armed groups and the illicit exploitation and trade of
natural resources. In addition, the outbreak of Ebola in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo could impact regional stability, if not adequately contained.
89. I welcome the outcome of the ninth high-level meeting of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism, in which the need for greater cooperation towards the
neutralization of negative forces in the region was highlighted. I encourage the
19-03950

15/17

S/2019/229

signatories to implement the decisions adopted at the meeting and urge national and
regional leaders to remain committed to dialogue and cooperation at all levels.
90. I am concerned by the recent spate of attacks attributed to ADF, as well as the
increasing number of cross-border incidents, which, if unchecked, could escalate
tensions and worsen instability in the region. I welcome the decision by the Regional
Oversight Mechanism to strengthen existing regional mechanisms and commend the
steps already taken in that regard. I call on all signatories to meet their obligations
and fulfil their commitments under those mechanisms, in particular the Joint Follow up Mechanism on ADF and the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism, so that they
may discharge their mandates effectively. My Special Envoy will continue to mobilize
support to those efforts.
91. With regard to the repatriation of foreign former combatants, I commend the
cooperation among the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, as
well as the support provided by the guarantors, through the follow-up mechanism
established to that effect. The recent repatriation of large numbers of disarmed FDLR
combatants and dependants by the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda offers an example of how the region can act together to advance
common peace and security objectives. I call on Rwanda and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to ensure the effective reintegration of the disarmed combatants, in line
with international law. I further encourage the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda and Uganda to complete the repatriation of former M23 combatants through
the follow-up mechanism, in accordance with human rights principles and
international humanitarian and refugee law.
92. I welcome the call by the Regional Oversight Mechanism for inclusive electoral
and political processes. I regret that, despite our best efforts, challenges persist in
ensuring basic political freedom and human rights for all in the Great Lakes region. I
call on Governments to uphold their commitments, notably those under the African
Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance, and to create the space necessary
for the voices of all stakeholders to be heard in decision-making processes.
93. I commend the Congolese people for the peaceful conduct of the elections and
the first orderly transfer of power in the post-independence history of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I encourage the Government and all political actors to work
towards consensus and national unity, to lay the foundation for peace and
development throughout the country.
94. With regard to Burundi, I commend the efforts undertaken by the Mediator for
the East African Community, President Yoweri Museveni, the Facilitator, Benjamin
Mkapa, the African Union and my Special Envoy. I call on all concerned parties to
meet their obligations in putting an end to the political crisis. I appeal to the East
African Community and all the leaders of the region to redouble their efforts towards
ensuring that stability is restored, while preserving the gains of the 2000 Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi.
95. I am pleased with the progress achieved in raising the profile of the women and
peace and security agenda in the region and welcome the adoption by the gender
ministers of the regional action plan for the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). I call on all national leaders to implement the 30 per cent
quota for the representation of women in peace and political processes and to continue
efforts to achieve gender parity.
96. I regret to note persistent instances of sexual and gender-based violence in the
region. I urge the signatories to the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework to
take all actions necessary to stop such heinous acts and to ensure that the perpetrators
of such crimes are swiftly brought to justice.
16/17

19-03950

S/2019/229

97. Fighting impunity remains key to delivering peace, security and development.
In that regard, I welcome the work of the Great Lakes Judicial Cooperation Network.
I am encouraged to see the collaboration between signatory countries to address cases
of serious human rights violations and encourage the Office of my Special Envoy and
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region to provide sustained support
to those efforts.
98. I welcome the progress made towards greater economic cooperation and
integration. Such cooperation should encompass the management of natural
resources. In that regard, I encourage the signatory countries, with the support of the
guarantors, to initiate a political dialogue on options to promote shared prosperity,
through enhanced governance of natural resources.
99. Recognizing the importance of a comprehensive approach to address the root
causes of conflict in the region, my Special Envoy and the Chair of the Regional
United Nations Development Group will continue to rally suppo rt for the
implementation of the Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework.
100. I would like to pay tribute to my outgoing Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region, Mr. Said Djinnit, and to thank his team for their tireless efforts to advance
the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. During his
distinguished service in the Great Lakes region, my Special Envoy worked closely
with Member States and the African Union, as well as regional organizations and
mechanisms, to address complex peace and security challenges in the region.

19-03950

17/17
