S/PV.8596

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8596th meeting

Tuesday, 13 August 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Czaputowicz. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Maas
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security
International humanitarian law
Letter dated 5 August 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Poland to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/629)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-25161 (E)
*1925161*

S/PV.8596

International humanitarian law

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The promotion and strengthening of the rule of
law in the maintenance of international peace
and security
International humanitarian law
Letter dated 5 August 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Poland to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2019/629)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in the meeting:
Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares, Under-Secretary-General
for Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel;
Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross; and Ms. Annyssa Bellal,
of the Geneva Academy of International Humanitarian
Law and Human Rights.
Mr. Maurer is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/629, which contains a letter dated
5 August 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of Poland to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Mr. De Serpa Soares.
Mr. De Serpa Soares: I would like to thank the
Security Council for inviting me to this meeting. I also
convey a special greeting to my colleagues and friends
from the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Just over 70 years ago, on 11 August 1949, a
Diplomatic Conference convened in Geneva adopted
the four Geneva Conventions, and on the following day
its Final Act was signed by the participating States.
The four Conventions entered into force around a year
later, on 21 October 1950, and have been at the core of
international humanitarian law ever since.
2/22

13/08/2019

The four Geneva Conventions were by no means
completely novel at the time. The first three Conventions
found their origins in previous treaties and were revised
versions of them. These three Conventions are the First
Convention, which deals with the wounded and sick in
armed forces in the field; the Second Convention, which
covers the wounded, sick and shipwrecked members of
armed forces at sea; and the Third Convention, which
deals with prisoners of war. The Fourth Convention
was, however, the first treaty that was specifically
dedicated to the protection of civilian persons in time
of war.
Most of the provisions in these four Conventions
are applicable to international armed conflicts — in
other words, armed conflicts between States. However,
there is a provision in each of the four Conventions that
applies to non-international armed conflicts, which
is article 3 common to the Geneva Conventions. This
provision contains basic rules on the humane treatment
of persons taking no active part in hostilities, including
members of the armed forces who have laid down
their arms or who have been placed hors de combat by
sickness, wounds or detention, as well as civilians.
The inclusion of common article 3 in the Geneva
Conventions was a historic moment for humankind. It
was the first instance in which non-international armed
conflicts were regulated by a multilateral treaty. The
significance is augmented by the fact that the Geneva
Conventions are now universally adhered to. There is no
doubt that common article 3 has become one of the most
important provisions of the Geneva Conventions, not
only because of its nature, which I have just mentioned,
but also because it is perhaps the most frequently applied
provision in contemporary armed conflicts, which are
mostly non-international in character. Common article
3 was subsequently developed and supplemented by
Protocol II Additional to the Geneva Conventions and
a number of customary rules have been recognized as
being applicable to non-international armed conflicts,
but common article 3 still occupies a special place in
international humanitarian law.
The relevance of the Geneva Conventions to the
work of the United Nations might not have been so
obvious in the early years of the Organization, as the
Charter does not specifically refer to international
humanitarian law. However, the United Nations was
established in the aftermath of the Second World War,
which saw violations of international humanitarian
law on a massive scale. The Charter, in its Preamble,
19-25161

13/08/2019

International humanitarian law

contains a solemn declaration of a determination “to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war
[and] to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person”, and in its
Article 1 further provides that one of the purposes of
the United Nations is
“to achieve international co-operation in solving
international problems of ... [a] humanitarian
character, and in promoting and encouraging
respect for human rights”.
In this regard, it is not surprising that international
humanitarian law has become one of the most important
areas of international law that guide the work of the
Organization today, including the Security Council.
The role of the United Nations in situations of
serious violations of international humanitarian law
has also been specifically recognized in article 89
of Protocol I Additional to the Geneva Conventions,
which requires that the high contracting parties act,
jointly or individually, in cooperation with the United
Nations in situations of serious violations of the Geneva
Conventions and of the Protocol.
In practice, all competent principal organs of
the United Nations have dealt with issues related to
international humanitarian law in one way or another.
As far as the Security Council is concerned, it has on
several occasions recalled “its primary responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and in
this context, the need to promote respect for the rules
and principles of international humanitarian law”, such
as in the second preambular paragraph of resolution
2474 (2019) of 11 June 2019.
With respect to the Geneva Conventions specifically,
it was only in 1967 that the Council invoked those
Conventions for the first time in one of its resolutions,
almost 20 years after their adoption. Since then, the
Security Council has made express references to the
Geneva Conventions or to specific provisions from them
in its resolutions, but in a large majority of instances
the Council has invoked international humanitarian law
generally or its customary rules rather than specific
treaties or provisions from them.
With respect to international humanitarian law
generally, the Council has played a crucial role
in ensuring respect for that law. Apart from the
Council’s frequent condemnation of violations of

S/PV. 8596

international humanitarian law and its call on the
parties to the conflict to respect the obligations that it
lays down, the Council has taken concrete measures,
such as establishing international criminal tribunals
to prosecute war crimes, as well as the crime of
genocide and crimes against humanity; authorizing the
establishment of commissions of inquiry to investigate
alleged violations of international humanitarian
law; mandating peacekeeping operations to protect
civilians, particularly in the context of ongoing armed
conflicts, including by the use of force; authorizing
humanitarian agencies to carry out cross-border
humanitarian assistance, pursuant to a binding decision
of the Council; requesting the Secretary-General, his
special representatives and envoys, peacekeeping
operations and special political missions to monitor
potential violations of international humanitarian
law in ongoing conflicts; requesting the SecretaryGeneral to report on certain thematic areas, such as
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, children
in armed conflict and the protection of medical and
humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical
duties; and imposing sanctions on individuals and
entities involved in violations of applicable international
humanitarian law.
The breadth of actions taken by the Security
Council shows that the Council has great potential
and flexibility for ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law. While the United Nations has a
role in ensuring respect by others for international
humanitarian law, it is at the same time an entity to
which international humanitarian law applies. This
is relevant to all United Nations personnel in armed
conflict situations, but is particularly relevant to United
Nations peacekeeping operations deployed to armed
conflict situations, some of which have increasingly
been targeted by armed groups.
The Geneva Conventions and other instruments of
international humanitarian law do not contain specific
provisions concerning the protection of United Nations
peacekeepers. However, there is no doubt that they
are protected by international humanitarian law in
situations of armed conflict. That they are entitled to
the humane treatment set out in article 3 common to the
Geneva Conventions was specifically recognized most
recently by the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia in the Prosecutor v. Radovan Karadžić
case. The Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court further criminalizes intentional attacks against

19-251613/22

S/PV.8596

International humanitarian law

peacekeepers as a war crime, as long as they are
entitled to the protection given to civilians under the
international law of armed conflict.
The Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel of 1994 provides further protection
to United Nations peacekeepers by prohibiting attacks
against United Nations and associated personnel and by
requiring States parties to submit relevant cases to the
competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution.
However, as many host countries are not yet parties
to the Convention, in practice the application of the
Convention in those countries has been made possible
only by ad hoc arrangements, namely, by including a
specific provision in the relevant status-of-forces and
status-of-mission agreements.
In view of the fact that United Nations peacekeepers
continue to be attacked, I appeal to the Council
and Member States to further reflect upon ways to
ensure that attacks against peacekeepers are properly
investigated and, where appropriate, prosecuted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are not
only protected by international humanitarian law but
are also bound by it in certain circumstances. That this
is the case is recognized in the Organization’s statusof-forces agreements and in the Secretary-General’s
bulletin on the observance by United Nations forces
of international humanitarian law. As far as the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is concerned, the
Security Council has specifically mandated it to carry
out targeted offensive operations “in strict compliance
with international law, including international
humanitarian law”.
A number of measures have to be taken in order
to ensure compliance with international humanitarian
law, including providing guidance to a mission so that
military operations are carried out in accordance with
the rules of international humanitarian law concerning
the conduct of hostilities; establishing procedures so
that any persons captured by a mission are handled
in accordance with international law and standards;
concluding an agreement with the host country to
ensure that persons transferred by a mission to the host
country are treated in accordance with its obligations
under international law; and providing guidance to
a mission so that any act by its personnel that might
be contrary to international humanitarian law is
properly addressed.
4/22

13/08/2019

The Secretariat will continue to make every effort
to ensure that the relevant peacekeeping operations
comply with international humanitarian law, and
it counts on the support of the Security Council and
Member States in that regard.
The President: I thank Mr. De Serpa Soares for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Maurer.
Mr. Maurer: I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting and for the opportunity to brief
the Security Council today.
This year marks an important milestone — 70 years
since States convened to adopt the historic 1949 Geneva
Conventions in the aftermath of the Second World
War. In doing so they made a critical declaration that
even in armed conflict, even between fierce enemies,
there must be limits on the suffering that we can inflict
upon each other. The Geneva Conventions symbolize
our enduring and common humanity. Rooted in ideas
that have existed in all civilizations, they limit the
devastating effects of warfare. Today the universally
ratified Geneva Conventions represent one of the
greatest achievements of inter-State cooperation. The
Conventions show us what is possible when States take
collective and individual action to uphold the law and
humanitarian principles.
International humanitarian law does not ask the
impossible. States were not carried away by lofty
ideals when they negotiated the treaties. They knew the
realities of war and set out inherently pragmatic rules
to protect and respect human life and dignity. Through
the four Geneva Conventions, protections are given for
wounded and sick soldiers on land and at sea, prisoners
of war and civilians. In addition, a major achievement
in 1949 was the inclusion of article 3, common to
all four Conventions, which provides protections in
conflicts involving non-State armed groups. Today
international humanitarian law remains a key tool
for States to deal with contemporary challenges of
conflict, including counter-terrorism operations in
armed conflict. International humanitarian law strikes
a balance between military necessity and humanity.
Every single day, international humanitarian law
is at work saving lives and protecting women, men
and children in conflicts around the world. We rightly
hear about the violations because the consequences
are tragic and visible, but we must also recognize the
19-25161

13/08/2019

International humanitarian law

protective power and positive impact of international
humanitarian law when it is respected.
The impact of international humanitarian law is
visible in the events that take place — when the wounded
and sick are evacuated to safety, when people detained
are treated with dignity, when the fate of missing
people is finally clarified and when humanitarian
assistance is delivered across lines. Its impact can also
be seen through acts of restraint — when horrors are
not inflicted, when civilian areas are spared from direct
shelling or when medical workers are able to freely
operate without threat or targeting.
When respected, international humanitarian
law reduces the risk of physical and social damage
to communities over the long term. In this era of
protracted conflict, people are living through war and
violence for years or even decades, and some semblance
of day-to-day life must continue. When international
humanitarian law is respected, the entire collapse
of towns and cities can be avoided, meaning fewer
people are displaced and schools, hospitals and markets
remain open.
While the Geneva Conventions are universally
ratified, it is clear by the obvious terrible suffering in
today’s conflicts that they are not universally respected.
Too often, the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) sees the impact on people when international
humanitarian law is violated — indiscriminate killing,
torture, rape, cities destroyed and psychological
trauma inflicted.
But continued violations of the law do not mean
the law is inadequate, but rather that efforts to ensure
respect are inadequate. We can and must do more. The
Council can do more. Experience tells us that, when
it comes to violations of international humanitarian
law, it is not only knowledge of the law that counts but
the translation of that knowledge into behaviour. The
challenge is to ensure that the law is not only integrated
into formal doctrine and military procedures, but that
it also becomes an ethical standard of behaviour among
forces and individuals — that fighters facing a choice to
act in violation of the law know to say, “This is wrong;
this is not who I am”.
On this anniversary, we call on States to be
vigilant, to keep watch over their legal responsibilities
and continue to take practical steps for ambitious
interpretation and thorough implementation of the law.
States can do more by ratifying all treaties related to

S/PV. 8596

international humanitarian law; strengthening military
doctrine, the rules of engagement and practice; ensuring
that military training socializes the rules and principles
of international humanitarian law; developing national
legislation that is compatible with international
obligations; and training parliamentarians and legal
professionals on international humanitarian law. We
must ensure that the words of the Geneva Conventions
do not remain dormant in legal texts but instead are
known, applied and championed.
As a living document, the way the law is
understood must reflect present day realities. There is
no doubt that the modern battlefield is a complex arena.
Urbanized warfare, an increasing number of armed
groups and partnered warfare are posing new and
difficult dilemmas. Rapidly developing technologies
are creating new front lines in cyberspace, as well as
new ways to fight, such as autonomous weapon systems
and remote technologies.
With these new challenges ahead, we need to
constantly reflect on the meaning and development of
international humanitarian law to meet the challenges
of warfare today and in the future. The ICRC is working
with States on the application of basic international
humanitarian law concepts in these emerging fields,
and we ask that they engage in constructive and open
dialogue with us on these important issues. The world
cannot afford to miss the opportunity to preserve
humanity on these new frontiers.
The Geneva Conventions are for all of us. They
represent the line of our common humanity and shield
us from our own barbarity. We cannot forget that. This
anniversary serves to encourage us by showing us that
respect for the law is both possible and desired by all. It
is also a call to do more, to do better and live up to our
responsibilities during times of conflict to respect life
and dignity.
The President: I thank Mr. Maurer for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bellal.
Ms. Bellal: First of all, on behalf of the Geneva
Academy of International Humanitarian Law and
Human Rights, I would like to thank the Security
Council for having invited me to share with the Council
some thoughts on this important anniversary — from
the perspective of not only a scholar and practitioner of
international humanitarian law but of one who teaches
it to future generations.

19-251615/22

S/PV.8596

International humanitarian law

Younger generations use Twitter intensively.
Therefore, before coming here, I tweeted to ask them
what they thought was the key message I should convey
to the Council today. One message was mentioned
repeatedly: the importance of common article 1 to the
four Geneva Conventions and the obligations therein to
respect, and to ensure respect for, the Conventions in all
circumstances. To put it in more prosaic terms — again,
speaking to students — I often say that common article
1, which requires respect for international humanitarian
law, is an everlasting reminder of the central value
underpinning any legal system, that our common
humanity must be the measure of all things and that we
need to ensure respect for international humanitarian
law because, ultimately, we are all in this together.
I will therefore structure my remarks around
common article 1and develop three specific points to
illustrate the idea that we are all in this together: first, the
protracted nature of contemporary armed conflicts and
the value of mainstreaming international humanitarian
law; secondly, the prevalence of non-international
armed conflicts and the need to increase ownership of
humanitarian norms among armed non-State actors;
and, thirdly, recognizing the benefits of peer pressure.
Let me start with my first point. One unfortunate
feature of contemporary armed conflicts is their
protracted nature. As such, they have long-term
consequences on civilians, who are unable to live their
lives normally, often for decades. It also deeply impacts
the mental and physical health of all those facing
such traumatizing events, hampering their potential
to build a solid future in the aftermath of a conflict.
Under such circumstances, no institution can afford to
work in isolation. Other bodies of law, such as human
rights or refugee law, are obviously relevant, but so
too are the norms pertaining to human, economic and
social development.
Because international humanitarian law may remain
applicable for a long period in a given situation, there
is a need to mainstream international humanitarian
law in all pertinent legal systems and build bridges
between implementing institutions to create efficient,
coordinated and more integrated responses to
prolonged situations of violence. To a certain extent,
that is already being done. For example, on 15 April,
the World Health Organization (WHO) denounced
the violation of international humanitarian law in the
context of the fighting between the different parties
to the armed conflict in Libya, in which 147 people
6/22

13/08/2019

died and more than 600 were injured, among them
medical personnel, in a single day. That call to respect
international humanitarian law by an institution for
which international humanitarian law is not necessarily
the primary mandate is interesting, even more so when
we know that the words “international humanitarian
law” and “armed conflict” are not mentioned once in
the WHO Constitution. To me, that is a sign that the
global international community feels the need to be
more involved in the implementation of humanitarian
norms, and I believe that is a good thing.
There is no need to reinvent the wheel. Creating
new ways to implement international humanitarian
law using existing mechanisms is possible. It is well
known that the financial and economic rebuilding
of a country coming out of conflict can lead to more
sustainable peace and benefit the reconstruction of
society. The United Nations Peacebuilding Fund, for
example, precisely aims, and I quote from its website,
at providing
“for a more sustained engagement in support of
countries emerging from conflict and [supporting]
peacebuilding activities that directly contribute to
post-conflict stabilization”.
The Fund, however, is also available as an immediate
response facility, typically for countries that are within
five years of conflict or have a significant risk of
relapsing into conflict. In those situations, international
humanitarian law often remains applicable. Therefore,
out of the 33 countries that receive funding from the
Peacebuilding Fund, at least 11 are in a situation of
armed conflict to which international humanitarian
law is applicable. As a way to implement common
article 1, one could imagine some kind of conditionality
between the behaviour of the parties to the conflict and
the financial aid they may receive through the Fund, of
course without prejudicing the civilian population.
Let now continue with my second point. According
to the latest figures, the majority of armed conflicts
have, for several years now, been of a non-international
character — that is, they involve armed non-State
actors. The existence of such actors is often a
symptom of deeper societal issues. But it is not the
object and purpose of international humanitarian law
to evaluate the legality or legitimacy of the resort to
armed violence by any party to an armed conflict,
be it a State or a non-State actor. What matters is the
protection of civilians and those who have laid down
19-25161

13/08/2019

International humanitarian law

their arms. The Geneva Conventions, their Protocols
Additional and customary international humanitarian
law have evolved to address and regulate the behaviour
of armed non-State actors. It is today uncontroversial
that organized armed groups are bound by international
humanitarian law, including on norms pertaining to the
conduct of hostilities.
It has long been long recognized by humanitarian
actors and international organizations, including the
United Nations, that engaging armed non-State actors
on compliance with international norms is a critical
element in any effort to strengthen the protection of
civilians. According to a recent study, at least five
different United Nations organs and agencies have
drafted policies or guidelines on engagement with
armed non-State actors: the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the Department of Peace
Operations, the Secretary-General, UNICEF and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.
However, how armed non-State actors understand
international humanitarian norms, how they value them
and to what extent they have the necessary capacity
actually to implement those norms are issues that
have been neglected by the international community.
Academic and policy research has shown that, if one
strives for better implementation of international
humanitarian law, humanitarian norms must be
reflected in the local norms and values of armed
groups. In other words, it is important to increase their
ownership of international law.
The Council held a briefing in May on the impact
of counter-terrorism legislation on international
humanitarian law and humanitarian action (see
S/PV.8534). I will not repeat the content of that debate
here, except to say that labelling any kind of non-State
actors as “terrorist” groups obviously limits the
possibility of humanitarian engagement with those
actors. But, more generally, experts tend to agree that it
is also important to consider armed non-State actors not
only as perpetrators of violations of international law,
but also as actors who can at times play a positive role
in the implementation of international humanitarian
law, if only because they are often very close to
their constituencies.
I now turn to my third and final point, on recognizing
the benefits of peer pressure. Evaluation among peers is
a well-known process in the scientific community. Any

S/PV. 8596

article will always be peer-reviewed before publication
in a scientific journal. Even fiercer are the evaluations
by one’s own students on any possible aspect of one’s
teaching skills. It is by no means agreeable to read
about one’s limitations or one’s weaknesses in the
elaboration of an argument and capacity to convince.
But the beauty of peer reviews is that they always lead
to a better final product, one that is more pertinent and
meaningfully contributes to the general debate.
Since the 32nd International Conference of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement, States have tried
to find ways to strengthen respect for international
humanitarian law. While consensus has not yet been
reached, all States reaffirmed that international
humanitarian law remains the appropriate international
legal framework for regulating the conduct of parties
to armed conflict and reiterated their willingness to
work towards improving its implementation. At the
international level, mechanisms such as the Universal
Periodic Review have proved to be feasible for matters
as sensitive politically as respect for human rights
norms. Recognizing the benefits of peer pressure
remains an interesting way forward to better the overall
system of international humanitarian law protection.
Allow me to conclude my remarks by quoting a
novelist whose words were also of universal reach and
who just left us last week. In her acceptance speech
for the Nobel Prize in Literature, Toni Morrison
emphasized the importance of language
“partly as a system, partly as a living thing, over
which one has control, but mostly as an agency, as
an act with consequences”.
In 1949, the language of the Geneva Conventions
laid the foundation for an innovative and courageous
legal system. As a lawyer, I of course believe in the
power of the law. But so do humanitarians, who take
immense risks to alleviate the suffering of others. So
do students and scholars who discuss for hours the
significance of a particular treaty provision. And so
do States and the Security Council when debating and
adopting resolutions on the protection of health care
and the rights of children, women and persons with
disabilities in armed conflict. However, as States and
as members of the Security Council, in a State-centric
system like ours, members are the ones with control.
Members are the ones to be the agents of change.
They have the immense privilege of being able to act
with consequences for ensuring better respect for the

19-251617/22

S/PV.8596

International humanitarian law

Geneva Conventions and guaranteeing their respect
for the sake of our common humanity. We scholars,
students, humanitarians and, of course, victims count
on the Council because we are all in this together.
The President: I thank Ms. Bellal for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland.
First, let me thank Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares,
Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and United
Nations Legal Counsel, Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
and Ms. Annyssa Bellal of the Geneva Academy of
International Humanitarian Law and Human Rights for
their informative briefings.
Yesterday we celebrated the seventieth anniversary
of the Geneva Conventions. As they are ratified
and acceded to by almost every State of the world,
the principles and legal norms enshrined in the
Conventions are also recognized as customary
international humanitarian law and are universally
applicable. That is a rare quality for any multilateral
treaty. The four Conventions have been supplemented
by three Protocols Additional. Together they constitute
a significant body of law that has played a vital role in
limiting the brutality of armed conflicts.
From the first few days of Poland’s membership of
the Security Council, we have pursued the priority of
strengthening international law. It has always been an
issue of particular importance for Poland because of
our difficult history, which was painfully affected by
consequences of the failure of other States to comply
with international agreements and by reason of our sense
of responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. If we want to protect the victims
of wars, we must ensure respect for the principles and
rules of humanitarian law, which have been codified in
the Geneva Conventions since 1949. Consequently, we
have been confronted with difficult questions. How is
it possible that so many people suffer from the brutality
of warfare? What is even worse, how is it possible if
its conduct is regulated by the most widely accepted
and universally applicable treaties in international
relations? An eagerness to find the answers led us to
the following observations.
First, the greatest challenge to protecting human
life in modern conflict is the observance of and respect
for the existing rules by armed forces and non-State
8/22

13/08/2019

armed groups. Violations of humanitarian law occur
in a number of circumstances — the brutal conduct
of warfare, the willingness to intimidate opponents
and the perpetrators’ feeling of impunity. If existing
rules were followed, much of the human suffering in
contemporary armed conflicts would not occur.
Secondly, we face new developments in present
armed conflict that demand appropriate practices and
policies consistent with international humanitarian
law. Non-State actors play a major role in modern
armed conflicts. The actual fighting is conducted
in densely populated urban areas, with frequently
appalling consequences for civilians. Actors often still
try to find soft targets, first and foremost civilians.
Artificial intelligence and autonomous weapons
systems, such as military robots and cyberweapons,
reduce the role and control of human factors during
wartime. Many existing weapon systems are likely to
cause indiscriminate harm to civilians. Two principles
of international humanitarian law in particular deserve
our attention: first, the obligation to protect civilians,
prisoners of war, the wounded and shipwrecked, and,
secondly, limitations to the rights of parties to an armed
conflict on how they conduct operations and on their
choice of weapons.
This new reality of modern conflict, the increasing
role of non-State actors and the legal loopholes of
international humanitarian law hinder the application
of international humanitarian law in many ways. The
complexity of new challenges impedes the process of
classifying conflict situations and makes it difficult
to determine the exact rules that may be applied. For
example, only a small part of international humanitarian
law may be applied to non-State actors. It also raises
the question of whether the emergence of non-State
actors and new means of combat require a revision of
international humanitarian law, or whether the existing
rules are sufficiently adaptable to frame those new
challenges. Poland takes the view that international
humanitarian law needs to be protected by way of its
implementation. However, its further development and
adjustment to the new challenges need to be pursued.
Finally, there is a problem of insufficient, or even
lack of, accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law. It is a systemic weakness that is not
new. A great Polish lawyer and creator of the legal term
“genocide”, who made significant input to international
humanitarian law, Raphael Lemkin, put it very bluntly:
why is the killing of 1 million a lesser crime than
19-25161

13/08/2019

International humanitarian law

the killing of an individual? It is the international
community’s role to ensure that impunity be removed
and remedies for the victims of violations be provided.
Impunity can be eradicated only by prosecuting
alleged perpetrators. This is a responsibility that lies
first and foremost with States, but it is helped by mutual
legal assistance through judicial cooperation and
collaboration with the International Criminal Court. It
should be our goal to create the reality where no State
and no perpetrator can be above the law and no person
is outside the protection of the law in situations of
armed conflict.
In today’s discussion we will address many
questions with regard to the applicability and future
of international humanitarian law. I believe that the
present and future members of the Security Council
will continue the effort to find solutions to challenges
to international humanitarian law.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Federal Minister for Foreign affairs
of Germany.
Mr. Maas (Germany): I thank the Polish presidency
for convening this meeting today. I remember that,
only two weeks ago, Mr. President, we commemorated
together the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Warsaw
uprising. In the final months of the Second World War,
200,000 innocent men and women — most of them
civilians — were murdered by German soldiers, and
the city of Warsaw was left in ruins. It was crimes like
those that led the international community to proclaim
“never again”. The Geneva Conventions were adopted
and to this day they remain one of humankind’s
proudest achievements. The alternative — war without
limits — is simply not acceptable.
The Geneva Conventions are the cornerstone of
international humanitarian law. Their spirit is upheld by
the brave men and women in humanitarian operations
worldwide who dedicate their lives to saving the lives
of others. And while they are doing their job, we have
to ask ourselves, “Are we really doing our job?” Of
course, humanitarian issues have become regular items
on the agenda of the Security Council. The Council
is increasingly frequently being briefed by experts
whose credibility is unassailable, and that is the case
for our briefers today. They make sure that attacks on
humanitarian actors and violations of humanitarian law

S/PV. 8596

are clearly addressed. But can we talk about progress
when humanitarian crises are multiplying, especially in
the context of armed conflict? What does it say about
the Security Council when we meet time and time again
and people are still dying?
Respect for humanitarian law is declining, and
the complexity of modern warfare, with extremist
groups and conflicts without borders, adds new deadly
challenges. Day after day, civilians, humanitarian
workers and medical personnel are attacked. Hospitals
and schools are targeted. Just recently, a hospital
supported by the German Government and its
humanitarian partners in the Syrian town Kafr Nabl
was attacked twice — just one example of many. We
are failing the most vulnerable. We are not living up to
our legal and ethical obligations.
Mr. Peter Maurer once said that peace remains the
ultimate goal of neutral and impartial humanitarian
work, and that goal is highly political. I agree. It is a
threat to peace and security when thousands of people
die, when tens of thousands fear for their lives. And
when the most basic principles of humanity are at risk,
the Security Council must take action. It is our duty to
do so. We might not agree on specific political solutions
for many of the world’s conflicts. That is the sad reality,
but we must bridge our differences when our only task
is to protect human lives. Let us live up to the principles
we all agreed upon 70 years ago. Let us bring those
who attack humanitarian workers and violate the
Geneva Conventions to justice. This is why Germany
supports organizations that document war crimes in
Syria. The perpetrators must know that they will not
go unpunished. And let us use our influence to ensure
that all parties to conflict fully respect humanitarian
law and principles.
The goal of humanitarian diplomacy must be to
spread knowledge on international humanitarian law
just as the German Armed Forces already do whenever
they carry out training missions abroad, such as in
Mali. Let us back those who negotiate every day for
humanitarian access. Their success saves human
lives. Institutions such as the Geneva-based Centre of
Competence on Humanitarian Negotiation deserve our
full support.
Those are concrete steps we can take today, not
tomorrow. They are part of the humanitarian call for
action that Germany and France initiated during our
joint presidency of the Security Council in March and

19-251619/22

S/PV.8596

International humanitarian law

April. Our meeting today is an important step forward.
We invite all Member States, starting with members of
the Security Council, to join us.
We must not forget the lessons that humankind
learned 70 years ago. For those who saw the horrors
of the Second World War, the Geneva Conventions
became a sign of hope, and they would remain so today
if we finally implemented them. Any progress we make
will save the lives of many, and it is our duty to try.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to welcome and thank
you, Sir, for presiding over a meeting of the Security
Council once again. I would like to welcome the
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany,
Mr. Maas, and thank him for attending this meeting. I
thank Mr. Serpa Soares, Under-Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel, and
Mr. Maurer, President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC), for their briefings. We listened
attentively to Ms. Bellal’s briefing.
Seventy years ago, in the aftermath of two world
wars and after painful reflection, the international
community came together, revised and made
improvements to the Geneva Conventions and further
developed and supplemented them by adopting the
Protocols Additional. The principles of humanity,
differentiation, military necessity, proportionality
and prohibition of reprisals were established, with
protection at the centre. These shining principles of
humanity received universal support from all countries
in the world in a strong and important manifestation
of multilateralism. Two decades ago, the protection of
civilians in armed conflict was added to the agenda of
the Security Council, paving the way for the further
development and consolidation of the principles of
international humanitarian law.
At present, the international security situation
remains grave and fraught with new dynamics.
Traditional and non-traditional security threats are
intertwined. Armed conflicts in some regions have
become protracted or have even escalated, causing
serious concern to the international community.
Promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes through
dialogue, upholding international humanitarian law
and carrying forward the international humanitarian
spirit are of great significance. China would like to
emphasize the following points.
10/22

13/08/2019

First, the Governments concerned and the parties
to a conflict must earnestly fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian law. Governments in
all circumstances bear the primary responsibility for
complying with international humanitarian law, and
this role is irreplaceable. The conduct of the parties
to a conflict in disputed areas should be governed
by international humanitarian law. In situations
where conflicts are inevitable, the principles of
international humanitarian law should be upheld to
prevent the indiscriminate use of force or acts that
disregard humanitarian consequences. Any violation of
international humanitarian law should be investigated
and punished according to the law.
Secondly, the international community should
play a constructive role in helping the relevant parties
to strengthen capacity-building in implementing
their obligations under international humanitarian
law. China appreciates the efforts of the ICRC in
adhering to the principles of neutrality, impartiality
and independence and its long-standing contribution to
the wide dissemination and effective implementation
of the Geneva Conventions and their Protocols
Additional. Humanitarian agencies, on the basis of full
respect for the sovereignty of the countries concerned,
should promote humanity, compassion and dedication
and engage in training, legal consultancy, technical
support and experience-sharing to ensure the effective
implementation of the principles of international
humanitarian law.
Thirdly, the implementation of international
humanitarian law should be strengthened with a focus on
enhancing the effectiveness of the existing mechanisms
of international humanitarian law. At present, the
continuous
development
of
cybertechnologies,
artificial intelligence and high-tech weapons and
the frequent occurrence of non-international armed
conflicts and terrorist attacks pose challenges to
the implementation of international humanitarian
law. The international community should proceed
from the practical needs of applying and complying
with international humanitarian law and build on the
consensus among countries to reach a broad agreement
on addressing current challenges and strengthening the
implementation of international humanitarian law.
Fourthly, the Security Council should attach
great importance to tackling the underlying causes
of conflicts by addressing both the symptoms and
root causes. Conflict prevention, reduction and
19-25161

13/08/2019

International humanitarian law

resolution and the peaceful settlement of disputes are
the fundamental approaches to upholding the spirit of
international humanitarian law, focusing on protection.
At the heart of the collective security mechanism, the
Security Council should earnestly fulfil its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security and encourage parties to a dispute to fulfil
their obligations to implement Council resolutions and
resolve conflicts through dialogue, consultation and
political negotiations.
The international community should establish a
common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security concept, build partnerships by way of
choosing dialogue over confrontation and partnerships
over alliances and create a world of lasting peace and
universal security. We should build a community of
a shared future for humankind, advocate for a global
governance concept of extensive consultations, joint
contributions and shared benefits and strive to create a
peaceful and stable international environment.
China was among the first countries to accede to
the Geneva Conventions and their Protocols Additional.
Over the years, the Chinese Government has been
taking proactive and useful measures to implement,
study and disseminate international humanitarian law,
including strengthening relevant domestic legislation,
conducting training and advising in the army and
carrying out international humanitarian law education
and awareness-raising activities throughout society.
The National Committee on International Humanitarian
Law of the People’s Republic of China was established in
2007 to promote the dissemination and implementation
of international humanitarian law in China. China
stands ready to continue to work with all parties to
make greater contributions to the development and
implementation of international humanitarian law.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important event on
an important anniversary and for being with us today. I
also thank His Excellency the German Federal Minister
for Foreign Affairs for being here. It was very good to
hear from our briefers the Under-Secretary-General,
Ms. Bellal and the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), Mr. Mauer. The
ICRC is one of the oldest international organizations.
They gave us a very good context for why we are meeting
today and why international humanitarian law remains
so important. It provides a robust legal framework for
the protection of all civilians and combatants, and it is

S/PV. 8596

a vital tool in ensuring that humanity remains, even in
the worst of conflict situations.
For the United Kingdom, support for international
criminal justice and international humanitarian law is
a fundamental element of our foreign policy. We hold
an annual meeting with the British Red Cross to review
compliance. The United Kingdom has a strong history
of upholding and promoting international humanitarian
law. We consistently call on State and non-State actors
engaged in armed conflict to respect international
humanitarian law and to act in accordance with their
obligations under it. The United Kingdom believes
that justice and accountability for the most serious
international crimes is not only right in itself, but it is
also crucial to building lasting peace and security.
In March, we published our first voluntary report
on the implementation of international humanitarian
law at the domestic level. We invite other States to join
us and publish the steps that they are taking to improve
compliance. My Government also believes that the
International Criminal Court has an important role
in pursuing accountability when national authorities
are either unable or unwilling to do so. We contribute
to the International Criminal Court and international
and hybrid tribunals, and we provide training and
other support to Member States that want to enhance
their own justice systems. We believe that our support
helps strengthen the rules-based international system,
and it helps tackle impunity for serious violations of
international humanitarian law.
The adoption this year of resolutions 2462
(2019) and 2474 (2019) and their increased focus on
the protection of impartial humanitarian activity in
the counter-terrorism context helps to address an
increasingly complex nexus around modern warfare.
The thirty-third quadrennial International Conference
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent on international
humanitarian law will take place in December. We look
forward to participating and will host a session as part
of the International Conference on the voluntary report
that I mentioned earlier to share our experience and
hopefully come up with a corpus of best practices.
We will also host an international conference in
November on preventing sexual violence in conflict
on the theme “Time for justice: putting survivors
first”. The event will mark five years since the Global
Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict. Our
Special Representative on Preventing Sexual Violence

19-2516111/22

S/PV.8596

International humanitarian law

in Conflict, Lord Ahmad, will lead the event, where
we hope to pursue deliverables against three key
objectives: securing justice and accountability, tackling
stigma and preventing sexual violence in conflict.
As we all note, and as you enumerated, Mr. President,
there are ongoing violations of international
humanitarian law in multiple conflict zones. We need to
work together using all the tools available as members
of the Security Council to achieve that, as the Chinese
representative said a moment ago. Working with States
to implement training on international humanitarian
law, calling for greater accountability and information
when attacks happen and sharing expertise between
Governments are some of the things that we can do.
I would like to use this debate to shine a spotlight
on a few specific situations where the international
humanitarian law situation is dire.
In Ukraine, citizens in Crimea have been denied
access to basic services because they would not change
their citizenship, contrary to international humanitarian
law. In South Sudan, it is clear that justice, truth and
reconciliation are fundamental to rebuilding that
society, and all parties must ensure that transitional
justice, under chapter V of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, is implemented in full. In Mali and the
Sahel, the deteriorating security situation has brought
reports of violent international humanitarian law
violations and abuses by armed militias, armed terrorist
groups and regional security forces.
But it is in Syria that the adherence by the parties
to the conflict to international humanitarian law has
reached a nadir. The Syrian people have faced forced
starvation. They have been subjected to arbitrary
detention, with no access by the ICRC. They have been
driven from their homes in Aleppo and elsewhere.
They have had weapons of mass destruction used
against them in Aleppo and eastern Ghouta, as verified
by independent bodies. Now, as those displaced from
Aleppo join the terrified residents of Idlib, they find
their schools and hospitals being bombed. As we have
said in the Council several times, that is in defiance of
international humanitarian law and it defies humanity.
It undermines any claim by the Syrian authorities to
want to rebuild their country.
We still have not had answers as to how a return to
compliance with international humanitarian law will be
achieved. We have not had answers as to how Russian
12/22

13/08/2019

and Syrian forces are implementing deconfliction and
protecting hospitals. We still have not had answers as
to why the Syrian authorities are bombing hospitals, as
admitted in their letter to the Security Council, without
following the Geneva Conventions and giving the due
warnings that the Conventions demand.
The Secretary-General has established a Board of
Inquiry to examine those questions, and that is welcome.
I take this opportunity to recall that commanders on
the ground have an individual personal responsibility
to uphold international humanitarian law. They will
be held individually and personally accountable for
violations that might amount to crimes against humanity
or war crimes. Justice might not come tomorrow, but it
will come.
With regard to the contribution of the United
Kingdom, it has given more than £2.8 billion, or more
than $3 billion, in response to the Syria crisis, which is
our largest-ever response to a single humanitarian crisis.
But with more than 400,000 people who have died,
more than half the population displaced, 6.2 million
people fleeing their homes, more than 5.6 million
people taking refuge in neighbouring countries and
11.7 million people in dire need of humanitarian
assistance, it is clear that the end to the conflict cannot
come too soon.
As President Maurer reminded us, there are
increasingly complex aspects to warfare at the moment,
especially concerning urban conflict. We have more
non-State actors involved in conflict than before,
conflicts are lasting longer and they lead to complex
and protracted crises. Of the 20 largest humanitarian aid
countries, 17 have been receiving international support
for eight consecutive years or more. The Council must
continue to draw attention to those points. In several,
non-international armed conflicts, State agencies are
involved overtly or covertly. Those are very complex
areas, and they require our further attention and study.
Only collectively can we address the increasingly
difficult and intertwined nature of modern conflict.
Finally, it is clear that we need more action. As
President Maurer said, the laws of conflict were
designed to be inherent and pragmatic. They were
designed not to be an aspiration difficult to attain, but
to be followed so that they could reduce suffering. We
need to continue to spotlight violations by any and
all actors. Only by doing so can we have a stake in
upholding and strengthening our common humanity.
19-25161

13/08/2019

International humanitarian law

Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I deliver this statement
on behalf of the African members of the Security
Council — Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea and
South Africa. We would like to thank the briefers
this morning for their comprehensive briefings and
for particularly re-emphasizing the importance of
respecting international humanitarian law. We would
also like to welcome the Federal Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Germany, Mr. Heiko Maas.
Allow us to also thank Poland for organizing this
briefing on international humanitarian law on the
seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions. The
four Geneva Conventions of 1949 form the cornerstone
of international humanitarian law. They have been
complemented by the two Protocols Additional of 1977
and Protocol III Additional of 2005. Their adoption in the
aftermath of the Second World War firmly established
that those who are not, or no longer, taking direct part
in hostilities — the sick and prisoners of war, including
civilians living under occupation — must be protected
and their dignity upheld without adverse distinction.
We wish underscore that all parties involved in
armed conflict are obligated to respect international
humanitarian law in all circumstances. We are
disturbed by reports of war crimes in some parts of the
world and the tremendous harm inflicted on civilian
populations and vulnerable persons, which illustrate
blatant violations of international humanitarian law.
Thousands of people continue to bear the brunt of
armed conflict, particularly women and children, and
have been forced to leave their homes, sometimes
taking extreme and dangerous routes to seek refuge
in safer countries far away. In addition, victims and
their communities must be given access to resources in
order to limit the negative effects that such crimes have
on societies.
In some armed conflicts, parties to conflict have
often resorted to the recruitment of children and have
used sexual exploitation and abuse as a method of
war. Ensuring respect for international humanitarian
law has been extremely challenging in such conflicts,
and there is a clear serious compliance deficit. The
international community has the obligation to address
the situation urgently.
We remain grateful to the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) and Mr. Peter Maurer for their
continued commitment to preserve human lives, dignity
and well-being. We commend the ICRC’s outstanding

S/PV. 8596

work in its quest to reach people who urgently seek
humanitarian assistance and relief. The ICRC continues
to contribute to the development and implementation
of international mechanisms and frameworks for
providing effective humanitarian assistance to people
who are negatively affected by war and armed conflict,
particularly women and children.
Conflicts have evolved in recent years. The new
emerging nature of conflicts and the resurgence in
violations of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, which compels people
to seek refuge elsewhere, is a matter of concern. We
have witnessed an upsurge in violent extremism and
terror attacks in which thousands of innocent civilians
are targeted by armed terrorist groups.
In this new era of extremism, the respect that has
existed historically for aid workers, medical personnel,
schools, hospitals and other essential civilian facilities
is no longer abided. Our historical heritage and cultural
property continue to be indiscriminately decimated.
At the same time, communities that have traditionally
lived in peace are now turning against one another
violently as they compete for access to resources.
Some armed conflicts are playing out in Africa and
delaying the achievement of peace and security as key
prerequisites for Africa’s prosperity. This challenge
is becoming more alarming with the changing face of
contemporary armed conflicts. Modern technology has
brought about many positive developments but, on the
grim side, it is increasingly characterized by the use of
an array of new and lethal methods of warfare, including
remote-controlled weapons and automated systems that
contribute decisively to the dehumanization of war.
Their use and the destruction that they can cause have
serious legal, ethical, moral and practical implications
for international humanitarian law.
We underscore the need to respect international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
by all parties to armed conflict. Access to people in
distress in conflict areas by humanitarian workers
remains a serious challenge and cause for concern. As
members of the Security Council, we need to ensure
unfettered access to and the prioritization of security
for humanitarian workers in key areas. Otherwise, such
insecurity will persistently hinder efforts to provide
humanitarian assistance to people in need of relief.
The root causes of war crimes, including abject
poverty, the violation of women’s rights and political

19-2516113/22

S/PV.8596

International humanitarian law

13/08/2019

corruption, must be addressed. The best way to ensure
respect for international humanitarian law and to end
the suffering of civilians and vulnerable persons is
to prevent armed conflict. Conflict prevention and
inclusive dialogue remain critical mechanisms that
have proven to be effective in averting possible deadly
conflicts when combined with strong political will and
support from regional and international partners.

Organization, the United Nations, was created following
that war as a result of the terrible loss of human life and
to prevent the outbreak of another equally devastating
war. But the violence and suffering that we have seen in
various conflict-affected areas during the past decades
are nearly equal to the violence and suffering that the
world witnessed during the Second World War, 74
years ago.

The Council has the responsibility to redouble its
efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts in its quest to
maintain international peace and stability.

Consolidating the rule of law, in particular
international humanitarian law, has become more
important than ever. The four Geneva Conventions and
their Additional Protocols form a vitally important legal
framework for protecting people during war and armed
conflict. However, it is important to note that although
those Conventions were globally ratified, they do not
enjoy the necessary respect and compliance. The world
can see that the texts of those conventions have been
largely ignored and neglected recently; an example
is what is happening in the occupied Palestinian
territories, in Syria, and in Myanmar concerning the
Rohingya minority.

We cannot overemphasize the fact that
accountability is critical to ensuring respect for
international humanitarian law. Likewise, impunity
must be eliminated. The responsibility to end impunity
by prosecuting alleged perpetrators for crimes against
humanity and war crimes lies first with States,
including through improved ways of carrying out
mutual legal assistance.
In conclusion, the Geneva Conventions and the
relevant Protocols are strongly supported. Our aim
should be for respect for international humanitarian
law to be strengthened and enhanced. We believe that
the relevance of the Geneva Conventions remains
intact in their seventieth year of existence and that
their implementation should be encouraged in order to
ensure the continued protection of civilians.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome you, Mr. President, as you preside over this
meeting, and we thank you for having convened it.
We welcome also the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany, who is here with us today. In addition, we
would like to thank Mr. De Serpa Soares, Mr. Maurer
and Ms. Bellal for their thorough and valuable briefings.

The question, therefore, is, how do we put an end
to such violations and alleviate the terrible and tragic
suffering of human beings in conflict zones? The
response thereto is very much the point of today’s
debate, that is, through consolidating the rule of law
and respecting humanitarian principles during armed
conflict. However, the most important question is, how
do we achieve that?

With the passage of time and as we move from
one generation to another, it is important to recall
the reasons behind the adoption of the Geneva
Conventions and to consider the obstacles that hinder
the implementation of their objectives. We therefore
welcome the convening of meetings and events aimed at
focusing on the importance of this legal system, which
constitutes a basic guarantee for protecting human
rights during conflict.

First, and above all, the United Nations in general
and the Security Council in particular play a crucial and
pivotal role in upholding international humanitarian
law and consolidating the rule of law by ensuring the
full implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, notably those concerning the protection
of civilians, and the compliance of parties to the
conflict and international organizations on the ground
with international humanitarian law. United Nations
peacekeepers are also responsible for protecting
civilians by taking the necessary measures, within
their mandates, to ensure the security of displaced
persons’ camps, the medical evacuation of the injured
and the strengthening of the capacities of the national
police forces.

We are commemorating the seventieth anniversary
of the 1949 Geneva Conventions this year, which were
signed following the most devastating war the world
has ever seen — the Second World War. This very

Secondly, there must be accountability for war
crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity. All
violations of human rights must be condemned by
all parties to a conflict. It is also necessary to ensure

14/22

19-25161

13/08/2019

International humanitarian law

that those responsible for attacks against civilians
are held accountable. Sanctions, if used effectively
and transparently, can also play an important role
when it comes to accountability for those who violate
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
Thirdly, and lastly, we as Member States have
a responsibility to ensure that international law is
respected more comprehensively through the adoption
of precise and practical measures. We cannot deny
that our priorities and national policies may differ, and
that it is frequently difficult to unite around a position
every time. However, this should not undermine our
obligations or responsibilities under international
law, notably concerning the humanitarian aspect and
humanitarian assistance, as well as providing access,
without obstacles and conditions, to such humanitarian
aid for those who need it. In that regard, we call
once again on States not to use the right of veto and
not to hinder international humanitarian convoys
for those who are in need of them. Efforts could
also be redoubled bilaterally through the sharing of
experience and best practices between countries and
by coordinating our efforts in order to comply with
international humanitarian law, as well as by urging
parties to a conflict to respect their obligations under
international law.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank the presidency
for having convened today’s meeting today and the
briefers for their exhaustive comments. In particular,
I would like to thank Mr. Peter Maurer and convey to
him our country’s deepest gratitude for his work and
that of the International Committee of the Red Cross as
guarantors of the Conventions.

S/PV. 8596

reflect on the principal challenges that we collectively
face in the area of the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Non-compliance with the norms of international
humanitarian law continues to have unacceptable
consequences for civilian populations caught up in
conflict. In this context, we would stress the particular
vulnerability of women, children, older persons and
persons with disabilities. Failure to focus on their
specific needs can lead to ongoing feelings of resentment
and exclusion, which can lead to situations of violence.
Be it intentionally or by omission, many States are
unable to comply with international humanitarian
law when facing conflict situations. Moreover, very
frequently it is those States that undertake offensive
actions by which they shirk their responsibility to
protect and guarantee the human rights of all living
within their jurisdiction.
The growing proliferation and complexity of
non-State actors that do not respect any principle other
than that of using defenceless populations to realize
their heinous aspiration is perhaps one of the most
complex challenges that we face. This requires urgent
action on the part of the States affected and by regional
and international organizations aimed at increasing
the capacity for prevention and conflict resolution by
peaceful means. There is a general lack of political will,
both to prevent abuses of human rights and violations
of international humanitarian law and to ensure that
those who commit such atrocities pay the price for
their actions.

This meeting provides us with a unique opportunity
to commemorate the adoption of one of the most
important instruments in safeguarding human security
and dignity in contexts of armed conflict and to address
the role of the Security Council in this area. We wish
also to acknowledge the presence among us of the
Minister from Poland as well as the Minister from
Germany, who have placed this issue at the heart of
their agendas.

I would like to make some recommendations from
our own perspective. Increasing our knowledge of
international humanitarian law and training at all levels
of the State armed forces in international humanitarian
law and human rights is critical, particularly those of
female military personnel and members of civil society,
so as to transform them into agents of change and
champions of the principles enshrined in the Geneva
Conventions. It is essential to educate actors about the
rules contained in these documents, using accessible
and comprehensive language adapted to national
cultural realities and taking into account the minority
languages of affected populations.

Seventy years after their universal adoption,
the norms and principles contained in the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols remain
relevant today. In the light of these conventions, we must

As the guarantor for ensuring the implementation of
the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping missions,
the Council must undertake actions that reflect the
realities on the ground, while respecting the social,

19-2516115/22

S/PV.8596

International humanitarian law

economic and geopolitical characteristics that affect
the configuration and duration of conflicts. We reiterate
that our responsibility in that regard is not limited to
protecting civilians, but includes the renewal of hope
and confidence in ourselves, our countries, legal and
political processes and the international community.
Let us unite as humankind through a renewed
commitment that translates into greater respect for
human dignity, more justice and less impunity. It
is our hope that, in 2089, when future generations
commemorate the 140th anniversary of the signing of
the Geneva Conventions, we will live in a world free of
human suffering.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Seventy
years ago, the adoption of the Geneva Conventions was
a milestone in the evolution of our universal conscience
following the horrors of the Second World War. I
therefore welcome your commitment to this topic,
Mr. President, and thank Poland for having taken the
initiative of convening this commemorative meeting
some months after the 1 April meeting (see S/PV.8499),
on international humanitarian law during the joint
French and German presidency of the Security Council,
led by Mr. Heiko Maas, German Federal Minister for
Foreign Affairs, whose presence I welcome today, and
Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister of Europe and Foreign
Affairs. For us, respect for international humanitarian
law is a high diplomatic priority.
I would also like to thank the three briefers and
pay special tribute to the International Committee
of the Red Cross, which, as guarantor of the Geneva
Conventions, plays an essential role in the fight for
the dissemination and implementation of international
humanitarian law.
Today, the Conventions and their Protocols
Additional, for which we call for universal ratification,
are too often violated, whether in Syria, Libya, Yemen,
Palestine, Afghanistan, the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo or South Sudan.
Certain parties to conflict even go so far as to knowingly
incorporate violations of those rules into their military
strategy in order to deprive people of all assistance
and obtain their surrender. Others violate international
humanitarian law in the name of fighting terrorism.
That is unacceptable and it is up to the Council to
reaffirm that very clearly and regularly.
Today, our efforts must focus on three priorities.
16/22

13/08/2019

The first is to ensure access of humanitarian aid
to civilian populations. If humanitarian and medical
personnel are to have access to civilians, they must
be protected from all violence and threats and must
not be targeted. No one should target an ambulance.
The Security Council marked a critical point in
addressing this challenge when it adopted resolution
2286 (2016). In 2017, in order to move from words to
action, France initiated a political statement to promote
the implementation of that resolution, which is now
endorsed by 44 States.
The second priority is to prevent the violation of
international humanitarian law. That is what we do when
we place the protection of civilians, particularly women
and children, at the heart of peacekeeping mandates,
as is the case for the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic. As Miguel
de Serpa Soares reminded us, those operations, like
non-United Nations forces supported by the Council,
should carry out their operations in strict compliance
with international humanitarian law. That is what the
human rights compliance framework does for the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
The prevention of violations of international
humanitarian law depends above all on the behaviour
of each State, and the members of the Security Council
must be exemplary in that regard. In France’s military
action, international humanitarian law is integrated
from the planning stage and is an integral part of our
security and defence cooperation, particularly in the
training provided to our partners and the strategy
for modernizing our armed forces. As Ms. Florence
Parly, Minister of the Armed Forces, pointed out on
5 April, in her speech on intelligence and defence, the
rise of artificial intelligence must not move any of the
red lines drawn by international humanitarian law in
terms of either discrimination between combatants
and non-combatants, respect for the principle of
proportionality or the minimization of damage. On
the contrary, artificial intelligence should enable us to
continue to improve our compliance with these rules in
future conflicts.
The third priority is the fight against impunity, the
importance of which you have just noted, Mr. President.
We must strengthen national capacities to conduct
19-25161

13/08/2019

International humanitarian law

impartial and independent investigations and, where
national mechanisms are insufficient or inappropriate,
support the use of international mechanisms. In that
regard, France reiterates its call for the universalization
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
There is also a need to improve data collection.
The establishment of the World Health Organization
database, which lists attacks on health personnel and
infrastructure, is a significant step forward in that
regard. We also welcome the establishment by the
Secretary-General of an office of investigation into
attacks on schools and hospitals in north-west Syria,
using the United Nations de-confliction mechanism.
Finally, sanctions are a deterrence tool that the
Council must use more frequently, particularly against
those responsible for sexual violence and attacks on
humanitarian personnel and facilities.
The task ahead is significant and we must collectively
mobilize more than ever around those priorities. That
is why, as Minister Heiko Maas has just noted, France
and Germany have launched a humanitarian appeal for
action, which we will introduce in September during
high-level week at the General Assembly. The appeal
will identify concrete actions that States can take to
strengthen respect for international humanitarian law.
We call on all of our partners to endorse it.

S/PV. 8596

adapted to the major changes in warfare. It is therefore
a matter not of rewriting the Geneva Conventions, but
of redoubling our efforts to ensure that they are better
respected and implemented.
This meeting of the Council provides me with
an opportunity to point out four simple and specific
ways that Belgium believes to be particularly
appropriate for strengthening respect for international
humanitarian law.
First, we must promote the dissemination of the
rules of international humanitarian law among all actors
concerned, as President Maurer also recalled. First of
all, the core principles of international humanitarian
law must be included in school curricula for the earliest
possible ages onwards to anchor a culture of humanity in
society. Next, armed forces must be adequately trained,
for example, by integrating international humanitarian
law into the teaching of military personnel. Finally,
public powers must leverage international humanitarian
law even in times of peace. Here, we stress the key role
played by national humanitarian law commissions not
only in advising and assisting in the dissemination and
implementation of international humanitarian law, but
also in holding to account those who violate the rules.

The 1949 Geneva Conventions, whose seventieth
anniversary we celebrated yesterday, have been
universally ratified. Together with their Protocols
Additional, they constitute the key elements of the
international legal framework for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. As such, international
humanitarian law plays a central role in the
maintenance of international peace and security. It
helps to limit atrocities in the event of armed conflict
and thereby also facilitates post-conflict peace and
reconciliation processes.

Secondly, States, be they parties or non-parties to
an armed conflict, and the international community
as a whole must take every possible measure in order
to implement their obligation to respect and ensure
respect for international humanitarian law. It is up to
them to set an example by using their influence when
they participate in a military coalition or when they
support an armed non-State group in the context of an
armed conflict. As the guarantor of international peace
and security, the Security Council must also remind
States Members of the United Nations and parties to
a conflict of their obligations. Belgium will therefore
continue, among other things, to work in favour of
safe, sustained and unhindered humanitarian access in
Syria, in our capacity as co-penholder for that dossier,
and specifically for the protection of children in the
context of our work as Chair of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

Unfortunately, we all know that the rules of
international humanitarian law rules are being
increasingly violated. However, we must not draw
the wrong conclusions from that. International
humanitarian law remains more relevant today than
ever before. Its principles remain simple, practical and

Thirdly, we must ensure that no measures taken in the
fight against terrorism hinder the work of humanitarian
organizations in their neutral and impartial activities.
Respect for international humanitarian law remains
essential everywhere and in all circumstances, and
the policies we may adopt towards terrorist groups do

Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this meeting, as well as the three briefers for their
extremely relevant presentations.

19-2516117/22

S/PV.8596

International humanitarian law

not give us the right to depart from these rules. This
is why Belgium, together with the European Union,
will organize, next September on the sidelines of the
ministerial week of the General Assembly, a high-level
event on the impact of counter-terrorism measures on
the humanitarian sphere.
Fourthly and finally, States must not limit their
actions to prevention. It is imperative that we fight
impunity for the most serious crimes in order to
deter future atrocities. While this is primarily the
responsibility of each State, there is also a role for the
Security Council to strengthen its support for national
judicial procedures, hybrid mechanisms and the
International Criminal Court, especially in situations
that the Council has referred to it.
Seventy years ago, the adoption of the Geneva
Conventions was a historic moment reflecting our
shared humanity and our common values. The
anniversary we celebrate today should spur us to
renew our commitment to the respect of international
humanitarian law by taking specific measures aimed at
reducing as far as possible the too-numerous victims of
armed conflict.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, and welcome you back to the Council.
It is excellent to have you with us today. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Serpa Soares, Peter Maurer
and Professor Bellal for their briefings today. The
United States would like to recognize and commend
the vital role of the International Committee of the Red
Cross in promoting the protection of civilians.
Seven decades ago, with the horrors of the Second
World War still fresh, representatives from around the
world gathered in Geneva to try and change the way
wars were waged. Building on an existing framework
of law and war treaties, the resulting Geneva
Conventions enshrined formal legal rules to govern
the conduct of war. The Conventions have played a
significant role in shaping parties’ behaviour on the
battlefield and improving protections for combatants
and civilians alike.
Today’s briefing is an important opportunity to
reflect on the successes of the Geneva Conventions,
and to deepen and strengthen international compliance
with and enforcement of those obligations. Much has
changed in the past 70 years. New technologies have
emerged that allow for greater precision in many cases,
but also more deadly force. The rise of terrorist groups
18/22

13/08/2019

like Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
has created new challenges as States work to defeat
enemies who abide by no rules whatsoever. Today,
the Geneva Conventions remain some of the very few
universally ratified international treaties. They are a
powerful articulation of international humanitarian law
and have become synonymous with ethical behaviour
in war.
As States Members of the United Nations, we have
several tools at our disposal to address violations of
international humanitarian law. In certain instances of
grave and systematic violations, war crimes tribunals
have been important tools to hold offenders accountable.
The United States is proud to have supported the
establishment of the tribunals for Cambodia, Rwanda,
Sierra Leone and the former Yugoslavia, as well as their
subsequent work to punish some of the worst offenders
of international humanitarian law.
In other cases, however, obstacles to accountability
remain. For the relevance of these Conventions to
endure into the future, compliance and accountability
are key. While Member States and parties to armed
conflict are ultimately responsible for adhering to their
international humanitarian law obligations, each of us
has an important role to play in calling out violations
and holding those responsible to account.
We continue to push for greater compliance with
the Geneva Conventions by other actors, and we are also
firmly committed to respecting our own obligations.
To this end, we support efforts to disseminate accurate
information about international humanitarian law
among all parties to conflicts. For example, the
training of United States military personnel includes
thorough coverage of international humanitarian law in
principle and practice. We also incorporate adherence
to international humanitarian law into United States
training for international military partners. This
includes peacekeeping predeployment training that we
offer for troop- and police-contributors supporting the
United Nations and regional peace operations.
We have made the protection of civilians and
civilian infrastructure, as well as humanitarian
personnel, locations and missions, a high priority in
conflict areas, and we know that effective protection
requires full adherence to international humanitarian
law by all parties to conflict.
The United States will continue our efforts to
respect and ensure respect for the Geneva Conventions.
19-25161

13/08/2019

International humanitarian law

We call on all Member States and the actors they
support to comply fully with their obligations and to
hold violators accountable.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I welcome you to New York, Sir. We are
pleased to see you once again in the Security Council
President’s Chair.
I would also like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Legal Affairs, Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares;
the President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies, Mr. Peter Maurer;
and Ms. Bellal for their briefings.
History has seen various different approaches
to the problems of the law of armed conflict. It is no
secret that war was once thought to be contrary to law
and therefore not subject to any regulation. This was
expressed in the well-known Roman maxim: “In times
of war, the law falls silent”. Unfortunately, humankind
required several centuries and two of the most terrible
armed conflicts in its history, which took place in the
twentieth century, to realize the need to humanize wars
and form a set of rules for its conduct so as to ensure,
among other things, that those not directly participating
in armed conflict are kept as safe as possible.
Today we gather to mark the seventieth anniversary
of the Geneva Conventions. These documents form the
foundation of the contemporary law of armed conflict.
Our country made a substantial contribution to the
development of these Conventions, which substantially
expanded the legal regulation of States’ conduct in
armed conflicts and, above all, with respect to the
protection of civilians.
I take this opportunity to recall another anniversary
related to international humanitarian law. In November
last year, in Saint Petersburg, the Interparliamentary
Assembly of Member Nations of the Commonwealth
of Independent States and the International Committee
of the Red Cross organized a conference devoted to
the 150th anniversary of the adoption, upon Russia’s
initiative, of the 1868 Saint Petersburg Declaration
Renouncing the Use, in Time of War, of Explosive
Projectiles Under 400 Grammes Weight. That document
established the idea not only of banning inhumane
forms of weaponry, but also of excluding civilians
and civilian objects from what are considered to be
legitimate targets of war.

S/PV. 8596

When we speak of the relevance of the Geneva
Conventions, we also need to recall the history that
led to their creation. I believe that it would be no
exaggeration to say that the Geneva Conventions
embody the lessons that humankind learned from the
bitter experience of the Second World War. That war,
which was unprecedented in its scale and brutality, was
an immense tragedy for the peoples of Europe, Asia and
the entire world. A threat to the fundamental principles
of civilization was prevented through colossal joint
efforts and heavy losses.
As we know, Germany essentially refused to
comply with the norms of international law that
existed at that time. Peaceful cities and civilians were
bombed. Hitler’s air and ground forces were guided by
a scorched-earth policy. Mass deportations of civilians
and the alleged collective punishment of civilians for
supporting partisans were widespread. Moreover,
collective punishment, as modern research shows, has
served, among other things, to reduce the total number
of people living in occupied territories, thereby freeing
up resources that were useful to the occupying Power.
Starvation was also widely used as a weapon of war.
The abuse of prisoners of war was particularly
cynical. It took place in spite of the fact that the parties
to the conflict had international obligations that were
applicable at the time. Germany’s mass and gross
violations of its international obligations were the
subject of the sentencing at the Nuremberg Tribunal.
At the same time, the judicial protection of war
criminals actively advanced the idea that The Hague
rules for the waging of war, which were based on the
experience of nineteenth-century wars, were outdated.
Moreover, defendants actively referred to the absence
of specific prohibitions with regard to the treatment of
civilians. Although those justifications did not allow
them to evade responsibility, they raised the issue of
strengthening the international legal protection of
victims of armed conflicts. It was in that context that
the Diplomatic Conference was convened, culminating
in the adoption of the 1949 Geneva Conventions.
At the same time, following the adoption of the
Geneva Conventions, it became clear that the evolution
of the means and methods of warfare, the emergence
of new types of conflicts, such as national liberation
wars, and the heightened attention of the international
community to upholding human rights in any situation
dictated the need for the further codification,
confirmation and development of humanitarian law.

19-2516119/22

S/PV.8596

International humanitarian law

That led to the adoption in 1977 of Protocols I and II
Additional to the Geneva Conventions.
Allow me to quote resolution 8 of the 1949
Diplomatic Conference and remind the States that
participated in the drafting of the Geneva Conventions
of the following:
“The Conference wishes to affirm before all
nations: that, its work having been inspired solely
by humanitarian aims, its earnest hope is that, in
the future, Governments may never have to apply
the Geneva Conventions for the Protection of War
Victims; that its strongest desire is that the Powers,
great and small, may always reach a friendly
settlement of their differences through cooperation
and understanding between nations, so that peace
shall reign on earth for ever”.
Those words remain relevant today. However, armed
conflicts in various parts of the world remain a reality
and the Security Council is forced time and again to
focus its attention on the institutions of international
humanitarian law.
The nature of wars has changed. Internal armed
conflicts now predominate and their main cause is
usually the undermining of statehood, including through
the ousting of legitimate Governments as a result of
outside interference. The authority of international
humanitarian law is now often affected by selective
approaches and double standards. That, in turn, gives
grounds for discussions about the need to uphold that
branch of international law — as a rule, by means of
a declaration or an additional monitoring mechanism.
Furthermore, in such conditions, many, depending on
their political predilections, are tempted to reveal the
violations of some parties while concealing the crimes
of others.
We believe that the norms of international
humanitarian law should not be used for political
manipulation. Regrettably, we have already heard one
example of such manipulation today in the statement
made by our British colleague. As our country was
addressed directly, I would just like to say that our
colleague either has outdated information or is poorly
prepared. There is no armed conflict in the territory
of the Russian Federation, which includes Crimea.
Therefore, referring to international humanitarian law
as it applies to our country is not appropriate. With
regard to remarks made about Syria, that too is not an
appropriate subject for today’s meeting. I recall the
20/22

13/08/2019

many questions we pose to our British and American
colleagues with regard to what is taking place with
regard to the observation of international humanitarian
law beyond the Euphrates. We continue to ask those
questions but receive no response. Perhaps the time has
come to have them.
We call on all States to comply strictly with their
obligations under international law — first and foremost,
the existing norms of international humanitarian law
that form the firm legal basis for protecting civilians
from the dangers arising from military operations.
As we have said repeatedly in the Chamber, we are
convinced that implementation problems lie not in the
weakness of international humanitarian law, but in the
disinclination or reluctance to implement its principles
and norms in practice. In addition, along with vital
measures to strengthen and maintain peace and security,
of equal relevance are the means to reduce the intensity
of armed conflicts, limit violence and create conditions
for reconciliation and political settlement. Our country,
in turn, continues to call for the humanization of armed
conflicts and, above all, their prevention.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): As others have done, let me
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting and, of course, welcoming you to
preside over it as we debate a very important topic.
I also welcome His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas,
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany, to
the Chamber.
I would also like to thank our briefers
today — Mr Miguel de Serpa Soares, Mr. Peter
Maurer and Ms. Annyssa Bellal — who provided us
with insights into what is happening with regard to
international humanitarian law and its implementation.
Our meeting coincides with the seventieth
anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions. This year
also marks the twentieth anniversary of the Council’s
adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. All are very important
milestones in what the Council has achieved thus
far. In that regard, allow me to re-emphasize that our
concerted efforts in the Council and in the United
Nations framework are and should always be based on
respect for international law, in particular the Charter
of the United Nations. Respect for the Fourth Geneva
Convention is not an exception in that regard. We must
stress that parties to any conflict must honour their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
19-25161

13/08/2019

International humanitarian law

respect human rights. Civilians, civilian facilities,
schools and hospitals, humanitarian workers and
peacekeepers are not targets. Attacks on them must
stop. Indonesia offers its deepest condolences to the
innocent victims, including United Nations personnel
all over the world, including recently in Libya.
I will make three pertinent points today.
First, as the first step towards peace, we need to
address the root causes of conflict, as Indonesia has
always advocated, and we must continue to build trust.
The Geneva Conventions are the jus in bello, the laws
of war, which must be respected; war is inhuman, but
there are codes of conduct. Addressing the root causes
of conflict will enable States to achieve greater security.
Confidence-building measures should be put in place to
enhance the trust among parties and communities.
My second point is that we must work to save lives.
We need to ensure effective implementation of and
compliance with international humanitarian law. Not
only should countries respect international humanitarian
law but they should also ensure that it is respected and
implemented, as stipulated in various resolutions related
to the Geneva Conventions. I would like to underline
the words “ensure respect”, which means that countries
should be proactive in ensuring compliance, through
awareness programmes, training, rules of engagement,
inter alia, as Mr. Maurer mentioned.
Engagement with all parties is key to addressing
conflict. The Council can become a true partner and
build trust among all sides to a conflict, including
through regional organizations, which have local
knowledge of what is truly needed to resolve such crises.
Existing international rules, including the resolutions
of the Security Council, and United Nations-sanctioned
arms embargoes must be obeyed and respected. We call
on external actors in conflicts to restrain themselves and
silence the guns by stopping their flow. The message
should be clear to non-State actors and armed groups
that they are not beyond the law, including international
humanitarian law.
Thirdly, we need to strengthen the capacities
of concerned States, which includes international
partnerships to support States in conflict that are unable
to provide such protections themselves. Indonesia is
continuing its support for conflict and post-conflict
States through South-South and triangular cooperation.
Just last week, in Jakarta, Indonesia held a regional
conference on humanitarian assistance, which provided

S/PV. 8596

a platform to share best practices in conducting
humanitarian actions in the South-East Asia and
neighbouring countries. We have also worked with the
Red Cross in this regard. The conference highlighted
once again the need for partnership.
International humanitarian law is a living doctrine.
It is still and will always be relevant, today and in future.
But noting that the world has changed dramatically, we
should adapt to present-day realities. Our approach in
bringing the message of compliance and the need to
abide by international humanitarian law by all parties
should also be adapted.
In conclusion, allow me to quote the Indonesian
Foreign Minister, who, at the open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict held during the
Indonesian presidency of the Council in May, said that
the Security Council should be reminded
“not only of our political commitments, but also
[of] our duty to implement those commitments to
ensure the primacy of human safety and security.
After all, the United Nations was established
upon the mandate ‘we the peoples of the United
Nations’. We cannot afford to let our people down”
(S/PV.8534, p. 9).
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
too would like to begin by thanking the Polish presidency
for having convened this meeting on a priority issue
for the international community and also to welcome
Foreign Minister Czaputowicz’s, presence among us
once again. We would also like to acknowledge the
important briefings made by the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal
Counsel, Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares; the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, Peter
Maurer, whose organization plays a central role in this
issue; and Ms. Annyssa Bellal, of the Geneva Academy
of International Humanitarian Law and Human Rights.
We believe that in a world of growing
interdependence, the maintenance, development and
defence of a rules-based international order is essential
and the only way for the international community
to effectively address the serious underlying global
challenges and threats, on the basis of the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. Peru is therefore a country committed to the
rule of law, multilateralism and the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes. Within that framework,
it prioritizes full respect for and compliance with

19-2516121/22

S/PV.8596

International humanitarian law

international humanitarian law, which represents the
minimum standard of dignity in the context of an
armed conflict, which must be strictly observed by the
parties for the protection of both civilians and those
who can no longer continue in the conflict because they
are wounded or detained.
The Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Protocols
Additional, the seventieth anniversary of whose
adoption we celebrate and recall today, constitute the
cornerstones of such protection. The importance and
relevance of the Conventions have been emphasized
by the International Court of Justice, recognizing
them as part of jus cogens. The Conventions, in
particular, and international humanitarian law, in
general, represent a fundamental tool in the work of
the Security Council, having been highlighted in many
resolutions and presidential statements as key elements
for the promotion and building of international peace
and security. However, it is a matter of concern that the
discourse often contrasts with reality, as has been the
case in the conflicts in Syria, Yemen and Libya, among
others. Particular attention should also be paid to the
need to guarantee the delivery of humanitarian aid on
the basis of free and unrestricted access to the field for
humanitarian agencies and aid and relief organizations,
while at the same time ensuring due protection.

22/22

13/08/2019

We also believe that the proper implementation
of international humanitarian law transcends the
application of its protection measures to counter the
need to strengthen justice and the rule of law and
the fight against impunity. That means promoting
greater trust in jurisdictional institutions and effective
deterrence, particularly against atrocious crimes, while
ensuring full compliance with their decisions.
From our perspective as a troop-contributing
country, we attach central importance to the knowledge
and application of these norms in the training of our
officers. Peru has therefore established a National
Commission for the Study and Application of
International Humanitarian Law, with a view to
training Peruvian officials in this branch of law and
highlighting its importance.
We conclude by stressing the urgent need for
the Security Council to remain united on the need to
defend and promote international humanitarian law and
the protection of civilians in conflict, particularly in
the various cases that are part of our agenda and where,
at present, joint and decisive action is needed. This is
the only way to meet the indispensable requirement
of humanizing conflict, which is also part of its
primary responsibility to maintain international peace
and security.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

19-25161
