S/PV.8703

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8703rd meeting

Wednesday, 15 January 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Ms. Mogashoa
Mr. Baati
Mr. Allen
Ms. Norman-Chalet

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2019/983)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-01130 (E)
*2001130*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.8703

almost daily or at least with great frequency. I also note
that the protective measures that the force has been
taking for over a year have helped to limit casualties,
although more must be done in that regard. Terrorism
continues to fuel intercommunal violence in central
Mali. There are now more displaced people suffering
from hunger in the Mopti region than in the past.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2019/983)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Tiébilé Dramé, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Mali. Mr. Dramé
is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Bamako.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/983, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the Council
today in the presence of His Excellency Mr. Tiébilé
Dramé, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali, on the recent developments in the
situation in Mali. I welcome Mr. Dramé.
The security situation in Mali and in the Sahel
region as a whole is deteriorating at an alarming rate.
Last week, 18 peacekeepers were wounded in an attack
on the camp of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
in Tessalit, and recently 89 Nigerien soldiers were killed
in an attack on their base near the Malian border. On
4 January, 14 children lost their lives in an attack on a
bus close to the Malian border in northern Burkina Faso.
Terrorist groups are proliferating in the Ménaka and
Gao regions. We have seen an increase in improvised
explosive device attacks on our convoys, which have
wounded several Blue Helmets. These incidents occur
2/21

15/01/2020

Politically, the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali has been slow and
uneven. Important decisions have been postponed due
to disagreements between and among the signatory
parties. However, significant progress has also been
made. The inclusive national dialogue was concluded
in Bamako on 22 December, nine months after it was
announced. The process was at times difficult, but the
consultations within the framework of the dialogue
were thorough and inclusive, without any taboo
subjects. I congratulate the Government of Mali and
all stakeholders who have participated peacefully and
constructively throughout the country. Their ideas,
opinions and concerns are important and should be
taken into account as we move forward. I am particularly
encouraged by the high level of participation of women
in that respect. There can be no lasting peace without
their contribution. I also commend the Coordination
des mouvements de l’Azawad for having joined the final
stages of the dialogue and for its valuable contribution
to the discussions. We regret, however, the absence of
opposition parties from the national dialogue.
The conclusion of the inclusive national dialogue
is a welcome development. It is now important that
the Government of Mali respect its commitment to
implementing the outcome and continue to reach out to
members of the opposition. That will require charting
a clear path for the future, including the adoption
and implementation of a revised electoral and reform
timetable, as well as the holding of legislative elections
and a constitutional referendum. I urge all political
actors to work together constructively to implement the
conclusions of the dialogue. The Malian people need
to see and feel that their voice has been heard and their
concerns taken into account.
We hope that the conclusion of the dialogue will
also give new and urgent impetus to the implementation
of the peace agreement. It is now important that the
Agreement Monitoring Committee resume its meetings.
In that connection, I welcome the forthcoming session of
that high-level Committee on 19 January. It is essential
that the signatory parties seize that opportunity to
20-01130

15/01/2020

The situation in Mali

agree on concrete next steps to achieve the goals set
out in resolution 2480 (2019). Significant progress has
been made, including the disarmament and integration
of former combatants into the defence and security
forces and the creation of the legal framework for the
establishment of the northern development zone. But
more needs to be done in a context where growing
security challenges threaten to reverse the hard-won
gains made since the signing of the peace agreement.
(spoke in English)
The rapid and thorough implementation of the
peace agreement remains the only viable path for the
stabilization of Mali. It provides a framework for the
political and institutional reforms required to restore
and decentralize State authority in order to build a
Malian State that reflects the diversity and interests of
all its citizens. The peace agreement also provides for
mechanisms to address the grievances of those Malians
who feel excluded from the country’s political life and
economic development and who see little hope for
their future.
The redeployment of the reconstituted units of
the Malian defence and security forces to northern
Mali remains an urgent priority. On 6 January, the
Malian authorities started the deployment of the first
reconstituted battalion from Bamako to Kidal via Gao.
It is expected to arrive in Kidal by the end of the month.
That is an important step towards restoring State
authority across the country.
The deployment of the reconstituted units will also
pave the way for the redeployment of a more effective
State administration and public services — most
importantly, justice officials, teachers and health
workers in the north. I commend the Malian parties
for reaching agreement on the modalities for the
redeployment and the progress made to date. Their
continued commitment and perseverance will be
essential to achieving that important goal.
I would also like to express my gratitude to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif and
MINUSMA colleagues, who have provided critical
support for the accelerated disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process and for facilitating the
deployment of those units to Kidal and eventually the
entire north, further demonstrating the critical role that
MINUSMA plays in creating the conditions for the
peace process to unfold.

S/PV. 8703

In recent months, in line with resolution 2480
(2019), MINUSMA has done its utmost to implement
its second strategic priority in the centre of the country,
while continuing to carry out tasks in support of its
primary strategic priority in the north. Its increased
presence and activity in the Mopti region has contributed
to preventing a further escalation of intercommunal
violence and large-scale massacres.
The establishment of temporary operating bases
has increased MINUSMA’s ability to provide security,
protect the local population and facilitate the return of
the national security forces and Government services
to the Koro, Bankass and Bandiagara cercles. Recent
visits to the Mopti region, conducted by the Malian
authorities and MINUSMA, have further reinforced
the collaboration between the Mission and the
host Government.
The Mission’s added focus on central Mali has
required it to divert key capabilities — such as air assets,
its quick reaction force, and intelligence, surveillance
and reconnaissance assets — from Gao to Mopti, as
outlined in the report (S/2019/983). It is not feasible
for MINUSMA to implement its additional strategic
priority in the centre without additional resources.
Attempting to do so has resulted in dangerous gaps in
areas in northern Mali where the Mission’s presence is
critical and urgently needed, such as Ménaka and Gao.
In order to address that challenge, MINUSMA
has developed a viable plan to adapt its uniformed
components within the authorized troop and police
strength, while taking into account the needs of the
civilian component to effectively implement its mandate
in central and northern Mali.
The plan is an integral part of an overarching
strategy to support and enhance the Mission’s good
offices, mediation, reconciliation, capacity-building
and technical and logistical support to Malian
authorities in order to stabilize and secure population
hubs in the centre; create favourable conditions for the
restoration and expansion of State authority across the
country; and provide basic social services so that those
who have suffered the most — ordinary Malians — will
finally reap the benefits of the peace process.
The plan provides for the establishment of a mobile
task force that will enhance the Mission’s ability to
implement its mandate and protect civilians. It will
make MINUSMA more agile, flexible and mobile,
with tailored units, enhanced capabilities and — most

20-011303/21

S/PV.8703

The situation in Mali

importantly — with additional air mobility. The plan
is ambitious and its successful implementation hinges
upon the support of the Council and other member States,
troop and police contributors, the host Government and
other partners.
Obtaining the required capabilities will be
challenging, but I insist that it is indispensable for
MINUSMA to deliver on its mandate. It is also an
integral part of efforts to further enhance the Mission’s
performance. I therefore call on all partners to support
the implementation and help the Secretariat mobilize
the required resources and capabilities to ensure that
MINUSMA remains fit for purpose.
In addition, in order to achieve the implementation
of the plan and fulfil its mandate the Mission urgently
requires access to additional land in both Gao and Mopti.
I urge the Government of Mali to make it available as
quickly as possible as per ongoing discussions.
Increased
and
sophisticated
capabilities
notwithstanding, MINUSMA can only be as effective
and efficient as the parties and partners want it to be.
Political will remains the most important enabler for
any peacekeeping operation to be effective. I therefore
reiterate the Secretary-General’s appeal to all Malian
leaders to display the necessary leadership and work
together to address the challenges their country faces,
with the support of the international community.
(spoke in French)
Lastly, MINUSMA is only one element of a
broader collective response to address instability and
violence and their root causes in Mali and the Sahel
and to protect civilians. We are encouraged by the
strong commitment expressed by the Heads of State of
the countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) to combat terrorism in Mali and the Sahel, with
the support of other international forces. National and
international forces play an essential role and their
contribution remains vital, even if a military solution
alone will not be enough to solve the problems faced by
Mali and the region.
The United Nations remains strongly committed to
working with all its partners to address the root causes
of terrorism, instability and violence in Mali and the
Sahel. As part of its work in the Sahel, the Mission will
spare no effort to provide the Joint Force of the G-5
Sahel with operational and logistical support, in line
with resolutions 2391 (2017) and 2480 (2019), and has
4/21

15/01/2020

responded positively to all requests it has received from
the Joint Force.
However, to date, the Joint Force has been unable to
take full advantage of that support, as it does not have
the capacity to transport the essential consumables that
MINUSMA provides to all its sectors and contingents.
Therefore, we are prepared to implement more creative
and proactive solutions to ensure that the necessary
support reaches the Joint Force, in line with the
current mandate.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Peace Operations for his briefing.
Six months following the adoption of resolution
2480 (2019), our meeting today is an opportunity to
assess the progress that has been made. I would like to
make three points.
My first point is related to the security situation in
the Sahel, which has changed. We are now faced with
geographical spread and an evolving threat. Terrorist
groups continue to adapt to challenges. As they are
unable to control territory, they seek to prevent the
return of State authority. Although civilians are the
primary victims, soldiers in the Sahel have also suffered
heavy losses. I pay tribute to the memory of all victims,
including soldiers.
Given the situation, France believes that there
is an urgent and important need to respond. France
organized a summit with the countries of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), which was held on
Monday in Pau, in which the Secretary-General and
representatives of the European Union, the African
Union and the International Organization of la
Francophonie participated. At the end of the summit, we
decided together to establish a coalition for the Sahel.
The coalition’s military objective will be to continue
to weaken terrorist movements over time. Its political
objective will be to ensure the return of State authority
to all regions of the Sahel, including Kidal and northern
Burkina Faso.
France invites all interested countries and
organizations to join the initiative. It will be organized
around four pillars: the fight against terrorism;
20-01130

15/01/2020

The situation in Mali

strengthening the capacity of the defence and security
forces of the countries of the Sahel; support for the
return of State authority; and economic and social
development. Several initiatives that we conduct with
our European Union partners, in particular Germany,
are already part of that framework, such as the Alliance
for the Sahel and the Partnership for Stability and
Security in the Sahel.
The aim is therefore to increase the support
we provide to the countries of the G-5 Sahel and to
encourage them to implement reforms in the area of
security and also in the areas of governance and human
rights. Once we have established those conditions, we
will succeed in eradicating terrorism. The coalition will
be based on effectiveness and results. Heads of State
will meet in Nouakchott in June to closely monitor the
implementation of the coalition and the fulfilment of
mutual commitments.
My second point pertains to the peace process and
the political situation in Mali. The inclusive national
dialogue was a milestone. The constructive nature
of the exchanges between signatory movements and
other signatories to the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali bodes well moving forward,
and we welcome the fact that a number of women
participated in that undertaking. Progress has been
made in the implementation of the peace agreement.
The redeployment to the north of the initial units of
the reconstituted Malian army is presently under way;
an initial step is to be deployment to the city of Kidal,
from where the army and the Malian Administration
have for too long been absent.
France commends the holding of the meeting of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee set for 19 January,
as the Committee’s work has been on hold since August.
It is important to take advantage of this opportunity to
achieve greater progress on other proposed measures,
complete the transfer of 30 per cent of State resources
to local authorities, carry out a pilot project for
development in the north and ensure the participation
of women in the process. The role of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) will remain vital in all these areas,
and it is critical that it be provided with the resources
necessary to discharge its duties.
The Algiers agreement must remain our lodestar, as
it provides the sole framework for lasting reconciliation
among the Malian, which is a prerequisite for achieving

S/PV. 8703

the stabilization of the country. As has been stated
on several occasions by the Security Council, those
who hinder its implementation risk the imposition
of sanctions.
I wish to conclude by touching on the criticism
levelled against international partners and MINUSMA
in particular. MINUSMA remains the linchpin of
the international mechanism in Mali and carries out
functions that no other actor can, from the protection
of civilians, support for the implementation of the
peace agreement to the provision of logistical support
to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. The Mission has sustained
tremendous losses, and I would pay tribute here to the
commitment made by the troop-contributing countries
and their personnel. Given the circumstances, it is
important that there be better communication vis-à-vis
the respective actions of the various international
stakeholders in Mali. It is also important to listen to
criticism and to reflect on ways to make improvements.
France therefore welcomes the adaptation plan of the
MINUSMA force aimed at making it more mobile and
agile so that it can better deliver on its mandate and
protect civilians. It is an ambitious but timely plan,
and France encourages all members of the Council to
support it.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I should
like through you, Mr. President, to express my sincere
gratitude to Under-Secretary-General General Lacroix
for his excellent briefing, in which he laid out the plan
to strengthen the force in order to make it even more
operational and effective.
I am pleased to make this statement on behalf of the
African members of the Security Council — the Niger,
South Africa and Tunisia — on this very important
item on the agenda, the situation in Mali.
I wish to emphasize three points, as did the
Ambassador of France — not on the same issues, but
three points nonetheless.
First, we appreciate the international and regional
efforts towards peace, security and stability in Mali,
including the efforts of the United Nations, the
African Union and African regional and subregional
organizations, including the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the West African
Economic and Monetary Union and the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), which have always put
security in Mali at the top of their agendas.

20-011305/21

S/PV.8703

The situation in Mali

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2019/983), which contains relevant information on
the recent developments in Mali in the political, security
and development areas, and we very much appreciate
the work done at the level of the secretariat of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and that done by the
United Nations entities in Mali and in the region to
help to meet the multiple and complex challenges that
Mali and the region face today. We pay tribute to all
victims of terrorist attacks in Mali and in the Sahel
region, including civilians and members of the national
defence and security forces as well as personnel of the
G-5 Sahel and all allied international forces.
We welcome the progress made in the
implementation of the Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement in Mali following on from the Algiers
process, particularly in the area of political and
social reform, with the successful holding, from 14 to
22 December 2019, of the inclusive national dialogue,
which had more than 3,000 participants, including
representatives of the movements signatories to the
agreement, the Coordination des mouvements de
l’Azawad and the Platform coalition of armed groups.
We welcome also the headway made in the areas
of security and defence with the integration of 1,330
former combatants from the signatory movements and
members of the Operational Coordination Mechanism,
as well as the adoption of the action plan of the National
Council for Security Sector Reform.
Also encouraging is the promulgation of the texts
that constitute the legal and institutional framework of
the Northern Development Zone in Mali, as well as the
establishment of a sustainable development fund with
$72 million.
We welcome also the process of national
reconciliation, with the promulgation of the law on
national accord and the start of hearings for the victims
in December 2019.
In the spirit of the progress made recently, we
welcome the calls made by the President of the Republic
and the Malian Government for the people to continue
to support the international forces on the ground.
I take this opportunity to call on bilateral and
multilateral partners to step up their support for the
Government of Mali in the implementation of the
agreement in a context that, as the Council is aware,
6/21

15/01/2020

is particularly difficult. We believe that the situation
in Mali and across West Africa and the Sahel urgently
requires that concerted efforts be deployed to help the
defence and security forces by strengthening logistical,
operational and intelligence capacities. These kinds of
measures will undoubtedly help the Malian authorities
to re-establish their control and influence across
the national territory and to resume the provision of
indispensable social services for their people.
We also welcome MINUSMA’s strategy aimed at
increasing its mobility and support for the people of the
centre. In that regard, we support the second strategic
priority laid out in resolution 2480 (2019) regarding
the renewal of MINUSMA’s mandate, which provides
for support to the Malian authorities in their efforts to
protect civilians in the centre of the country.
The intensification of the actions of and attacks by
terrorist armed groups in the northern and central regions
of Mali as well as in the tri-border area — between
Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger — is a cause for real
concern. In the Niger, for example, all the attacks in
the Tahoua and Tillabéri regions, including the recent
ones in Inates and Chinegodar, which killed 71 and 89
lives, respectively, have been perpetrated by terrorist
groups operating in the border zone with Mali. That
is why it is urgent for the implementation of the Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement in Mali to be speeded
up within the context of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee and that the presence of the Malian State be
effective throughout the country.
I should like also above all to strongly urge partners
to honour their commitments with regard to the G-5
Sahel Joint Force. I welcome the expansion of the
tripartite technical arrangement between MINUSMA,
the European Union and the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
to other operational areas and would recall that, for
reasons of effectiveness, there is a need to ensure the
prior involvement of the Joint Force in the delivery of
the required support, and I welcome the comments made
by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix on this front.
We propose that this should be done through existing
United Nations channels in the countries concerned.
In the same vein, we invite the international
community, especially the United Nations, to take
into account the highly relevant conclusions of the
ECOWAS Summit held in Abuja, which adopted a
2020-2024 action plan with an initial allocation from
20-01130

15/01/2020

The situation in Mali

member countries of $2.3 billion, including $1 billion
of our own funding.
To conclude, we call on regional and international
partners to expedite the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and its support
plan. We believe that the strategy is a key element of
international and national efforts for sustainable peace,
stability and development in Mali in particular and the
Sahel region in general.
Lastly, I align myself with the statement delivered
by Ambassador Nicolas De Rivière of France on the
decision taken on 13 January in Pau between the
President of the G-5 Sahel and the President of France,
with the participation of the Secretary-General, the
Chairman of the African Union Commission, senior
authorities of the European Union and the International
Organization of la Francophonie.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing.
Last June, the Security Council adopted resolution
2480 (2019). Its aim was to encourage the Government
of Mali and the signatory armed groups to show followthrough and progress towards the benchmarks in the
Algiers Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali. Six months later, the progress that we had hoped
for has yet to materialize — a stark illustration of how
little meaningful progress has been made in the peace
process. The inaction of the signatories is not without
consequence. Malian civilians are being killed, maimed
and abducted with impunity. The country’s displaced
population doubled last year, and today millions suffer
from food insecurity, with a full 30 per cent of the
population malnourished.
Furthermore, physical insecurity and criminality
constrain United Nations and non-governmental
organization access to vulnerable populations to
deliver life-saving assistance. That lack of access raises
significant concerns with respect to humanitarian
principles, and potentially under international
humanitarian law. In that environment, terrorist groups
are taking advantage of ungoverned spaces, exploiting
grievances and fuelling intercommunal conflict.
United Nations peacekeepers face extraordinary
dangers, as the wounding of 18 last week in Tessalit
reminded us, and the Malian armed forces are suffering
critical losses. We appreciate Ambassador Konfourou’s

S/PV. 8703

country’s continued commitment to achieving peace
and security, and we extend our condolences to families
for that loss of life. The United States honours those
who have made the ultimate sacrifice, and we commend
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and
international security forces for their fight against that
escalating regional crisis.
We also commend and recognize France’s
unwavering commitment in Mali. Ambassador De
Rivière’s country’s sacrifices do not go unnoticed,
and the United States values France’s leadership in the
region.
The Council has, however, spent years asking
the signatories to make meaningful progress towards
implementing the agreement, even by providing
them with achievable benchmarks. Despite our
robust support, we continue to witness inaction and
a deteriorating security environment. It is therefore
time for the Council to begin developing an alternative
approach to addressing growing instability in Mali. To
that end, I would like to offer a few observations.
First, we must recognize that peacekeeping
missions are not the answer to growing terrorist threats
in Mali. A clear-eyed assessment of MINUSMA is
needed to determine how the Mission most effectively
complements other security activities in the region.
Secondly, we must re-evaluate MINUSMA’s
role in supporting the implementation of the Algiers
agreement. MINUSMA’s success is dependent on the
Government of Mali and the signatory armed groups,
but since 2015 both have proven unwilling to implement
the agreement. We should consider deprioritizing
MINUSMA’s support in implementing the agreement
and instead focus the Mission on protecting civilians.
That would allow MINUSMA to direct its resources to
the more densely populated and strategically important
centre, where it can have an immediate impact.
Additionally, the Mission can reduce its size, allowing
Member States to apply resources to more effective
efforts in the region. If the signatories are serious about
MINUSMA’s continued support to the agreement, they
can demonstrate their resolve by implementing the
benchmarks in resolution 2480 (2019) before 29 June,
when MINUSMA’s mandate expires.
Thirdly, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2374 (2017), concerning Mali, must sanction

20-011307/21

S/PV.8703

The situation in Mali

individuals and entities on all sides of the conflict,
including Government officials and armed group
members who meet sanction designation criteria.
Fourthly, we must ensure that MINUSMA receives
high-performing troop and police contingents. The
United States is concerned by reports of training
and capability shortfalls, undeclared caveats and
commanders unwilling to take risks or comply with
orders. Those types of challenges, especially in a
mission as complex and dangerous as MINUSMA,
hinder the Mission, increase the risk of both peacekeeper
and civilian casualties and support a narrative of
peacekeeping ineffectiveness. We call on the SecretaryGeneral to increase reporting on MINUSMA’s troop
and police performance, in line with the requirements
of resolution 2436 (2018), to ensure that memorandums
of understanding accurately reflect the requirements
of the Mission and to swiftly hold poor performers
accountable.
Finally, any changes to MINUSMA’s mandate must
be considered as part of an integrated and transparent
regional security strategy. The United States
commends the current initiatives of our European and
African partners, including members of the Economic
Community of West African States, to coordinate
security activities and expand counter-terrorism
capacities. We look forward to seeing how those
initiatives enhance regional security and complement
MINUSMA.
The United States desires peace, security and a
brighter future for the people of Mali, the Sahel and
West Africa. We are committed to that future, which
is why we are the largest financial contributor to
MINUSMA and the largest supporter of predeployment
training for its contingents. But it is past time for
Malian citizens to benefit from our commitment and
the tireless work of the peacekeepers. I look forward to
working with members of the Council between now and
June to develop a new approach that disrupts the status
quo and prepares the way for a future that the Malian
people deserve.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peace Operations, for his
briefing.
Russia is deeply concerned about the deteriorating
security situation in many parts of Mali in recent
months. Tragic reports of deaths of military personnel
8/21

15/01/2020

and civilians at the hands of jihadists demonstrate
the magnitude and severity of the threats facing the
country and its vulnerability to the destabilizing forces
of terrorists, organized crime and extremist ideology.
A central factor to normalize the situation in Mali
remains the implementation of the 2015 Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We note that
progress has been achieved in implementing some
of its provisions. The disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process for former combatants is
yielding positive results. We trust that units of the
Operational Coordination Mechanism will be deployed
as expeditiously as possible to the north of the country.
We call on the Malian authorities to consistently
strengthen the capacities of the regular armed forces
and to reclaim the positions lost in Ménaka and Gao.
We view the inclusive national dialogue launched
in the fall as a unifying platform for determining the
future of the country. However, within the framework
of the obligations that have been undertaken by the
parties to the Algiers peace agreement, the inclusive
participation of all stakeholders is of paramount
importance.
We note that factors such as the high levels of
inter-ethnic tensions, persistent attacks by terrorists
and extremists and delays in the restoration of State
governance institutions in the central and northern
parts of the country could significantly slow or
even undermine the positive changes that have
been observed. We are very concerned about the
humanitarian situation. The victims of violence remain
the most vulnerable groups — women, children and the
elderly. We welcome the steps taken by the authorities
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to resolve
intercommunal disputes and to disarm the local selfdefence forces.
The Libyan dimension continues to have a very
negative impact on the situation in Mali and in the
region as a whole. The so-called Liptako-Gourma
triangle, located on the borders of Mali, the Niger
and Burkina Faso, where we see the juncture of the
greatest challenges facing the region, has become all
too familiar. We also regret to note that the “malignant
tumour” of terrorism extends to other West African
countries.
In that regard, we support the concrete steps taken
by the States of the Group of Five for the Sahel to
20-01130

15/01/2020

The situation in Mali

establish the Joint Force in order to combat terrorism
and organized crime, as well as the counter-terrorism
operations that they are conducting. We would
particularly like to note the commitment of the countries
of the Economic Community of West African States
to investing significant resources in overcoming the
increasing security challenges. The principle of African
solutions to African problems is the cornerstone for the
nation-building of sovereign States on the continent.
We continue to provide bilateral support to the SaharaSahel countries.
We would like to highlight in particular the role of the
United Nations Multidimensional Stabilization Mission
in Mali in facilitating the settlement process. We firmly
believe that the Mission needs comprehensive support,
especially in an environment where it essentially has to
implement its mandate on two fronts at the same time,
in central and northern Mali. At the present time, we
are not prepared to consider options for a significant
adjustment in the scope of its operations or a drawdown.
In conclusion, we would like to convey our gratitude
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Annadif for his effective leadership of MINUSMA.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): At
the outset, I would like to acknowledge the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali, who will
join us via video-teleconference. I thank Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, for his insightful overview of the operations
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines strongly
condemns the mortar attack on a military base in Kidal
in northern Mali. We wish the injured a rapid and full
recovery.
MINUSMA has been entrusted with the very
important role of supporting the Malian authorities
as they strive to fully implement the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We recognize that
across such a vast territory, plagued by the multifaceted
challenges of persistent underdevelopment increasingly
exacerbated by climate change, the restoration and
extension of State authority depend on the support of
a wide range of actors across the region and within the
international community.
Successful regionalism creates many buffers that
insulate Member States from the rigours of a rapidly

S/PV. 8703

changing, and often tumultuous, global political
economy. Deepened integration must, however, be built
not only on security cooperation but also across the
humanitarian, development and peace nexus. Indeed,
without development, there can be no security. Only the
structural changes brought about by an improvement
in the standard of living will draw people away from
the lure of armed groups as they become more firmly
embedded in legitimate socioeconomic activity. We
encourage our partners and friends in the international
community to explore all options available in bringing
investment to this region.
In order to solve and prevent violent extremism and
the proliferation of armed groups, we need to ensure
inclusion, open dialogue and the return of full State
authority to the affected areas. Also, the perpetrators of
terrorist and extremist acts must be held accountable.
We welcome the redeployment of 1,330 troops,
which, through the accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, will be
instrumental in restoring the rule of law and trust. We
also share concerns about the challenges with regard
to the implementation of the peace agreement. In
particular, we support better representation of women
in the peace and other political processes, and we
commend MINUSMA’s efforts in that regard.
In additional, we note the continued grave
violations against children, including recruitment by
armed groups. In order to build lasting peace for future
generations in Mali, we must protect children.
We encourage MINUSMA to continue its
community engagement initiatives to ensure buy-in from
the communities and people in Mali. In addition, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines supports the continuation
and strengthening of dialogue to resolve the situation in
Mali. The holding of the final session of the inclusive
national dialogue and the expressed willingness of the
signatory movements to the peace agreement to resume
meetings of the Agreement Monitoring Committee are
encouraging signs.
MINUSMA’s challenges in the north are
understandable given the conditions on the ground.
We believe that the mobility challenge can be resolved
through the deployment of air assets necessary to
facilitate operations. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
will support efforts to that effect.

20-011309/21

S/PV.8703

The situation in Mali

Before closing, I wish to highlight the consequences
of climate change on peace and security in Mali and the
subregion. We encourage resilience building and longterm strategies for adaptation in Mali. The international
community should also mobilize itself to assist in that
regard.
Finally, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines would
like to fully align itself with the joint statement of
the three African members of the Security Council
delivered by my colleague from the Niger.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to express
our support for the statement of the representative of
France. We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix for his briefing.
First of all, we would like to express our categorical
condemnation of the wave of attacks in the last quarter
of last year, which claimed the lives of some 193 Malian
soldiers. representing an alarming trend in terms of
both frequency and scale. Our heartfelt condolences go
to the families of the victims who died in the line of
duty, including the 13 French soldiers.
On a positive note, we are encouraged by the
progress in the long-awaited inclusive national dialogue
as a constructive exercise in empowering all the relevant
parties in the peace and reconciliation process. We
eagerly await the results of the dialogue, which should
reflect the legitimate concerns and recommendations
of the people, and the implementation of policies and
measures based on its conclusions.
The Dominican Republic has always championed
the important role of women in decision-making and
internal processes, and we therefore commend the
active participation of women’s and youth groups in
the inclusive national dialogue. We agree with the
statement that it is women and young people who pay
the highest price in conflicts, and therefore there can be
no real discussion on peace and development without
their equal participation.
The Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict visited Mali in December to learn about
the situation first-hand and to establish a dialogue
with the Government, armed groups, civil society
and other stakeholders regarding the challenges and
opportunities in making progress on that agenda.
We take this opportunity to acknowledge the work
being done by the United Nations Multidimensional
10/21

15/01/2020

Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and UNICEF in that regard. We call on the Government
of Mali to continue strengthening the legal framework
for the protection of children and we hope that the draft
law on gender-based violence, as well as the revision
of the Child Protection Code, which criminalizes the
recruitment and use in hostilities of children under 18
years of age, will be adopted as soon as possible.
More than 1,000 schools remain closed owing
to persistent insecurity, which amounts to more than
244,000 children without access to education. We call
on the Government of Mali to fulfil its obligations under
the Safe Schools Declaration and take action to resume
the education of the thousands of affected children and
on armed groups to refrain from threatening teachers,
attacking schools and using them for military purposes.
As they have concluded the process of the inclusive
national dialogue, we urge the parties to focus their
attention on the immediate implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, based
on the priorities identified in resolution 2480 (2019),
which were also part of the conclusions of the dialogue
reached by consensus, including the constitutional
and institutional reforms; the redeployment of the
reconstituted Malian defence and security forces
to the northern part of Mali; and the participation
of women, who continue to be underrepresented in
the mechanisms responsible for implementing and
monitoring the Agreement.
We remain very concerned about the persistent
critical and complex security situation in central and
northern Mali as a result of intercommunal violence
and the spread of terrorist groups, which, during
every reporting period, claim the lives of hundreds of
civilians and threaten to destabilize the entire region.
We must pay particular attention to the hopelessness
felt by the population, especially young people, and
the existing vacuum in the absence of State authority
to provide security and justice that are exploited by
extremist groups to promote their cause and exercise
greater control.
We are encouraged by MINUSMA’s efforts, based
on the Council’s request for the development of a
second strategic priority that would allow the Mission
to increase its presence in the centre of Mali.
Lastly, we believe that it is important to strengthen
outreach initiatives and relations with the relevant
parties in Mali in order to better understand the work
20-01130

15/01/2020

The situation in Mali

and mandate of MINUSMA and the sanctions regime,
the sole purpose of which is to contribute to security
and the peace and internal reconciliation process.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): On Monday, we all
observed a minute of silence for the latest victims
whom we and the Niger mourned. I think that we are
all aware that they were only the most recent victims in
a spiral of violence that we are observing. I would also
like to convey, at this stage, my condolences and those
of the German Government to the Ambassador of Mali
for all the victims in the Malian civilian population and
security forces. As one looks at the numbers in Mali,
they are a disaster.
In that regard, I would like to turn to my French
colleague and once again fully support what he said
earlier. Germany is in partnership with friends and the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and remains
totally committed to bringing security and stability
to the region. We support obtaining the desired
results, including those related to the economic and
social aspect.
In condemning the terrorist attacks, Germany
continues to stand side by side with our partners in
the G-5 summit, Mali, the Niger and other countries.
In our discussions, we must not make the mistake of
underestimating the grave threat that we see related
to the military aspects of the situation. We need to
understand the drivers of violent extremism and we have
to recognize that a part of the population, as several
colleagues noted earlier, has legitimate grievances that
must be addressed.
We need to do everything we can and the authorities
in Mali and the G-5 countries need to do everything
to establish good governance, fight corruption and
impunity, develop the justice system and respect for
human rights — as the Ambassador of Dominican
Republic highlighted earlier — and implement the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. As
previous speakers said, what is also needed, of course,
is the restoration of State institutions to all parts of
the country.
We have to protect children, which has two aspects.
One aspect is the physical protection of children.
Children are the victims of violence and I am sure that
my Belgian colleague will say something about this.
The other aspect is education. Whenever I hear the
number of schools closed, I see that as another indicator
that violence will rise. What will children do if they

S/PV. 8703

do not go to school? Therefore, the opening of schools
is key.
As the Ambassadors of France, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines and the Dominican Republic said
earlier, more has to be done to advance the participation
of women, including in Government and the peace
process. I welcome the remarks by the Under-SecretaryGeneral and I recognize the efforts of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in that regard. Those of
us who were in Bamako on our Security Council trip
last year still remember, when we looked at the followup committee, that its membership was almost entirely
made up of men. More has to be done.
Of course, that is only something very personal,
but I remember that at a meeting I attended last January
(see S/PV.8445), the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mali was a woman, whereas I see that a male Minister
was announced for today’s meeting. That is just one
indication. I hope that the Foreign Minister is able to
listen to our remarks or that they will be conveyed
to him.
Lastly, as the Ambassador of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines very eloquently said earlier, the drivers of
violence and problems are related to climate change and
security and their effects and more has to be done in
that regard to build resilience.
Let me conclude in turning to MINUSMA. As
sometimes criticism is voiced with regard to the
Mission, at this stage I would like to sincerely recognize
what MINUSMA is doing and what the individuals in
the Mission are doing. We recognize that, in difficult
circumstances, they are doing a good job. MINUSMA
alone cannot provide security and can only do so as a
partner of the Government in the implementation of the
peace agreement.
MINUSMA continues to try to strengthen the
Malian Government, such as with regard to the police,
but such support should be based on a comprehensive
strategic development plan prepared by the Malian
authorities, which would then be supported by
the Mission.
My United States colleague talked about reforms
or proposals for the adaptation of MINUSMA and we
will of course study such proposals with great interest.
For the time being, MINUSMA has a limited mandate
and more also needs to be done to better communicate

20-0113011/21

S/PV.8703

The situation in Mali

its mandate so that there is no unjustified criticism
of its work. The Government also has a role to play
in that regard. We, as a Council, have to ensure that
MINUSMA, whatever its mandate, has adequate means
at its disposal — as does the United Nations system
in general. In this respect, I also support what Mr. De
Rivière said earlier.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by extending
our sincere thanks to Under-Secretary-General Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix for his very comprehensive briefing. I
would also like to express my sincere appreciation for
the work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and all the personnel of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) on the ground.
As stated by the Secretary-General, Mali is one
of the most challenging and dangerous operational
environments for United Nations peacekeepers. Yet,
despite these challenges, MINUSMA continues to
show outstanding performance and leadership, which
calls for rightfully deserved recognition. Having said
that, allow me to share three points.
First, it is important to speed up the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
which remains the most viable solution for lasting
peace and stability in the country. We welcome the
conclusion of the inclusive national dialogue, which
resulted in important resolutions, including with regard
to legislative elections and constitutional reform. We
call on all parties to continue their endeavours aimed
at advancing the peace process and key reforms. In
addition, we would like to emphasize the importance
of redeploying Malian defence and security forces in
order to restore State authority, particularly in northern
Mali. We also welcome the reintegration of 1,330
former combatants. We hope that any outstanding
issues can be resolved, and that the redeployment plan
can be adopted. More efforts are also needed to ensure
the functioning of local authorities and to address
outstanding matters related to the operationalization of
the northern development zone.
Secondly, with regard to the addressing security
situation, we note with concern the terrorist activities,
the proliferation of self-defence militias, intercommunal
clashes and the negative sentiment of the population
directed towards international forces. Efforts must be
made to address the deteriorating security situation.
The role of national and international security forces is
12/21

15/01/2020

critical in this regard. We commend MINUSMA for its
role in supporting the peace process and in stabilizing
the situation in Centre. As stated in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/983), MINUSMA’s added
focus on central Mali has put additional pressure on the
Mission. While the Mission continues to try to adapt
and rebalance its capacity, it is necessary to focus on a
more sustainable approach.
We concur with the Secretary-General’s observation
that organizational partners are better placed to conduct
counter-terrorism operations beyond the mandate and
capability of the Mission. In this regard, it is necessary
to enhance effective partnerships. It is regrettable
that despite national, multinational and international
efforts, the security situation has not been improving.
We believe that this is testament to the fact that a
military solution alone will not be sufficient to solve
the problems Mali is facing.
Accordingly, with regard to my third point, on the
need to address root causes of instability, support for
the peace process and efforts aimed at improving the
security situation will be realized and succeed only if
they are translated into an improvement in the living
conditions of the Malian population. The alleviation
of poverty and food insecurity and the creation of
opportunities, including income-generating activities,
are therefore critical.
In conclusion, obtaining a national commitment
to the Agreement’s implementation, restoring State
authority and addressing the security and humanitarian
situations are of crucial importance to achieving peace,
stability and sustainable development in Mali.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing.
Estonia expresses its strong support for the
activities of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
I would like to focus my statement today on the
following points: the need for the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, the
deteriorating security situation, and the importance of
accountability.
Full implementation of the peace agreement remains
the basis of a successful political process in Mali. It
is the main tool for addressing the root causes of the
20-01130

15/01/2020

The situation in Mali

conflict and helping to restore trust among the people
of Mali. A crucial aspect in the implementation process
is the full, effective and meaningful participation of
women and youth; a lasting solution will not be possible
without them.
We welcome the holding of the inclusive national
dialogue that was concluded on 22 December. However,
the most important part of the process — implementing
the conclusions of the national dialogue — needs to
start now. Moreover, the process has to support the
implementation of the peace agreement. We count
on the leadership of the Government of Mali and the
political will of all parties to take this process forward.
We are following with great concern the reports of
negative trends in the country, especially the further
deterioration of the security situation in the centre of
the country. The growing number of terrorist attacks
on civilians, targeted attacks on military outposts and
growing resentment towards the international presence
are extremely worrying. Only last week, MINUSMA’s
base in Kidal was attacked again. These terrorist
attacks are simply unacceptable.
We agree that it is important to effectively engage
the local community. Its trust and acceptance are crucial
for the successful implementation of MINUSMA’s
mandate and a sustainable transition. We commend
MINUSMA for the steps taken so far. However, this
remains a key challenge and requires a thorough,
integrated approach and enhanced cooperation with
relevant actors.
Counter-terrorist efforts in Mali require effective
cross-border cooperation among regional and
subregional organizations, the States of the region and
international actors. It is important that Mali and its
neighbouring States take full ownership of the fight
against terrorism. We welcome the efforts of the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and encourage
its further operationalization. Estonia supports the
counter-terrorist efforts in the Sahel by contributing
to French-led Operation Barkhane. The Estonian
parliament recently decided to nearly double our
military personnel deployment in the operation.
Finally, allow me to turn to the question of
accountability. Parties involved in grave human rights
violations and abuses, those fuelling intercommunal
tensions, and perpetrators of crimes against civilians
and peacekeepers must be brought to justice. A
continuous and principled fight against impunity will

S/PV. 8703

not only hold the perpetrators accountable, but is also
a powerful tool in building trust and bridging a way to
lasting peace.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I should like first of all to welcome the
participation by video-teleconference of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Mali. Allow me also to thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing and, through
him, all the staff of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
We welcome their commitment to peace and stability
in Mali.
Again, in recent months, many civilians and soldiers
have died in Mali. Partner and friendly nations of Mali
have also lost troops in the service of peace. On behalf
of Belgium, I would like to express our condolences
and solidarity with them.
Some positive developments in Mali are to be
welcomed, including the holding of the inclusive
national dialogue, which was open to all, a decrease
in intercommunity violence in Centre, thanks in
particular to the efforts of the Government and of
MINUSMA, timid progress towards the redeployment
of reconstituted units to Kidal and signals in the fight
against corruption. I also commend the work of the
International Commission of Inquiry for Mali. The final
report will be presented in June. It will be imperative
to follow up and initiate criminal proceedings without
delay.
The next resumption of the meetings of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee has been
announced. That is good news. We expect the parties to
demonstrate maturity and responsibility in the search
for compromise. A resolution to the question of Kidal
will be an important step.
Despite everything, it is clear that Mali has been
slow to emerge from the crisis. In addition to the
implementation of the 2015 Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, we expect progress on all the
priority actions mentioned in resolution 2480 (2019). I
recall that resolution 2480 (2019) is clear in affirming
that the authors of delaying tactics are liable to
sanctions.
In recent months, we have observed a rise in
criticism of MINUSMA, the French forces and the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. Discontent
seems to be growing among the people, who denounce

20-0113013/21

S/PV.8703

The situation in Mali

not only the presence of foreign forces but also the
absence, ineffectiveness or even illegitimacy of State
services. We must rise to meet this challenge. It is the
very credibility of our action which is at stake, and as
we know, it is above all a boon for the enemies of peace.
We already know the answers. We must protect the
populations throughout Malian territory; listen to them;
offer a desirable future to Malian youth, starting with
an education and jobs of quality; assure the provision
of basic services to all Malians; and act in favour of
justice and against impunity for the perpetrators of
crimes. In other words, in addition to the indispensable
military response in the immediate future, there is an
urgent need to deepen Malian democracy in order to put
a brake on the growing attraction of the social model
advocated by the jihadists. In this respect, political and
administrative decentralization constitutes a priority
project.
MINUSMA remains the most dangerous
peacekeeping operation in the world. We thank the
Secretary-General for his candid comments, including
on the effectiveness of the Mission. MINUSMA’s
mandate is clear. To protect civilians, MINUSMA can
adopt an offensive stance and anticipate threats. The
project of a more mobile, agile and flexible Mission
has our full support. Let us now give it the means to
achieve that.
In conclusion, I would like to say a few words
about the visit of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict to Mali, which I led in my capacity as
Chairman of the Working Group. The Working Group
visited Mali from 8 to 11 December 2019. Several
members of the Working Group joined the visit. We had
meetings in Bamako and Mopti with several national
and international interlocutors. It was a productive visit,
with a rich programme co-organized by MINUSMA,
UNICEF and the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. I thank them for their work. The main issues
we discussed included the problem of schools closed
due to the conflict, the granting of birth certificates, the
adoption of the draft revised child protection code and
the signing of an action plan by the Platform coalition
of armed groups.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing
and welcome Foreign Minister Dramé, who is joining
today’s meeting via video-teleconference.
14/21

15/01/2020

We condemn the attack on a camp of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) on 9 January and wish
the wounded a speedy recovery.
The Secretary-General’s most recent report
(S/2019/983) points to the continued complexity and
fragility of Mali’s security situation, grave violence
within and between communities and a dire humanitarian
situation. The security and economic situation in
northern and central Mali is a cause for concern, while
terrorist forces are threatening regional security. The
Government of Mali and the parties concerned must
take action to resolve the aforementioned issues.
First, the Government of Mali must play an
effective role and resolve differences peacefully in full
consultation with all parties in Mali in order to promote
the peace process and stay jointly committed to national
peace and development. As observed in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, accelerating the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
is the only viable path to lasting peace and stability
in the country, which will require the sustained and
intensified efforts of the Malian Government.
Secondly, the Government of Mali must enhance
regional cooperation so as to respond to cross-border
terrorist operations through holistic means. The
security dynamics in Mali and the surrounding Sahel
region have posed challenges to the implementation of
the peace agreement. The Government of Mali must
truly and effectively assume its primary responsibilities
of protecting its own territory and people, enhance
its security and counter-terrorism capacities, and
gradually take charge of its own security in order to
maintain stability in northern and central Mali.
Thirdly, the Government of Mali needs to
consolidate its economic bases, improve the livelihoods
of its people and make great efforts to achieve
independent and sustainable development so as to
promote peace through development. The Government
should increase its input in northern and central Mali
so that local people can enjoy the peace dividend at an
early date.
MINUSMA and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General have played an important role in
keeping Mali stable, enhancing its security capacities
and supporting and facilitating its peace process, which
is crucial to security and stability in Mali and the
Sahel region. MINUSMA is one of the most dangerous
20-01130

15/01/2020

The situation in Mali

peacekeeping missions of the United Nations. We
encourage the Government to fully collaborate with the
Mission and coordinate with its continuous efforts to
enhance the safety and security of its peacekeepers.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me also thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing.
Like others, I would like to begin by offering my
condolences and those of the British people for the
loss of life we have seen in recent attacks in Mali and
the wider Sahel. I am thinking particularly of last
Thursday’s terrible attack in the Niger, which was an
especially shocking reminder of the cost of instability
in the region, but also of attacks against the personnel
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), which we
condemn, including the 9 January attack on MINUSMA
forces in Tessalit. I join the German Ambassador in
offering condolences for the lives lost by Malian forces,
as well as civilians, of course.
Those developments are a testament to the
urgent need for the international community and the
Government of Mali to work together to help achieve
long-term peace and stability in the country and the
region. It is worth reflecting on where we stand with
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
which was signed in 2015 and is now reaching its fifth
year. Over those five years, we have yet to see its full
implementation. Meanwhile, MINUSMA is losing
troops and the situation in the region continues to
worsen. It is extremely concerning that we have seen
only limited progress towards the implementation of
the peace agreement. The Ambassador of the Niger
said that the parties needed to speed up. I unequivocally
echo that call, which a number of us have been making
for some time.
We welcome recent developments, including the
inclusive national dialogue and the deployment of
reconstituted forces by the Government of Mali to the
north. We also welcome the announcement of a highlevel workshop to increase the participation of women
in the peace process.
Overall, however, I agree with my American
colleague that benchmarks set by the Council must be
met and that failure by the political actors to act for peace
will have to lead to consequences, including sanctions.
In particular, we need to see the transfer of key services
and competencies to regional leaders, as well as the
operationalization of the northern development zone.

S/PV. 8703

I agree with all of those who have talked about the
importance of the meaningful participation of women
in the peace process.
The dynamics in the centre of the country are a
cause of significant concern. I would like to welcome the
Prime Minister’s appointment of a High Representative
to better coordinate efforts there but we now need to
see action. As the Ambassador of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines reminded us, we cannot have security
without development and services — just as we cannot
have development without security.
We therefore need a comprehensive, politicallyled strategy, coordinated across all sectors, to protect
civilians, reduce intercommunal violence, re-establish
basic social services and allow for effective justice and
reconciliation. We know that those things are easier said
than done. It is a complicated and difficult undertaking,
but the implementation of the peace agreement must
happen and it must happen more quickly.
Turning to MINUSMA, I want to echo the tributes
paid by others to MINUSMA and its troops and the
hard and difficult work they do. I would also like to
say that we very much commend MINUSMA’s plans
and efforts to adopt a more mobile, flexible and agile
posture, with high-end capabilities, to enable them to
more effectively carry out their mandated tasks. We
look forward to discussing those issues in more detail.
I would just say as well that the United Kingdom’s
planned deployment of 250 troops to the Mission
is testament to the important role that we believe
MINUSMA and the region play. In that context, I would
like to echo Under-Secretary-General Lacroix’s call for
a swift resolution of the land issues that are hampering
deployment.
We should not have to underline again around
the table the urgency of action to address the drivers
of conflict in Mali and the broader Sahel. The United
Kingdom is ready to play its part alongside others,
through diplomacy, security support, humanitarian aid
and development assistance. However, it is only with
inclusive, effective Malian political leadership that
those international efforts can deliver stability.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Viet Nam.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his insightful briefing.

20-0113015/21

S/PV.8703

The situation in Mali

I share the concerns of the Secretary-General about
the continued delays in the implementation of the 2015
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. It is
also our particular concern that the security situation
in northern and central Mali continues to deteriorate
due to intercommunal violence, armed conflict and
terrorist armed groups’ operations. We condemn the
recent terrorist attacks against the Malian security
forces and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
We pay tribute to peacekeepers and members of the
Malian armed forces who have sacrificed their lives for
the sake of the peace and security of the Malian people.
In the light of the findings and recommendations in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/983), the letter
on the situation in Mali and the work of MINUSMA, my
delegation wishes to make the following observations.
First, we are of the view that implementing the 2015
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation should continue
to be the key strategy for sustaining peace and security
in Mali. In that vein, we welcome the conclusion of the
inclusive national dialogue sessions held in November
and December 2019. National ownership and the full
participation of the parties concerned in the inclusive
national dialogue in Mali should be encouraged so
that all differences can be bridged. We also note
efforts to push forward the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in northern Mali.
Secondly, we urge relevant parties to uphold their
responsibilities to protect civilians in armed conflict,
especially women and children. It is also necessary
to increase the participation of women and youth in
political and economic decision-making processes in
Mali.
Thirdly, we support the activities of MINUSMA.
We welcome international efforts to sustain peace in
Mali and support the role of the African Union and
the Economic Community of West African States in
making a contribution to peacekeeping, security and
sustainable development in Mali.
Lastly, we call on all regional and international
partners to speed up the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and its support
plan. We welcome cooperation between France and the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, reinforced
at the Pau summit in France on 13 January, with the aim
of protecting civilians and preventing the terrorist threat
16/21

15/01/2020

from spreading into bordering countries, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali.
Mr. Dramé (Mali) (spoke in French): First of all,
on behalf of the President of the Republic of Mali, I
would like to very warmly congratulate Viet Nam on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council.
I would like to warmly congratulate the delegation
of the United States of America, led by Ambassador
Kelly Craft, for the remarkable work done at the helm
of the Council last month.
On behalf of the delegation of Mali, I take this
opportunity to congratulate the new members of the
Council — Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam. In the same vein,
I commend the important contribution made by the
outgoing members — Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea,
Kuwait, Peru and Poland — to international peace and
security.
I would also like to thank all members of the
Security Council, the countries that contribute troops
and personnel to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
the African Union, the European Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and Algeria, in
its capacity as President of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee, for their invaluable support to Mali at this
most complex and difficult time in its history.
I cannot end my thanks without reiterating the
profound debt of gratitude the President of the Republic
of Mali and the Government and the people of Mali owe
to Secretary-General António Guterres for his steadfast
commitment to peace, security and development in Mali
and the Sahel, which he demonstrated by attending the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)-France summit
in Pau, less than 48 hours ago.
First, the Government of Mali takes note of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/983). I thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations, for his briefing.
Secondly, we also take note of the comments and
high expectations of Council members.
20-01130

15/01/2020

The situation in Mali

On behalf of the Government of Mali, I would like
to make a few remarks and to highlight, in particular,
the most recent developments in Mali since the
publication of the Secretary-General’s report. Let me
begin by reassuring the Council that today, more than
ever before, the Government of the Republic of Mali
remains very committed to the diligent implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation.
Admittedly, the work of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee has been suspended for some time, but I
can inform the Council that the Committee will meet in
Bamako on 19 January.
In addition, during that period, the movements that
signed the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali and the Government of Mali continued to
talk during a productive inter-Malian dialogue and
to consult each other. It is not an exaggeration to say
that, at the end of that period, the Malian parties once
again reached agreement on the key issues pertaining
to the implementation of the Agreement. It is that
inter-Malian dialogue that has enabled the significant
steps forward that are on the agenda of the next meeting
of the Agreement’s monitoring committee, to be held at
the end of this week.
That productive inter-Malian dialogue also enabled
the participation of the Coordination des mouvements
de l’Azawad and Platform coalition of armed groups in
the inclusive national dialogue. Their participation has
been the key to the success of the dialogue, which has
been welcomed in Mali, by our immediate neighbours
in Africa and by the world. The participation of the
Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad, which had
suspended its contribution to the preparatory work,
is the result of contact being maintained, despite the
suspension, throughout the period from August onward.
I can assure you that today, all the Malian parties are
committed to taking the last important steps towards
the implementation of the Agreement.
From Sunday onward, we will enter a period of
accelerated implementation of the Agreement, thanks
to the inter-Malian dialogue, which benefited from the
contribution of the entire international community,
and to MINUSMA. I welcome the good offices of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
his staff in helping to bring the Malian parties together
outside the Agreement’s monitoring committee.
The national dialogue was a complete success,
with the participation of trade unions and employers’

S/PV. 8703

organizations and of youth and women’s associations,
and its outcomes were adopted on 22 December 2019.
Among the recommendations and outcomes, it was
decided to place particular emphasis on four, which,
it should be recalled, are intended to speed up the
implementation of the Agreement.
The first resolution concerns the holding of
parliamentary elections on the basis of the current
electoral constituencies. Needless to say, there is a strong
commitment on the part of the country’s stakeholders
to launch a process of territorial reorganization and to
draw new administrative and electoral boundaries with
a view to further the representation in parliament of all
the country’s components.
The second resolution concerns the holding of
a referendum and the review of the Constitution of
25 February 1992 involving all stakeholders. The
organization of legislative elections and the holding of
a constitutional referendum will create the conditions
for speeding up the political and institutional reforms
needed to establish a National Assembly that is
representative of Mali’s national diversity.
The third resolution concerns the immediate,
countrywide deployment of the reconstituted defence
and security forces and the adoption of legislation in
the course of 2020 on the role of traditional leaders
and powers and of religious authorities in conflict
prevention and management.
The fourth resolution concerns the review of
certain provisions of the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali that emerged from the process,
in accordance with the mechanisms provided for in
article 65 of the Agreement.
Although concerns had been raised about the
manner in which the Agreement would be discussed,
the fact that the inclusive national dialogue had
discussed it did not sabotage the process. On the
contrary, it gave new legitimacy to the Agreement
and to the commitment of the Malian parties — hence
the recommendation to review certain mechanisms
to facilitate its implementation. All those issues
had already been discussed during the inter-Malian
exchanges that preceded the national dialogue.
As I have said, the national dialogue was an
important moment in the life of the nation, when a
genuine national consensus was forged through active
solidarity. By enabling all national stakeholders,

20-0113017/21

S/PV.8703

The situation in Mali

including the Coordination des mouvements de
l’Azawad and the Platform, to actively participate
in open discussions on the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali and the means of enriching that
precious instrument for the restoration of peace in Mali,
the national dialogue has changed the Agreement from
a bilateral instrument between the Mouvements and the
Government to a popular national issue.
For his part, the President of the Republic of Mali
undertook to do everything in his power to ensure that
the resolutions and recommendations stemming from
the national dialogue are implemented in keeping with
the laws in force. A follow-up mechanism will be set
up shortly.
On the question of the redeployment of defence and
security forces, I am pleased to inform the Council of
the tangible progress that has been made. A technical
committee on security met at the end of November and
drew up a plan for the deployment of several battalions
in the northern regions of the country. In other words,
the signatory parties — the Government parties and
the military leaders — with the encouragement of the
international community, especially MINUSMA, have
reached agreement on a deployment plan that will be
endorsed next Sunday at the meeting of the Agreement’s
monitoring committee.
From that moment on, the way will be paved for the
deployment of at least 1,330 former combatants from
the signatory armed groups, through the mechanism
known as Operational Coordination Mechanism, in the
four northern regions. The plan is to deploy a company
to Ménaka and a battalion each to Timbuktu, Gao
and Kidal.
Similarly,
confirming
the
Government’s
determination to honour the commitments contained
in the Agreement, the President signed a decree on
12 December 2019 to appoint, on an exceptional
basis, approximately 100 former combatants from the
signatory armed groups to various officer ranks in
the Malian army. That is not an effective return to the
forces of so-called former FAMAs, or those who at one
point in the country’s history left the national army, but
they have come back and are today working in the same
uniforms, under the same flag as their brothers-in-arms.
I believe that there are significant advances taking
place on the ground in Mali today and that it was my
duty to bring them to the attention of your august
Council. Security sector reform is under way and is
18/21

15/01/2020

being strengthened with the adoption of an action plan
by the National Council for Security Sector Reform,
which is attached to the Prime Minister and Head
of Government. With regard to the tensions among
signatory parties to the Agreement in the region and
around the town of Ménaka, I am pleased to announce
that a positive outcome among them was reached.
Turning to the development issues in the northern
regions of Mali, I am also pleased to note the very
significant progress made in the promulgation of
all the texts constituting the legal and institutional
framework of the northern development zone in Mali
and the establishment of the Sustainable Development
Fund, which is the financial instrument responsible
for implementing the development strategy for the
northern regions, to which the Government contributed
$72 million in 2019. For the fiscal year 2020, $44 million
has been earmarked. These financial efforts of the
State further illustrate the Government’s willingness to
expedite the implementation of the Agreement. At the
joint initiative of the Government and the signatories,
a pilot project will soon be launched in the northern
regions of the country.
In terms of national reconciliation, I can assure
Council members that an important step has also
been taken. The Truth, Justice and Reconciliation
Commission has to date registered 16,000 depositions
from victims through its regional offices, and public
hearings began on 8 December 2019. The mandate of
the Commission has been extended until 31 December
2021 and now covers all incidents that occurred in Mali
from 1960 to 2019.
The law of national understanding, promulgated in
July 2019 exonerates persons who committed or were
accomplices to crimes in the context of the painful
events that occurred in Mali from January 2012, in
accordance with the recommendations of the Conference
of National Understanding. However, the law does not
constitute a guarantee of impunity. On the contrary, the
law of national understanding specifically excludes war
crimes, crimes against humanity, rape and crimes not
subject to a statute of limitations. Notwithstanding real
progress on the implementation of the Agreement, the
Malian parties must again redouble their commitments
and efforts so as to enable the Malian people to fully
enjoy the dividends of peace.
The remarks made by Council members today have
been heard. Their concerns and observations will drive
20-01130

15/01/2020

The situation in Mali

us to step up our determination to make progress in
the implementation of the Agreement. Myriad immense
challenges persist, in particular the deterioration of
the security environment, especially in central Mali,
intercommunal tensions and the lack of financial
resources, namely, pledges made by partners.
The situation in the regions of central Mali
remains a source of major concern for the Government.
The tragic events of the night of 30 September
to 1 October 2019 in Mondoro and Boulékéssi
and the terrorist attack of 18 November 2019 in
Indelimane, in the Ménaka region, remind us that
our adversaries — terrorist groups, drug traffickers
and other types of traffickers — are determined to
destabilize Mali, its neighbouring countries and the
region as a whole. Worse still, in addition to sowing
terror in our shared space on a daily basis, these forces
of evil are exploiting our populations, pitting one group
against another. The factions created and manipulated
by these criminal groups stoke intercommunal violence,
which has unfortunately so afflicted our country, as
well as our neighbours.
The Government is fully aware of the complexity
of the situation in central Mali, which is why it has
opted for a comprehensive approach by adopting an
integrated security plan for the central regions and
developing a consultation framework to politically
manage the political issues of Centre. The Head of
State recently appointed a high representative for this
purpose. Multifaceted efforts are under way today to
attenuate tensions in a perceptible way in the region. The
arrangement provides for political measures, including
dialogue among communities, the strengthening of the
security apparatus to protect people and their property,
and providing peace dividends for the people.
In addition to devising an integrated security plan
for the Centre region, the Prime Minister has made
a number of visits to Centre, and the results are very
encouraging. This week, the High Islamic Council of
Mali is organizing an important forum on issues relating
to religion in the centre of the country. The ulemas of
Mali will have the opportunity to discuss their views on
the practices of Islam and the abuses that have caused
such pain in the centre of our country.
With regard to the human rights situation, I would
like to emphasize the Malian Government’s resolve
to respect and ensure respect for human rights and
to fight impunity. The four cases of human rights

S/PV. 8703

violations mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report
and attributed to the Malian defence and security forces
will be investigated and subject to administrative and
disciplinary measures when responsibility is assigned.
Similarly, the Government is aware of its primary
responsibility to protect civilians, which is why it
will continue to deploy the efforts needed to ensure
the security of people and their property throughout
the territory. It is also the reason why, following the
violence that Centre experienced during the first half
of last year, several alleged perpetrators of violent acts
were arrested and are now in the hands of the courts
to answer for their actions. It is true, however, that
the security situation, the lack of competent public
services in some towns and expertise deficiencies in
certain fields do not favour the rapid conclusion of any
open procedures.
Shouldering its full responsibility for managing the
humanitarian crisis, the Government of Mali is working
tirelessly and in good faith to ensure the diligent and
inclusive implementation of the relevant provisions
of the Agreement, which provide for, inter alia, a
framework for the return of refugees and displaced
persons to their places of origin. The Government is
also continuing its actions and programmes aimed
at providing those affected with an improved quality
of life, notably through the provision of basic social
services, in accordance with the national humanitarian
action policy and our action plan for the period 20162020.
The difficulties that the population is currently
facing are unfortunately being used by those acting
in bad faith, which sparked the protests that led to the
pillaging of the MINUSMA camp on 12 October 2019
in Sévaré. Similarly, a few days ago, in Bandiagara,
there were demonstrations against the presence of
United Nations forces. Every time such incidents have
occurred, the Government has unambiguously and
fully assumed all of its responsibilities, not only by
condemning them but also by inviting Malian public
opinion not to confuse our friends with our enemies,
or confuse the international forces that are in our
country at our request and with our approval — at
our insistence — with those who are calling for their
departure in order to bring about the ruin of our country
and institutions.
There is no ambiguity in the position of the
Malian Government is this regard every time there

20-0113019/21

S/PV.8703

The situation in Mali

is an incident. We will continue to raise awareness
among our people on the ground so that the abuses that
arise from time to time remain exceptions to the rule.
Furthermore, when looking at the way that people in
Bamako and elsewhere act with regard to those who
are calling for protest against international forces,
we realize that the majority of the Malian people are
grateful for the efforts of the international community
and the international forces that have come to help us
at our request.
Such acknowledgement is something that the
Government of Mali would like to reiterate to members
of the Council today. We express our deep gratitude for
the efforts that the international community undertaken
from the outbreak of the Malian crisis until today. That
is why we have increased our contact with those in
charge of MINUSMA at all levels so as to reassure the
MINUSMA forces, personnel and leadership of our
solidarity with them at all times and of our gratitude
and that of the Malian people.
What some call an anti-international force sentiment
is not widespread in Mali. It is only from a minority.
The Malian people, in general, continue to acknowledge
and appreciate the support of international forces and
their efforts on behalf of their Malian brothers in arms.
We say that to the Malian people every day. I had the
opportunity to say it only a few days ago to MINUSMA
when, following demonstrations on the Dogon Plateau
in Bandiagara, I went to the MINUSMA premises to
say that MINUSMA is us. MINUSMA is made up of
people from Togo, Burkina Faso, Senegal and the Niger
and our friends from outside Africa who decided to
send their children to us because we are in difficulty. I
ask the Council to believe that this message of resolve
and reason from the Government of the Republic of
Mali is well understood by the Malian people and by
Malian public opinion. That enables the President of the
Republic to say and reiterate to the diplomatic corps,
particularly when they present their credentials, and to
traditional authorities and civil society that Mali will
be eternally grateful to the international community.
The regional dimension of the Malian crisis
represents another, and not insignificant, challenge to
the implementation of the Agreement. That is at the
heart of the commitment of the States members of the
G-5 Sahel to stabilizing the region. As I was saying
earlier, the increase in terrorist attacks in recent weeks
in the Sahel region, particularly in the tri-border region

20/21

15/01/2020

of Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, highlights the
urgent need for the international community to step up
its efforts at our side in order to ensure that the G-5
Sahel Joint Force has the necessary human, material
and financial resources to implement its mandate.
As Council members can imagine, Mali welcomes
the conclusions of the Pau summit, held between the
Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel and the President
of the French Republic, in particular the common
commitment to combating active terrorist groups
operating in the area by immediately focusing military
efforts in the tri-border region under the joint command
of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force and Operation Barkhane,
targeting, as a priority, Islamic State in Greater Sahara,
a branch of Da’esh, or Islamic State; the training of
national armies, with particular emphasis on sharing
intelligence with foreign forces; the restoration of State
authority throughout the Sahel countries, particularly
in the Kidal region; and working in partnership for the
development of the Sahel.
I welcome the decision of the Heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS, our subregional organization,
to strengthen support for the fight against terrorism in
the region.
In conclusion, I wish to commend the remarkable
work being done on the ground by the women and
men of MINUSMA under the able leadership of
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, whose good offices,
constantly provided to us, have enabled Mali to make
progress towards national consensus. The good offices
of Ambassador Annadif made it possible to engage in
a political dialogue that led to what is known as the
political agreement on governance, signed on 2 May
2019. That resulted in the formation of an inclusive
Government, making it possible to significantly
ease political and social tensions in the country in
a meaningful and verifiable manner. We hope that
the Head of MINUSMA, Mr. Annadif, continues to
provide his good offices so that Mali and the Malian
people can regain the consensus without which it will
not be possible to achieve the national unity to enable
our country to overcome the challenges and ward
off threats.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to all the victims of the Malian crisis, civilian and
military, foreign and Malian alike, all of whom fell
for the freedom of Mali. I reiterate the gratitude of
the President of the Republic, the Government and

20-01130

15/01/2020

The situation in Mali

the entire people to the French Barkhane force, to the
troop-contributing countries of MINUSMA and to all
multilateral and bilateral partners for their unwavering
support towards a long-term and definitive settlement
of the Malian crisis.

S/PV. 8703

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal consultations
to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

20-0113021/21
