240

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Sealon

3. Invites the Governments which have not yet done
so to communicate their comments or suggestions or
to bring them up to date, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 31 /9;
4. · Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the necessary facilities and
services;
5. Invites the Special Committee to submit a report
on its work to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth
session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
i'ts thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Report of the
Special Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of
the Principle of Non-Use of Force in International
Relations".

61st plenary meeting
9 November 1979
34/51.

State of signatures and ratifications of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 concerning the respect for human
rights in armed conflicts

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/44 of 8 December 1977,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the state of signatures and ratifications of
the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 concerning the respect for human rights in
armed conflicts, 4
Noting the fact that thus far only a limited number
of States have ratified or acceded to the two Protocols,
Convinced of the continuing value of established humanitarian rules relating to armed conflict and the need
to secure the full observance of human rights in armed
conflicts pending the earliest possible termination of
such conflicts,
Mindful of the need for continued improvement and
further expansion of the body of humanitarian rules relating to armed conflict, of which the two Protocols form
part,
Noting in this context the importance of the United
Nations Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions of
Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be
Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, whose first meeting was held in
September 1979 and whose second meeting is to be
held in 1980,
1. Reiterates its call contained in resolution 32/44
that all States should consider without delay the matter
of ratifying or acceding to the two Protocols Additional
to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 concerning the respect for human rights in armed conflicts;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the
General Assembly annually, preferably at the beginning
of each calendar year, of the state of ratifications of and
accessions to the two Protocols with a view to enabling
the Assembly to consider the matter at a later stage if
it deems it appropriate.
76th plenary meeting
23 November 1979
4

A/34/445.

34/141.

Report of the International Law Commission

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-first session, 5
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development of international law and its codification in order
to make it a more effective means of implementing the
purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of
the United Nations and in the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Co-operation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations 0 and to give increased
importance to its role in relations among States,
Noting with appreciation that at its thirty-first session
the International Law Commission, pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 33/139 of 19 December 1978,
completed the first reading of the draft articles on succession of States in respect of matters other than treaties,
Noting further with appreciation the progress made
by the International Law Commission in the preparation
of draft articles on State responsibility and on treaties
concluded between States and international organizations or between international organizations, as well as
the work done by it regarding the study of the law of
the non-navi!.!ational uses of international watercourses,
jurisdictionai' immunities of States and their property,
the status of the diplomatic courier and the diplomatic
bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier and the
review of the multilateral treaty-making process,
Taking note of the decision of the Swiss Federal
Council on the question of the privileges and immunities
of the members of the International Law Commission,7
Welcoming the considerations and recommendations
contained in the report of the International Law Commission regarding the programme and methods of work
of the Commission with a view to the timelv and effective fulfilment of the tasks entrusted to it. ·
Recognizing the importance of referring legal and
drafting questions to the Sixth Co111mittee. includin~
topics which might be sub111itted to the International
Law Commission, thus enablin!.! the Commission further
to enhance its contribution to ~the progressive development of international law and its codification.
I. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-first session,
including the fact of the transmittal to the SecretaryGeneral of the Commission's observations on the techniques and procedures used in the elaboration of multilateral treaties as requested by the General Assembly
in its resolution 32/ 48 of 8 December 1977;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for the work accomplished at that
session;
3. Approves the programme of work planned by the
International Law Commission for 1980;8
4. Recommends that the International Law Commission should:
(a) Continue its work on succession of States in
respect of matters other than treaties with the aim of
completing, at its thirty-second session, the study of
5 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. JO (A/34/10 and Corr.I).
0 Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
7 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. JO (A/34/10 and Corr.I), para. 12.
8 Ibid., paras. 201-206.
