S/PV.7314

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7314th meeting

Tuesday, 18 November 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Quinlan .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. De Antueno
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Cai Weiming
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Šorytė
Mr. Maes
Mr. Laro
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Jones

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
First report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 2169
(2014) (S/2014/774)
Fourth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2014/776)

14-63485 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1463485*

S/PV.7314

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
First report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 6 of resolution 2169 (2014) (S/2014/774)
Fourth report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2014/776)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq; Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al-Hussein, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
and Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/774, which contains the first report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 2169 (2014). I also wish to draw the attention
of Council members to document S/2014/776, which
contains the fourth report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution
2107 (2013).
I now give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: Let me begin by presenting the
Secretary-General’s report pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 2169 (2014) on the activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the
most recent developments in Iraq. I am honoured to
be joined here today by the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Valerie Amos, and the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra’ad
Al-Hussein.
Twelve months ago, the city of Fallujah fell into
the hands of the terrorist organization the Islamic
2/10

18/11/2014

State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), setting off the
displacement of some 2 million people — currently one
of the largest such populations globally. From the very
beginning, ISIL’s strategy has been obvious — to insert
itself into the ethnic and religious fault lines of Iraq,
to undermine legitimate authorities and to spread fear
among the communities. Its goals have also been clear
from the beginning — to destroy the Iraqi State and
replace it with a state of terror that is built on genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity. To this end,
it continues using parts of Iraq and neighbouring Syria
to advance on the rest of the region and threaten global
peace and security.
The crisis in Iraq has been further aggravated by
the unresolved political, social and economic problems
of the country’s difficult transition to democracy; by
the lack of agreement on the full implementation of
the Constitution; by stalled reforms and sectarian
differences; and by the country’s exposure to the broader
regional and global rifts. This explosive combination
has consistently undermined public trust in the new
Iraqi State for years, and it has driven communities
apart, ultimately creating fertile ground for violence.
As the crisis unfolded, Iraq almost collapsed. Its
western provinces were overrun by ISIL; the Kurdistan
region openly spoke of seceding; the southern
governorates struggled with poverty while producing
the country’s riches; Baghdad was threatened on a daily
basis by barrage of suicide bombers and improvized
explosive devices; and Iraq’s minorities have been
subjected to unspeakable horrors. Faced with a common
threat, the political, community and religious leaders
across the country focused on pulling back from the
brink and saving Iraq. A strategy emerged, which I am
honoured to report was supported and facilitated by the
United Nations Mission in Iraq. Leaders agreed that the
response to ISIL should be based on the Constitution,
national unity and reconciliation.
First came the election of a new Speaker, a new
President and a new Prime Minister. Despite the odds,
this process was completed within the constitutional
timeline. Then the focus shifted on ensuring a
peaceful transition between the outgoing and incoming
Administrations — a rare occurrence in Iraq’s turbulent
history. Finally, an inclusive Government of national
unity was formed, based on national political agreement
and a new ministerial programme. In the past few days,
the Prime Minister has issued instructions preventing
the armed forces from hoisting banners or flags other

14-63485

18/11/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

than the Iraqi national symbols, and discontinuing
the use of logos and insignia of parties or political
organizations. In a separate move, the Government has
decided to allow displaced students to attend schools
and universities in their current areas of displacement.
These are just a few examples of the first steps in a
broader initiative to restore confidence among Iraq’s
communities.
Today I encourage the Iraqi Government to continue
moving forward with consolidating its political,
security and economic efforts in an inclusive and
comprehensive manner in order to kick-start national
reconciliation and dialogue and restore stability and
economic growth to the country. This will also entail
re-engaging all disaffected communities, particularly
those located in areas of current conflict.
The Iraqi Government’s security strategy to counter
ISIL is predicated upon organizing, supporting and
integrating local communities into a national system
that will allow them to keep their homes safe from
terrorism; on restructuring and empowering the armed
forces to fight ISIL; on strengthening cooperation with
the Peshmerga; and on working with the international
coalition and Iraq’s allies and neighbours. I particularly
welcome the Government’s efforts to improve its
cooperation with local tribes and other residents who are
committed to protecting their communities from ISIL.
In this process, the payment of salaries, the provision
of weapons and training, and legal guarantees to the
volunteers should be treated as a priority.
Spurred by the growing brutality of ISIL, illustrated
most recently by the massacre of 322 members of the
Albu Nimr tribe, communities across the country are
beginning to push back. Most recently, the Anbar
and Ninewa Provincial Councils reached agreement
with the Government to form local forces. It is the
cooperation between the Iraqi Army, local volunteers
and outside support that has made the liberation of
towns like Amerli, Jurf al-Sakhar and Zumar possible.
Most recently, this morning the oil refinery at Beiji and
surrounding areas have been brought back under the
control of the Government.
Nevertheless, the presence of militia groups
operating outside State structures remains a challenge.
To deal with this, the Government is putting in place
measures that should prevent non-State groups from
bearing arms in public. I take this opportunity to
also urge all armed groups outside of ISIL to seek the
resolution of their grievances through serious dialogue

S/PV.7314

with the Government in order to achieve genuine
political reconciliation and to stand united against the
danger of terrorism and violence for a better future for
all Iraqis. UNAMI remains committed to assisting the
Government of Iraq in these processes in accordance
with its mandate.
The process of working with local fighters should
also go hand in hand with restructuring, retraining and
re-equipping the Iraqi army. I am pleased to report
that important initial steps have been taken, including
the appointment of a number of new commanders.
Moreover, the Government’s programme provides for
the creation of the Iraqi national guard. This force would
allow people to volunteer and defend their homes, with
legal guarantees that the Government would provide
support in line with the standards of other branches of
the Iraqi security services. The United Nations Mission
in Iraq has been asked to provide advice and technical
assistance in the legal drafting process for the national
guard law, and we look forward to working with our
partners to conclude this process as soon as possible.
I am further happy to report some important
positive developments in the relationship between
Erbil and Baghdad. Four days ago, with the support
of the United Nations Mission in Iraq and the United
States, an interim agreement was reached that allows
public sector employees in the Kurdistan Region
to begin receiving their salaries. The Kurdistan
Regional Government will also resume partially its oil
contribution to the federal budget at a time of national
crisis. This important step breaks a deadlock that was
at the core of the most serious deterioration of relations
between Baghdad and the Kurdistan Region to date.
It also reflects a new-found willingness to engage in
dialogue and cooperation to tackle difficult issues.
On behalf of the Secretary-General, I want to
commend Iraqi Prime Minister Haidar Al Abadi and
Kurdistan Regional Government Prime Minister
Nechirvan Barzani for reaching this agreement,
which is to the benefit of all Iraqis. I would like to
encourage both leaders to seize the momentum and
swiftly move forward towards a comprehensive,
fair and constitutional solution to all outstanding
issues, including the enactment of oil and gas and
revenue-sharing laws. UNAMI, as always, stands ready
to continue providing its good offices, as well as legal
and technical support, to this process.
The Iraqi Government’s efforts are being reinforced
by the support of the international community. I would

14-634853/10

S/PV.7314

The situation concerning Iraq

like to thank those among Iraq’s neighbouring States
that have been responding with generous pledges and the
delivery of vital humanitarian and security assistance in
response to the crisis. I have recently visited with some
of Iraq’s regional partners, which expressed readiness
to establish a strategic relationship with Baghdad. This
coincides with the Government’s ongoing efforts to
engage its neighbours as part of a comprehensive effort
to promote stability in Iraq and the region. I strongly
welcome the Government’s efforts to explore the
elements of a common political and regional security
approach to combat ISIL. This has been a key feature
in the discussions that Iraq’s leaders have pursued with
Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, the
United Arab Emirates and others.
From the beginning of 2014 and until the end
of October, at least 10,000 people have been killed
and almost 20,000 injured. These are devastating
times for the country. My colleagues Ms. Amos and
Mr. Al-Hussein will brief the Council on humanitarian
and human rights developments. I will just take this
opportunity to call on the Government to begin the
process of reforming the criminal justice system of Iraq
in order to promote accountability and strengthen the
rule of law and the protection of human rights. In line
with its programme, I also urge Iraq to move swiftly
forward on an amnesty law that is in line with the
Constitution.
As we remain focused on the critical humanitarian
situation, let us not forget or overlook the need for
development support in Iraq. The new Government
has inherited a dire fiscal situation; it is in need of
international support not only to confront the menace of
terrorism through military action, but to also implement
vital fiscal, economic and social reforms.
I wish to present briefly the fourth report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution
2107 (2013) on the issue of missing Kuwaiti and thirdparty persons and property (S/2014/776). I wish that
I could report to the Council significant progress on
the missing Kuwaitis and the Kuwaiti national archives
since our last report (S/2014/485). The lack of immediate
results, however, should not be the only yardstick by
which we measure success. Iraq-Kuwait relations today
are at their peak. UNAMI’s endeavours and Iraq’s
persistence, especially in relation to the missing, have
been noteworthy. In the past four months, as in the 13
months before that, Iraqis have shown an unwavering
commitment to the search for the missing Kuwaitis.

4/10

18/11/2014

Exploring leads, debriefing witnesses and informants,
and digging trenches have taken place in a purposeful
manner, despite the debilitating security situation. This
has been recognized and appreciated by Kuwait.
In September, a witness travelled to Kuwait; this
was only the second witness to come forward since
2004. Sadly, the visit and the identification of the site
that this witness had provided did not yield immediate
results. A second witness, who has approached UNAMI
volunteering to help, is going to travel to Kuwait in the
coming days. Our teams are also working on the case
of a third potential witness who may hold the key to a
site containing a number of remains. These sensitive
discussions on the subject show that we can continue
engaging with Kuwait, Iraq and the families of the
missing persons.
Last but not least, UNAMI has been unanimously
welcomed by the tripartite mechanism as an observer,
which I read as a vote of confidence in our impartiality,
trustworthiness and work. I assure the Council and the
families of the missing that UNAMI will continue to
do all that it can to live up to the trust that has been
placed in us.
Two days ago, on 16 November, an explosion
targeted a United Nations convoy in Baghdad. Thanks
to the professionalism of the United Nations security
teams, all our colleagues are safe. This incident
reminds us of the conditions of hardship under which
our staff must operate. As such, I would like to express
my appreciation for their daily sacrifice, and to express
appreciation to the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral for their support and understanding of our work.
I also wish to express my appreciation and gratitude to
my political deputy, Mr. Gyorgy Busztin, for having
borne this responsibility with passion and commitment.
I also thank my humanitarian deputy, Ms. Jacqueline
Badcock, for her commitment and service in overseeing
the humanitarian and development operations at a
crucial time for Iraq. I wish both of them the very best
in their new endeavours after they leave UNAMI.
Once again, I express my deep and sincere
appreciation to the Government and people of Iraq for
their continued cooperation and assistance during these
difficult times.
The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Al-Hussein.

14-63485

18/11/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

Mr. Al-Hussein (spoke in Arabic): I am delighted
to return to the Security Council in my new role as the
new High Commissioner for Human Rights and I thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the
Council on the situation in Iraq.
It is forbidden in Islam to oversimplify sharia
matters and ignore established Islamic sciences. It is
forbidden in Islam to ignore the reality of contemporary
times when deriving legal rulings. It is forbidden in
Islam to kill the innocent. It is forbidden in Islam to
kill emissaries, ambassadors and diplomats; hence
it is forbidden to kill journalists and aid workers. It
is forbidden in Islam to harm or mistreat in any way
Christians or any “people of the scripture”. It is obligatory
to consider the Yazidis as people of the scripture. The
re-introduction of slavery is forbidden in Islam; it was
abolished by universal consensus. It is forbidden in
Islam to force people to convert. It is forbidden in Islam
to deny women their rights. It is forbidden in Islam to
deny children their rights. It is forbidden in Islam to
torture people. It is forbidden in Islam to disfigure the
dead. And it is forbidden in Islam to declare a caliphate
without consensus from all Muslims. Those are among
the points in a letter authored by 126 Muslim scholars
drawn from all parts of the world that they addressed to
Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi two months ago. I will return to
the letter shortly.
(spoke in English)
So monstrous are the crimes being committed by
the takfiris in Iraq — not just in violation of sharia
but of customary law, to which sharia is a significant
contributor — the world is staggered by them. On the
face of the broad evidence now existing, particularly in
respect of the Yazidis, and subject to the determination
by a competent court of law, it is possible that 3 out of the
5 offenses falling under the crime of genocide, as listed
in the Genocide Convention and the Rome Statute, have
been perpetrated by the individuals within the takfiri
leadership of what is also known as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which is also known as the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and as Daesh. Out
of the 11 offenses defined as crimes against humanity in
the Rome Statute, they are likely guilty of involvement
in up to nine of the offenses. As for war crimes, their
commission is also virtually undeniable on any number
of offenses where the relevant context is applicable.
The authors of those crimes are people whose actions
are nothing but disgusting, and whose consciences have
demonstrably been annihilated.

S/PV.7314

This takfiri group now controls a large swathe
of Iraqi territory, and seems bent on subjecting every
woman, man and child in it to its razor-thin, almost
blank, world-view. The scale and violence of ISIL’s
brutality towards civilians shreds every principle
relevant to human rights. And yet their fanaticism
has flourished in part because of the damage wrought
by years of conflict in Iraq, rhe early ruthless
attacks on the Shia population by that other takfiri
group — Al-Qaida — beginning in 2003, the equally
brutal counter-attacks by the Shia militia against
parts of the Sunni population. the subsequent clear
marginalization and persecution of large segments
of the Sunni population, targeted killings and and
cold-blooded attacks on innocent passers-by, many
perpetrated by Shia militias acting with impunity.
The people of Iraq have also endured discrimination,
corruption, rampant impunity, a lack of inclusive
participatory processes and failure to promote and
protect their economic, social, cultural, civil and
political rights. Their resulting widespread poverty and
unequal access to basic services constitute silent human
rights violations. Moreover, respect for the standards
of due process and fair trials and for the international
prohibition of torture has been, and continues to be,
problematic.
These must be considered root causes of the current
crisis. However, the new Iraqi Government is starting to
break with this pattern and is becoming more inclusive
in its policies. This is to be welcomed.
As I just noted, severe and apparently systematic
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights laws have been perpetrated by ISIL and associated
armed groups in northern Iraq. Victims have reported
wanton killings and summary public executions;
abductions, rape and enslavement of women and young
girls, with reports of girls and women being openly
sold at slave markets; brutal violence against children,
and the forced recruitment of children as young as 12;
denial of all fundamental freedoms; and the deliberate
persecution of ethnic and religious groups including
Turkmen, Shabak, Christians, Yazidis, SabeaMandeans, Kaka’e, Faili Kurds, Arab Shia and other
Sunnis.
Women and girls have suffered extremely grievous
violations of their rights. Many who have escaped
captivity report physical and sexual assault, sexual
slavery, trafficking and forced marriage. They are
literally sold in open markets. During a mission to Iraq

14-634855/10

S/PV.7314

The situation concerning Iraq

in October, my team led by Assistant Secretary General
Ivan Šimonović met girls as young as 13 who had been
kidnapped and raped before managing to escape. They
said many others, of the same age, remained captive.
Children have been viciously tortured by ISIL, and
many others have been forced to watch and participate
in barbaric executions and torture. Boys as young as
12 have been recruited and forced to form front lines
during combat to shield older ISIL soldiers.
It seems ISIL-controlled areas have been largely
emptied of ethnic and religious minorities, whose
members have fled, been captured or killed. Currently,
at least 1,500 captive members of persecuted ethnic
and religious groups are in ISIL hands, and their fate
is of extreme concern. The perpetrators of these crimes
must be brought to justice.
Iraqi Security Forces and affiliated armed groups
have also violated human rights, according to reports
received by my Office and the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The Office of the
United Nations High Commisioner for Human Rights
and UNAMI continue to receive reports of violent
attacks, harassment and the illegal arrest ofjoumalists.
The anti-terrorism law of 2005 is another continuing
concern, in that it fails to respect binding international
commitments regarding the administration of justice
and the prohibition of torture. My Office is preparing a
report on that issue.
The conduct of particular military operations,
including air strikes and shelling, may have also
violated the principles of distinction and proportionality
under international humanitarian law, and should be
investigated.
In the past, armed groups affiliated with the
Government have killed, abducted and threatened
civilians, particularly Shia armed groups such as Asaib
Ahl Al-Haq. These intolerable practices must not be
allowed to continue, and the Government should end
the impunity under which these groups operate.
Accountability for violations is above all the
responsibility of the State. But, as I have said, the
crimes committed in Iraq are of such scale and gravity
that in all likelihood they qualify as international
crimes, subject to the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). I call upon the Government to
accede to the Rome Statute and, at the very least, to
accept the ICC’s jurisdiction over the current situation
under article 12 (3). International crimes such as war
6/10

18/11/2014

crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide could
also be included in the Iraqi criminal code.
Following a lengthy delay of two months in
obtaining an urgent allocation of resources from the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, my Office is now also in a position to
dispatch a fact-finding mission to Iraq, as mandated by
the Human Rights Council on 1 September.
National and international strategies to counter ISIL
have so far concentrated on a security approach. The
Council has adopted an important resolution aimed at
stunting inflows of ISIL recruits from around the world.
There has also been a significant military effort. But
little attention has been paid to the underlying struggle
for minds. It is also disturbing how few to non-existent
have been public demonstrations of anger in the Arab
and Muslims worlds over the crimes being perpetrated
in Iraq, notwithstanding their clear condemnation by
many Arab and Islamic Governments.
The takfiri movement is gripped and driven by a
distinct ideology, and it will destroy everything that
is contrary to what it believes should exist. For the
takfiris there is only one acceptable manner in which
to live. Alternative viewpoints — indeed, any form
of individual thought outside their closed, unyielding
logic — are rejected by them. Those humans who
dissent must be murdered, their memory, their culture
and every shred of their existence destroyed. According
to their thinking, every single person in this Chamber
is eligible for death.
The leaders of the organization known as ISIL of
course want to establish an ideal, a caliphate. In doing
so, they exploit a general yearning shared by many
non-takfiri Muslims the world over for a caliphate, for
an ideal, though for everyone else the ideal is not built
on the back of abominable crimes, as the takfiris would
have it — or any crimes, for that matter. And yet by
cleverly blending fantasy with claims of victimization,
the takfiris attract adherents. That method, in which
the end justifies the means, in which an ideal is built
in a group’s own mind and then reached for, come what
may — including through lies and the commission of
atrocities — is, of course, not new. As Isaiah Berlin
wrote in his famous credo 20 years ago, reprinted in
The New York Review of Books only three weeks ago,
“the search for a single, overarching ideal because it
is the one and only true one for humanity invariably
leads to coercion. And then to destruction,

14-63485

18/11/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

blood — eggs are broken, but the omelette is not
in sight, there is only an infinite number of eggs,
human lives, ready for the breaking. And in the end
the passionate idealists forget the omelette, and just
go on breaking eggs.”
I therefore question whether it is possible to bomb
an ideology such as this into submission, or hope that
it can just vaporize at the end of a judge’s gavel. ISIL
may weaken or wither, it is true, but it will likely be
replaced by another takfiri group. Nine years ago, we
talked at length about Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi and his
group in this very Chamber, and here we still are, with
a different group and the same ideology — only now it
is worse. And no matter how inhumane the takfiris are,
as long as they can sow confusion among Muslims by
exploiting a broadly shared Muslim yearning, they will
likely survive.
Thought must therefore be undermined by thought.
And takfirism must be thwarted by an approach to
life couched in those principles and laws that bind
all of us — a system that will be more successful and
enriching because it is open to the multiple realities
of all human beings. Two months ago, when the 126
prominent Muslim scholars wrote the letter I mentioned
earlier, with the aim of refuting ISIL’s spurious claims
to speak on behalf of Islam, it did not, sadly, receive the
worldwide attention it so thoroughly deserved. To me,
that concerted effort to strip ISIL, point by point, of
its argument is a promising approach. And the scholars
could not have been clearer when, in conclusion, they
wrote to Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi,
“You have misinterpreted Islam into a religion of
harshness, brutality, torture and murder. This is a
great wrong and an offense to Islam, Muslims and
the entire world.”
I implore the Council to support such efforts to
overturn ISIL’s ideology of violence and death, for the
sake of the rights of all in Iraq, irrespective of ethnic or
religious identity, whether men or women, old or young.
Ultimately, support given to the ideological front may
be more effective than air strikes in bringing an end to
the longstanding suffering of the people of Iraq.
The President: I thank Mr. Al-Hussein for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Amos.
Ms. Amos: Humanitarian conditions in Iraq
continue to deteriorate, and 5.2 million people are now

S/PV.7314

in need of assistance throughout the country. Several
hundred thousand people were displaced in Anbar
governorate at the start of the year. The number of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) across the country
now exceeds 2 million, and the rate of displacement
continues to rise. In the past 10 weeks alone, more
than 200,000 people have been newly forced from their
homes by violence in Anbar, Ninewa, Sala Al-Din,
Kirkuk and Diyala governorates. More than 100,000
Iraqis have been registered as refugees in neighbouring
countries so far this year. In addition to the 2 million
displaced, there are 1.5 million people from host
communities, 1.4 million who live in active areas of
conflict where access to basic services is minimal, and
220,000 refugees who have fled Syria, all in urgent
need of assistance. Every governorate in Iraq is now
hosting displaced people. More than 900,000 men,
women and children have found refuge in the Kurdistan
region of Iraq. The rest are spread across the country,
including some 400,000 in Anbar and 150,000 in the
southern governorates.
The crisis in Iraq is first and foremost one of
protection, with intense violence and brutality being
meted out to civilians from all religious and ethnic
backgrounds. As the High Commissioner for Human
Rights has already outlined, women have been
specifically targeted, with daily reports of kidnapped
women and girls from Yezidi and other communities
being sold into marriage or sexual servitude to militants.
While the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
bears responsibility for the majority of those atrocities,
it is not the only perpetrator of human-rights abuses.
Armed groups, including militias affiliated with
the Government, continue to carry out brutal acts of
violence against civilians. Entire communities have
been uprooted, with a significant humanitarian impact.
And around half of all those displaced are children.
Many are deeply traumatized. Their schooling has been
disrupted and their families torn apart. As many as 700
children are believed to have been killed or maimed in
Iraq so far this year, including in summary executions.
The United Nations and its partners have quickly
scaled up their response, thanks to a generous
contribution of $500 million from the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia and support from other donors early on
in the crisis. Hundreds of staff have been deployed to
the governorates most affected in the north and are
now also in other areas of the country, including Basra.
That early infusion of donor funds has had tangible
results. More than 1.4 million Iraqis have received food

14-634857/10

S/PV.7314

The situation concerning Iraq

assistance this year, in all 18 governorates. Emergency
health interventions have ensured access to essential
medical services for at least 1 million people, and
around 1.5 million have been provided with water,
latrines, bathing facilities and hygiene materials. About
1.2 million IDPs have received emergency shelter and
essential relief items, including tents, mattresses,
blankets and stoves. Nearly 100,000 displaced Iraqi
children have received psychosocial counselling, while
82,000 have received assistance enabling them to
continue with their education.
But despite all of that, much more help is urgently
required. With the onset of winter, 450,000 people are
still in need of warm clothing; 300,000 need blankets,
stoves and other non-food support; 100,000 require
urgent help with water and sanitation; and more than
1 million, mainly children, need health assistance in
dealing with acute respiratory infections and other
chronic illnesses. Over 660,000 children require
vaccination for measles.
The ongoing insecurity and fighting prevent us from
reaching all those who need help. There are currently
3.6 million Iraqis living in areas under the control of
ISIL and affiliated armed groups, and 2.2 million of
them are in urgent need of humanitarian assistance.
Despite acute needs, including for shelter, health and
food in the areas most impacted by the conflict, only
meagre amounts of assistance have been delivered to
areas under ISIL control to date.
Every day, the humanitarian community faces
considerable operational challenges in our effort to
deliver aid. And every day difficult decisions have to
be made about who will receive assistance, given the
scarcity of resources.
A total of $173 million in winterization funding is
urgently required in order to meet the needs of IDPs in
the Kurdistan region and elsewhere. Those needs are
time-sensitive, and there is little room for delay. If the
World Food Programme does not receive $85 million
in the next few days, then food cannot be procured or
shipped, and distributions for around 2 million people
will be severely disrupted in January.
The Government of Iraq has provided $50 million
for the construction of camps and other support to the
displaced in Dohuk governorate, with additional funds
promised for Erbil and Sulaymaniyah governorates.
Those funds helped the relocation of IDPs from all

8/10

18/11/2014

secondary school in Dohuk governorate. The Ministry
of Displacement and Migration has also begun the
construction of a camp with 1,000 prefabricated shelters
in Diyala governorate.
I am pleased that salaries are to be paid to all civil
servants. The national health and food-distribution
systems need to be maintained throughout the
country, and kerosene for heating and cooking needs
to be subsidized for displaced people during the
winter. Current unsubsidized fuel prices mean that
humanitarian organizations are able to provide fuel for
heating and cooking for less than half of the 80,000
vulnerable families who need it in the Kurdistan region
for the next two months.
This is not the first time that Iraq has experienced
a humanitarian crisis. Iraqis are already weary of the
decades of sectarian violence and war which destroyed
the country’s institutions. One million people are IDPs
from previous Gulf wars.
This is not just Iraq’s crisis. It is part of a regional
catastrophe that we have a collective responsibility to
address. The humanitarian needs in Iraq are real, they
are urgent, and they are growing each month. Millions
of Iraqis face an uncertain future, with years spent
in camps or unfit dwellings. It is urgent that security
be re-established and that the protection of civilians
remain at the heart of national and international
political, military and other efforts.
As is always the case in these crises, it is the
ordinary people who suffer the most.
The President: I thank Ms. Amos for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I should like
at the outset to congratulate Australia on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council this month.
I thank it for its significant efforts, which have been
reflected in the holding of a large number of events.
I thank His Excellency Ambassador Gary Quinlan for
his outstanding leadership of the Council’s work, and
congratulate Argentina for its excellent presidency last
month. I wish also to commend Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
and Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al-Hussein, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. I commend also
Mr. Mladenov, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance

14-63485

18/11/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV.7314

Mission in Iraq (UNAMI). I thank him for his briefing,
during which he underlined the efforts of his team to
achieve the goals of the Mission.

common interests, which will serve the interests of our
people and prevent any exacerbation of the crisis in the
region.

Iraq strongly condemns the recent attack against
a UNAMI convoy. Iraq is suffering from the greatest
terrorist threat in the world. Despite this, the Iraqi
Government and people were able to hold free elections
for the third time since the change. The peaceful transfer
of power while upholding constitutional standards has
consolidated the young democratic experience of my
country. We have created an inclusive, comprehensive
national unity Government that takes into account all
elements of Iraqi society, including all religions and
ethnicities.

Turning to cooperation, we must prioritize the
struggle against terrorism, which has harmed our
religion and our values, and targeted peace, security
and peaceful coexistence; and today threatens our
countries and our nations with the danger of partition
and collapse. ISIS is a terrorist entity that has taken
over major facilities in order to strengthen its activities,
which are fuelled by the theft of oil revenues; it is
therefore necessary to eliminate that organization and
prevent it from taking root.

The Government is working to include all parties
so as to build national unity. The Government is
addressing pending issues so as to implement the plan of
action to which it committed itself, to ensure a safe and
stable future guaranteeing equitable treatment for all
citizens under the law. Its priorities are combating the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and corruption,
and bolstering relations with its neighbours.
The new Government has taken a number of
decisions, in particular to stop targeting terrorists
in populated areas so as not to harm people or their
property. The Government is cooperating with the
international coalition forces. It is committed to
strengthening, arming and training the Iraqi military
and security forces, the Peshmerga and the various
Iraqi tribes.
The Government is cooperating with all political
blocs to adopt a budget so as to address the issue of
revenue-sharing and improve economic performance,
which was negatively impacted by the lack of a budget
for 2014 and the drop in oil prices. Among the fruits
of the Government’s efforts so far we would note the
agreement reached between the oil ministry and the
government of the Kurdistan region, which will promote
the settlement of pending issues between Baghdad and
Erbil. When the international community realized the
threat posed by ISIS, it stepped up its efforts and began
cooperating to combat terrorism.
Today we must strengthen cooperation in particular
with the countries of the Arab region. We have clearly
voiced our wish to cooperate and to strengthen relations
with brotherly, friendly neighbouring countries.
Such relations must be based on mutual respect,
non-interference in internal affairs and respect for

In turn, the Iraqi armed forces and the Peshmerga,
in cooperation with popular forces and in coordination
with members of clans and tribes in the provinces of
Diyala, Salah al-Din, Anbar, Kirkuk, Mosul and Babil,
and with major international support, are confronting
terrorism in order to rid the country of it. A certain
number of territories and regions have been liberated,
such as the region of Beiji. We have lifted the blockade
of the Beiji refinery, the town of Amerli and the Mosul
dam so as to prevent the flooding of Iraqi cities along
the Tigris river. We have also opened the roadblocks
so as to overcome all threats to the capital and the holy
cities of Karbala and An-Najaf. Iraqi forces continue to
cooperate with international coalition forces to address
terrorism and to restore their control over the whole of
Iraqi territory.
In that regard, we stress the role of the religious
authorities who had the wisdom of supporting national
efforts to foster cooperation between the Iraqis in
combating the terrorist threat posed by ISIS. These
efforts have brought together all active forces in the
Republic, representing all sectors of society — Arabs,
Kurds, Shiites, Sunnis, Turkmen, Muslims, Christians
and Yazidis. We also wish to thank the international
coalition, under the command of the United States, and
all the States that have provided support, assistance
and technical expertise and responded to Iraq’s call for
backing in its struggle against terrorism. They have
supported us militarily, sending experts and weapons,
and cooperated in the field of intelligence as a result
of the efforts made and positions taken at the meeting
in Jeddah, Cairo and Paris, and of the statements and
resolutions adopted by the Security Council, including
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014). This support
has helped to lift the morale of the Iraqis in their
struggle against terrorism.

14-634859/10

S/PV.7314

The situation concerning Iraq

The negative repercussions on Iraq of the crisis
in the brotherly country of Syria has allowed ISIS and
other terror groups to expand their control to a number
of regions in northern and western Iraq. Daesh and other
terrorist groups have not only undermined security and
the political process in Iraq, but they have also been
the cause of an unprecedented humanitarian disaster,
murders, forced displacement, looting, abductions,
rape, the targeting of religious minorities — all of which
has displaced some 1.8 million Iraqi citizens. Those
atrocities are a flagrant violation of human rights and
tantamount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Meanwhile, the Iraqi Government and local
authorities, with the assistance of UNAMI and United
Nations agencies, are seeking to reduce the suffering
of thousands of displaced people until they can return
to their homes. Iraq is grateful for the humanitarian
assistance that has been given to the displaced. The
looming winter, with its biting cold, is a further threat
to refugees without a roof over their heads, and portends
a humanitarian catastrophe that has led the United
Nations to raise its alert readiness to level 3. The Iraqi
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government
have assisted over 270,000 Syrian refugees, whom Iraq
has hosted since 2011.
Despite that heavy burden, the Iraqi Government
has continued to provide protection to the inhabitants
to Camp Hurriya in Baghdad. The Iraqi Government
continues to meet the humanitarian needs of the
inhabitants of the camp. We pay tribute to the efforts of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and to the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral for the Relocation of Camp Hurriya Residents
Outside of Iraq, Ms. Jane Hall Lute, who is seeking the
transfer of the camp residents to other countries. We
thank the countries that have taken in some of those
people, in particular Albania, which recently agreed
to host 240 of them. We appeal to the international
community and the Iranian Government to take in their
own nationals so as to resolve this problem as soon as
possible.

10/10

18/11/2014

Iraq’s international policy is based on respect for
common interests, non-interference in the internal
affairs of States, and respect for international law and
its own obligations. In that respect, the President of
the Republic has visited the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
while the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister
have visited Jordan, Iran, Turkey and Kuwait to bolster
cooperation, underscore the importance of the struggle
against terrorism, and strengthen economic relations.
To that end, we commend the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia’s announcement that it will reopen its embassy
in Baghdad. That is a clear sign of improving relations
between the two countries, and of their cooperation in
the counter-terrorism struggle in the region.
Iraq is striving to further its relations with Kuwait.
We commend Kuwait for voicing its support for Iraq
at the Jeddah, Paris and New York conferences. Iraq
continues to do its utmost to find the remains of missing
Kuwaitis and the national Kuwaiti archives. We are
committed to achieving tangible results in those two
areas.
In conclusion, we thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliassson
for their recent visits to Baghdad, given the positive
impact of such visits, which highlight the ongoing
support of the United Nations for the Iraqi people.
We pay tribute to the efforts of UNAMI, which has
provided support and advice to the Iraqi Government.
We hail the courage of the UNAMI staff, who continue
to provide humanitarian assistance, notwithstanding
the current difficult conditions in my country. We also
wish to express our full gratitude to Mr. Mladenov and
his team for their commitment. We wish them every
success in their activities of support and assistance to
Iraq.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

14-63485
