20

General Aasembly -

tional Court of Justice regarding the voting procedure
to be followed by the General Assembly on questions
relating to reports and petitions concerning the Territory
of South West Africa,

Ha,ving noted that, in its advisory opinion4 of 7 June
1955, the Court was unanimously of the opinion that the
rule 5 that decisions of the General Assembly on questions relating to reports and petitions concerning the
Territory of South West Africa should be regarded as
important questions within the meaning of Article 18,
paragraph 2, of the Charter was a correct interpretation
of the advisory opinion 6 of the Court of 11 July 1950,
Accepts and endorses the advisory opinion of 7 June
1955 of the International Court of Justice on voting
procedure on questions relating to reports and petitions
concerning the Territory of South West Africa.
550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1955.
935 (X). Petitions and communications relating
to the Reho both Community of South West
Africa
The General Assembly,
Having accepted the advisory opinion7 of 11 July 1950
of the International Court of Justice on the question of
South West Africa, including the opinion that petitions
concerning the Territory of South West Africa are to
be transmitted by the Government of the Union of South
Africa "to the General Assembly of the United Nations,
which is legally qualified to deal with them",
Having authorized the Committee on South West
Africa, by resolution 749 A (VIII) of 28 November
1953, to examine petitions in accordance with the Mandates procedure of the League of Nations,
Having received a report from the Committee on
South West Africa dealing with a petition, undated,
from Mr. A. J. Beukes, Mr. P. Diegaard and Mr. A. van
Wyk, members of the Rehoboth Community of South
West Africa, and related communications from the
Rehoboth Community, received on 22 November 1954,
and from Mr. Jacobus Beukes, dated 27 November
1954, 8
Noting that the Government of the Union of South
Africa, by a letter 9 dated 25 March 1954, has informed
the Committee that it has "never recognized any obligation to submit ... petitions to any international body
since the demise of the League of Nations",
Noting that the petitioners request that their right of
self-government under the Constitutions of the Rehoboth Community of 1870-1874 be restored, and seek an
interpretation of the legal status of the Rehc:iboth Community; that they request that Proclamations Nos. 28
of 1923, 31 of 1924, 9 of 1928, 29 of 1929, 17 of 1932.
S of 1935, 20 of 1935, 16 of 1938 and 22 of 1941, issued
• South-West Africa-Voting Procedun, Advisory Opinion
of June 7th, 1955: I.CJ. Reports 1955, p. 67.
5 Special rule F adopted under General Assembly TeSOlution
844 (IX) of 11 October 1954.
8 International status of South-West Africa, Advisory Opinion: I.CJ. Reports 1950, p. 128.
1 Ibid.
8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Tenth Session,
Suppfement No. 12 (A/2913), chap. VIII and annex VI.
• Ibid., Ninth Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/2666 and Corr.
1), annex I (c).

Tenth Session

by the Administrator of South West Africa and applied
to the Rehoboth Community, be declared null and void
in that Community, that the boundaries of the Rehoboth Community, as allegedly recognized by the German
Government, be restored and that certain lands allegedly
alienated unlawfully from the Rehoboth Community be
returned to that Community.

I. With respect to the status of the Rehoboth Com-munity:
Noting that a Treaty of Protection and Friendship
was concluded in 1885 between the German Government
and the Rehoboth Community, as an agreement between
two Governments, whereby the German Government
agreed to assume the protection of the Rehoboth Community, while recognizing the rights and freedom which
the Rehobothians had established for themselves,
Noting that the German Government abrogated this
Treaty in 1915, when the Rehobothians refused to join
German forces and to provide men to guard captured
Union of South Africa prisoners during the First World
War,
Noting that the Administrator of South West Africa
as representing the Government of the Union of South
Africa on the one part and the Kapitein and members
of the Raad of the Rehoboth Community for themselves
and their lawful successors as representing the Rehoboth Community on the other part concluded an Agreement on 17 August 1923 "regulating the future administration by the Government of the Union of South Africa
in its capacity as Mandatory of the territory situate
within the district of Rehoboth occupied by the said
Community known as the Gebiet", that this Agreement
was ratified and confirmed by Proclamation No. 28 of
1923 and came into force on 1 October 1923,
Noting further that this Agreement provides, inter
alia, that:
( a) Subject to the provisions of the Agreement, "the
Administration concedes to the Rehoboth Community
the right of self-government within the Gebiet according to the laws presently to be found in the Law Book
of the Raad of the Rehoboth Community and such additions thereto or amendments thereof as may from time
to time lawfully be enacted by the Raad of the Rehoboth
Community", subject to the assent of the Administrator
to any law passed by the Raad after 1 October 1923,
( b) "The Administrator shall, after consultation with
the Raad of the Rehoboth Community, possess the power
to legislate for the Gebiet and to extend thereto the operation of any law, whether at present in force in the
Territory of South West Africa or hereafter enacted,
if he considers such legislation or extension to be expedient or desirable in the interest of either the Territory
of South West Africa or the Gebiet",
Noting that in 1924 political dissension within the
Rehoboth Community gave rise to a situation which, in
the view of the Administration, seriously endangered
the maintenance of law, order and good government both
wit~in the Gebiet and in the Territory of South West
Africa, and that as a consequence the Administrator
issued Proclamation No. 31 of 1924, declaring that the
Kap,itein and Raad and all persons acting under their
authority should cease to function within the Gebiet
and vesting all their powers, functions and duties in the
Magistrate of the Rehoboth District who was to exercise
these powers, functions and duties "in accordance with

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

the laws of the said Community at present in force within
the Gebiet and in conformity with the provisions" of the
Agreement of 17 August 1923,
Noting further that, in the application of laws to the
Gebiet subsequent to the issuance of Proclamation No.
31 of 1924, the Administrator in each instance cited the
1923 Agreement and referred to his power thereunder
to apply laws to the Gebiet after consultation with the
Raad, to the transfer of the functions and powers of the
Raad to the Magistrate and, consequently, to his consultation with the Magistrate with respect to the application of the law in question,
1. Decides to inform the petitioners that the Territory of South West Africa remains a Territory under
the international Mandate assumed by the Union of
South Africa on 17 December 1920, and that the provisions of the Mandate and of Article 22 of the Covenant
of the League of Nations accordingly apply to the Rehoboth Community, which constitutes a part of the Mandated Territory;

2. Considers that, subject to the terms of the Mandate, the administration by the Union of South Africa
of the territory known as the Rehoboth Gebiet continues
to be regulated by the Agreement of 17 August 1923
concluded between the Administrator of the Mandated
Territory as representing the Government of the Union
of South Africa on the one part and the Kapitein and
members of the Raad of the Rehoboth Community for
themselves and their lawful successors as representing
the Rehoboth Community on the other part ;
3. Considers that the permanent transfer of powers,
functions and duties from representatives of the Rehoboth Community duly elected under the laws of that
Community to an official appointed as Magistrate of the
Rehoboth District would not be in accordance with the
terms of the Agreement of 17 August 1923; ·
4. Further considers that consultation by the Administrator with the Magistrate of the Rehoboth District for the purpose of applying laws to the Rehoboth
Gebiet subsequent to 1924 does not fulfil the condition
of the Agreement of 17 August 1923 for consultation
with the Raad of the Rehoboth Community;
5. Recommends therefore that the Union of South
Africa, as the Mandatory Power, take the necessary
steps to correct this situation ;

II. With respect to the boundaries of the Rehoboth
Gebiet:
Noting that the boundaries of the Rehoboth Gebiet
were defined in the schedule to the Agreement of 17
August 1923 and appear to have been accepted by the
Kapitein and members of the Raad of the Rehoboth
Community for themselves and their lawful successors
as representing the Rehoboth Community,
Is of the opinion that any claims which the Rehoboth
Community may have regarding the alleged boundaries
of the Gebiet prior to the Agreement of 17 August 1923
appear to have been resolved by that Agreement ;

. III. With respect to the claims of the Rehoboth Com. munity to certain lands within the Gebiet:
Noting that these claims have been investigated by
successive commissions of inquiry, the first of which
was appointed in 1922,

21

Recommends that the Union of South Africa, as the
Mandatory Power, make every effort toward an early
and equitable settlement of these claims.
550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1955.
936 (X). Petitions and related communications
from Mr. Hosea Kutako, Mr. David Roos and
Mr. Erastus Amgabeb concerning South West
Africa
·
The General Assembly,
Having accepted the advisory opinion10 of 11 July
1950 of the International Court of Justice on the question of South West Africa, including the opinion that
petitions concerning the Territory of South West Africa
are to be transmitted by the Government of the Union
of South Africa "to the General Assembly of the United
Nations, which is legally qualified to deal with them",
Having authorized the Committee on South West
Africa, by General Assembly resolution 749· A (VIII)
of 28 November 1953, to examine petitions in accordance
with the Mandates procedure of the League of Nations,
Having received a report from the Committee on
South West Africa dealing with a petition, dated 2
September 1954, from Mr. Hosea Kutako, Mr. David
Roos and Mr. Erastus Amgabeb, and a related petition,
dated 14 January 1955 from Mr. Hosea Kutako, 11
Noting that the petitioners request that the United
Nations submit the question of the status of South West
Africa to the International Court of Justice for its compulsory jurisdiction,
Noting further that the petitioners raise questions relatin~ to the participation of the African people of the
Territory in the political development of the Territory,
the application of pass laws and racially discriminatory
laws, educational facilities, and the alleged refusal on
the part of the Administration to permit common meetings for all tribes,
1. Decides to inform the petitioners that, according
to the advisory opinion of 11 July 1950 of the International Court of Justice :
(a) "South West Africa is a territory under the international Mandate assumed by the Union of South
Africa on December 17th, 1920";
(b) " ... the Union of South Africa continues to have
the international obligations stated in Article 22 of the
Covenant of the League of Nations and in the Mandate
for South West Africa";
( c) ". . · . competence to determine and modify the
international status of the Territory [of South West
Africa] rests with the Union of South Africa acting
with the consent of the United Nations";

and that the General Assembly, by its resolution 449 A
(V) of 13 December 1950, accepted the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice on the question
of South West Africa;
Noting the observations of the Committee on South
West Africa with respect to questions raised by the
petitioners relating to conditions in the Territory of
South West Africa,
10 International status of South-West Africa, Advisory Opinion: J.C.!. Reports 1950, p. 128.
1 1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Tenth Seslio",
Supplement No. 12 (A/2913), chap. VIII and annex VII.
