V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

which he sent to Zambia in response to General Assembly
resolution 35/94 of 5 December 1980,
Regretting that the international community has not thus
far provided assistance to Zambia on a scale commensurate
with the costs, as called for in Security Council resolutions
253 (1968) of 29 May 1968. 277 ( I970) of 18 March 1970
and 329 (1973) of JO March 1973,
1. Endorses the assessment and recommendations contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation for the assistance provided
thus far to Zambia by various States and regional and international organizations;
3. Draws the attention of the international community
to the additional financial, economic and material assistance
required by Zambia, as identified in the annex to the report
of the Secretary-General, and to the particular need for
assistance in the transport sector;
4. Calls upon Member States. regional and interregional
organizations and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to provide financial, material and technical assistance to Zambia, wherever possible in the form
of grants, and urges them to give special consideration to
the early inclusion of Zambia in their programmes of bilateral or multilateral development assistance, if it is not
already included;
5. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the World Bank.
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development.
the World Food Programme, the World Health Oq~anization
and the United Nat10ns Children's Fund-to mamtain and
increase their current and future programmes of assistance
to Zambia, in order to enable it to carry out its planned
development projects without interruption;
6. Further requests the appropriate specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system to
report periodically to the Secretary-General on the steps
they have taken and the resources they have made available
to assist Zambia;
7. Invites the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Bank
and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to
bring to the attention of their governing bodies, for their
consideration, the special needs of Zambia and to report the
decisions of those bodies to the Secretary-General by 15
July 1982;
8. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to continue his humanitarian assistance programmes on behalf of refugees in Zambia, and urges Member States and the international community to provide him
speedily with the necessary means to carry out those programmes, as indicated in the Secretary-General's report:
9. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Zambia;
(b) To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary arrangements are made for continuing the organization of the
international programme of assistance to Zambia and the
mobilization of resources;
(c) To keep the economic situation in Zambia under
constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, the specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental organizations and international financial in-

145

stitutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social
Council, at its second regular session of 1982, of the current
status of the special programme of economic assistance for
Zambia;
(d) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
of Zambia and the progress made in organizing and implementing the special programme of economic assistance for
that country in time for the matter to be considered by the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/215. Assistance to Mozambique
The General Assemhly,
Recalling the decision of the Government of Mozambique
to implement mandatory sanctions agai1;1st the ill~gal regim~
in Southern Rhodesia in accordance with Secunty Council
resolution 253 (1968) of 29 May 1968,
Recognizing the substantial economic sacrifices made by
Mozambique in the implementation of its decision to enforce
United Nations sanctions and to close its borders with Southern Rhodesia,
Recalling Security Council resolution 386 (1976) of 17
March 1976, in which the Council appealed to all States to
provide, and requested the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the appropriate organizations of the United Nations system, to organize with immediate effect, financial,
technical and material assistance to enable Mozambique to
carry out its economic development programme normally
and to enhance its capacity to implement fully the United
Nations mandatory sanctions,
Noting with deep concern the loss of life and the destruction of such essential infrastructure as roads, railways,
bridges, petroleum facilities, electricity supply, schools and
hospitals identified in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General of 16 August 1979, 202
Recalling further its resolutions 31/43 of I December
1976, 32/95 of 13 December 1977, 33/126 of 19 December
1978, 34/ I 29 of 14 December 1979 and 35/99 of 5 December 1980, in which it urged the international community to
respond effectively and generously with assistance to
Mozambique,
Noting that the independence of Zimbabwe provides both
an opportunity and a challenge for the international community, particularly for those neighbouring States whose
economies have been so closely linked to that country,
Bearing in mind the fact that the drought which affected
six out of the ten provinces of Mozambique has attained the
dramatic proportions of a natural calamity,
Having examined the document on the drought in Mozambique, 2113 which contains an assessment of the immediate
requirements for urgent assistance from the international
community,
Noting that a mission of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Food Programme and the World Meterological Organization visited
Mozambique in July 1980 in order to assess the emergency
food situation in terms of the partial loss of cereals due to
the drought which had devastated part of the country,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General of
21 August 1981 204 and noting with concern that the economic and financial po~ition of that country remains grave
and heset by hudgetary and balance-of-payments deficits
"" A/34/377.
'"' AIC.2/3515. annex.
,,., A 116/267-S 1 14627.

146

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

and that, in the absence of increased international assistance,
the Government will have to reduce major imports that arc
essential for its development programmes and for restoring
industrial production to pre-sanctions levels,
l. Strongly endorses the appeals made by the Security
Council and the Secretary-General for international assistance to Mozambique;
2. Endorses fully the assessment and major recommendations contained in the annex to the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 21 August I 98 I ;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the measures he has taken to organize an international
economic assistance programme for Mozambique;
4. Expresses its appreciation also for the assistance
provided thus far to Mozambique by various States and
regional and international organizations;
5. Regrets, however, that the total assistance provided
to date falls far short of Mozambique's pressing needs;
6. Draws the attention of the international community
to the additional financial, economic and material assistance
identified in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General
as urgently required by Mozambique;
7. Urges Member States and organizations which are
already implementing or are negotiating assistance programmes for Mozambique to strengthen them, wherever
possible;
8. Appeals to the international community to provide
the urgently needed external assistance in foodstuffs and
medicines and technical co-operation for disaster preparedness and prevention;
9. Calls upon Member States, regional and interregional
organizations and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to provide financial, material and technical assistance to Mozambique, wherever possible in the
form of grants, and urges them to give special consideration
to the early inclusion of Mozambique in their programmes
of development assistance, if it is not already included;
10. Appeals to the international community to contribute to the special account of Mozambique established by
the Secretary-General for the purpose of facilitating the
channelling of contributions to Mozambique;
11. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to
bring to the attention of their governing bodies, for their
consideration, the special needs of Mozambique and to report the decisions of those bodies to the Secretary-General
by 15 July 1982;
12. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization and the
United Nations Children's Fund-to maintain and increase
their current and future programmes of assistance to Mozambique and to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective international programme of
assistance, and to report periodically to the Secretary-General on the steps they have taken and the resources they
have made available to assist Mozambique;
13. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Mozambique;

(b) To keep the situation in Mozambique under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and international financial institutions and
other bodies concerned, and to apprise the Economic and
Social Council, at its second regular session of 1982, of the
current status of the special programme of economic assistance for Mozambique;
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
of Mozambique and the progress made in organizing and
implementing the special programme of economic assistance
for that country in time for the matter to be considered by
the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
/03rd plenary meeting
17 December /98/

36/216.

Assistance to Djibouti

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/93 of 13 December 1977, 33/
132of 19 December 1978 and 34/124of 14 December 1979,
in which it, inter alia, expressed its deep concern at the
serious economic situation prevailing in Djibouti and
strongly appealed to Member States and to the international
institutions concerned to offer effective and sustained assistance to that country to enable it to deal with the critical
situation arising from its economic difficulties and requested
the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to mobilize the
necessary resources for an effective programme of financial,
technical and material assistance to Djibouti,
Recalling also its resolution 35/89 of 5 December 1980,
in which it drew the attention of the international community
to the critical economic situation still confronting Djibouti
and to the list of urgent short-term and long-term projects
submitted by the Government of Djibouti, 205
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General, 206
to which was annexed the report of the mission which he
sent to Djibouti in response to General Assembly resolution
35/89,
Taking note of the critical economic situation of Djibouti
and the list of urgent and priority projects, formulated by
the Government, that require international assistance,
Noting with concern that the harsh effects of the prolonged
drought continue to persist and place serious strains on the
fragile economic, social and administrative infrastructure
of the country,
Noting the conclusion of the Committee for Development
Planning at its seventeenth session, 207 in response to the
application of Djibouti for inclusion in the list of the least
developed countries, that Djibouti did not satisfy the existing
criteria for inclusion in that list,
Noting the statement made before the Second Committee
on 6 October 1981 by the Co-ordinator of Special Economic
Assistance Programmes, in which he emphasized the importance of priority projects for diversification of the economy and the urgency of providing increased financial,
material and technical assistance to Djibouti, 208
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the .;teps he has taken to organize an international economic assistance programme for Djibouti;

"" See A/35/415, annex.
206
A/36/281.
"" Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. /91',J, Supplement No. 7 (E/1981/27), para. 104.
'"" Official Records of the Genaal Assembly. Thirtv-sixth Session, S1•cond Committee. 7th meeting. paras. 28 and 29.
