S/PV.5824 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5824th meeting
Tuesday, 22 January 2008, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ettalhi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Muharemi
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Arias
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Laher
Mr. Johnston
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
Letter dated 21 January 2008 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Saudi Arabia to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2008/31)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-21448 (E)

*0821448*

S/PV.5824 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I call on the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of Egypt wishes to express to you, Sir, and
to the other members of the Security Council its
appreciation for your prompt response to the request of
the Group of Arab States to convene this emergency
meeting to consider the deteriorating situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, particularly in the Gaza
Strip, resulting from the cruel punitive measures that
Israel insists on imposing on the Palestinian people in
blatant breach of its commitments and obligations
pursuant to international law and international
humanitarian law, especially its commitments as an
occupying Power under the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949.
Egypt supports the statement made by the
representative of Saudi Arabia, Chairman of the Arab
Group for this month, and the statements to be made by
the representatives of Cuba on behalf of the NonAligned Movement and Pakistan on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, all of which
reflect the unanimity of the international condemnation
of Israel’s systematic violations of international law
and obligations.
Egypt stresses its legal and political position
against these unlawful and inhumane Israeli measures,
and it calls today upon the Security Council and the
entire international community to take all necessary
measures to end the Israeli policies of closure, siege
and the cutting off of food and fuel supplies, to ensure
respect for the human rights of the Palestinian people
and to enable that people to live a dignified life,
without discrimination between the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip, because the Palestinians in both areas
constitute one people.
We have all witnessed with deep sorrow the
scenes resulting from those Israeli policies and
measures, which contravene all international norms
and all the obligations of the occupying Power. These
include policies of siege and the closure of all crossing
points, resulting in a lack of food and medical supplies;
the cutting off of electricity; the halting of services in
hospitals and bakeries; and the withholding of heating
supplies during harsh weather conditions. These
measures have also affected the water supply and

2

sewage system, posing the threat that diseases and
epidemics will spread.
Moreover, our sorrow increases as we see our
brethren living in the harsh conditions imposed by the
occupying Power and facing repeated attacks by the
occupying Israeli army resulting — over the past two
days alone — in no fewer than 40 Palestinian deaths
and hundreds of casualties.
As part of Egypt’s endeavours to deal effectively
with the humanitarian crisis on the ground in the
occupied Palestinian territories, particularly in Gaza,
during a series of contacts with both the Prime Minister
and the Minister of Defence of Israel, President
Mohamed Hosni Mubarak called for the immediate
cessation of those punitive measures and for all
measures necessary to ease the suffering of
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. He
also asked for assurances that Israel would not repeat
such measures, which undermine all international
efforts aimed at establishing a viable independent
Palestinian State, through the negotiation process that
began following the Annapolis Conference. That
process is now in jeopardy due to the deteriorating
humanitarian and economic situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory.
In parallel, Egypt intensified its contacts at the
highest level with the international Quartet, which
should shoulder greater responsibility in addressing the
deteriorating situation in Gaza and in ensuring that
such a situation never occurs again. Egypt also made
contact at the highest level with the Palestinian
leadership in Ramallah and with other influential
international Powers interested in continuing the
Middle East peace process on the basis of international
legitimacy and full respect for all mutual commitments
on the part of both the Palestinian and the Israeli sides,
in accordance with relevant Security Council
resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
While Egypt fully rejects the launching of rockets
from the Gaza Strip into Israel, we stress the
importance of Israel respecting international law and
its obligations as an occupying Power in accordance
with the Fourth Geneva Convention, primarily its
obligation to respect the human rights of the
Palestinian people. The humanitarian disaster that the
Palestinians are currently experiencing must not be
allowed to fuel the vicious cycle of violence, thus

08-21448

S/PV.5824 (Resumption 1)

undermining the positive spirit aimed at reaching a
peaceful and just settlement.
The Israeli Government’s illegal decision to name
Gaza a “hostile entity” is an additional contravention
of international law and aims at discriminating against
the Palestinian people on an illegal and illegitimate
basis.
Despite the success of Egyptian and other
international endeavours to ensure that electricity is
restored to northern Gaza and to begin partial fuel
deliveries to the Strip, and despite Egypt’s ongoing
commitment to provide electricity to the Rafah area of
southern Gaza, the Security Council must still fulfil its
responsibility to lift the siege imposed on the
Palestinian people and to ensure access for
humanitarian assistance through all crossings, as this is
necessary to enable the Palestinian people to return to
normal life, both in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
It must also prevent Israel from violating the rights of
the Palestinian people through repeated assaults that
kill Palestinians and destroy all hope for peace in the
Middle East. Egypt is looking forward to the Security
Council immediately adopting the measures necessary
to ensure that such violations will not recur.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Malmierca Díaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to speak at this meeting on behalf of
the members of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and
Libya on your impressive work as President of the
Council for the month of January.
The members of the Non-Aligned Movement
condemn the recent attacks by Israel, the occupying
Power, against the Palestinian civilian population in
the Gaza Strip, which has resulted in the death of
19 Palestinians and the serious wounding of 50 others,
as well as in widespread destruction of civilian
property and farmlands. The situation is of grave
concern to the NAM, because Israel’s illegal actions
have caused the death of more than 150 Palestinian
civilians, including children and women, during the
past month and half.
This violent military escalation by Israel
constitutes a grave breach of international law,
including international humanitarian and human rights
law. It fuels the cycle of violence and threatens

08-21448

international peace and security as well as the fragile
peace process between the two sides. Moreover, such
actions exacerbate the dire humanitarian situation in
the Gaza Strip, where the civilian population continues
to be collectively punished under a crippling
occupation.
Israel, the occupying Power, has intensified its
closure of the occupied Palestinian territories by
hermetically sealing all border crossings, preventing
even the delivery of food supplies to the population
since Friday, 18 January 2008. At the same time, Israel
has persisted with the reduction of fuel supplies to the
Gaza Strip, completely cutting off fuel to the main
power plant on Sunday, 20 January 2008.
Such illegal measures of collective punishment
threaten to exacerbate the humanitarian crisis and are
hastening the deterioration of the situation on the
ground in all its aspects. The suspension of fuel
supplies has affected the provision of electricity to the
civilian population.
Israel should be called upon to lift the closures
and open the crossings to permit access, at the very
minimum, for necessary food and medical supplies.
Immediate action must be taken to ensure the entry of
essential supplies and the restoration of fuel to the
Gaza Strip.
The Non-Aligned Movement calls upon the
international community, especially the Security
Council, to shoulder its responsibilities and to urge
Israel, the occupying Power, to cease its violations
immediately and to comply with its obligations under
international law and relevant United Nations
resolutions as the occupying Power in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
The Non-Aligned Movement expresses its
solidarity with the Palestinian people during this
critical period and reaffirms its long-standing positions
of principle. It calls, inter alia, for an end to the Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian territory and other Arab
lands occupied since 1967 and the establishment of a
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the

3

S/PV.5824 (Resumption 1)

Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, and the countries of the
European Free Trade Association Iceland and
Liechtenstein, members of the European Economic
Area, as well as the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine,
align themselves with this declaration.
The European Union is deeply concerned about
recent violence affecting Gaza and communities in
southern Israel. While recognizing Israel’s legitimate
right to self-defence, the EU calls for an immediate end
to all acts of violence, including the continued firing of
rockets into Israeli territory, and to all activities that
are contrary to international law and endanger
civilians.
The EU reiterates its grave concern at the
humanitarian situation in Gaza and calls for the
continuous provision of essential services, including
fuel and power supplies. The EU once again calls on
all parties to allow unimpeded humanitarian access to
Gaza and to work urgently for the opening of crossings
to goods and people.
The EU welcomes the commencement of
negotiations between Israeli and Palestinian officials
on all outstanding issues — including all final-status
issues — with a view to concluding a peace agreement
before the end of 2008, as agreed in Annapolis last
November. The EU reaffirms that this is a crucial
opportunity for regional and international partners to
effectively support a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East. In that context, the EU calls
for continued broad and constructive involvement by
Arab partners, building on the Arab Peace Initiative.
The European Union urges the parties to
implement their Road Map obligations in parallel to
their negotiations. The goal remains the establishment
of an independent, democratic, contiguous and viable
Palestinian State in the West Bank and Gaza that will
unite all Palestinians, living side by side in peace and
security with Israel and its other neighbours. Recent
settlement activity constitutes another EU concern in
that context, as it represents a major obstacle to peace.
The EU reiterates that the Road Map is unambiguous in
that regard.
The EU is firmly committed to remaining
actively involved in order to support the parties’ efforts
to keep the negotiations on track, working closely with
other members of the Quartet and partners in the

4

region. The EU remains determined to contribute
significantly to this effort, as laid down in its Action
Strategy, “State-building for Peace in the Middle East”,
which covers the broad range of its assistance
activities.
The EU welcomes the results of last December’s
international donors conference for the Palestinian
State — namely, more than $7.4 billion in pledges —
and calls on all donors to deliver on their pledges, in
support of efforts to build the future Palestinian State
in accordance with the reform and development plan
presented by Prime Minister Fayyad. In that context,
the EU recalls the utmost importance of full
implementation of the Agreement on Movement and
Access. The EU is committed to providing substantial
financial support for the Palestinian people and to
working out the means to do so. In that context, the EU
continues to support the work of Quartet
Representative Tony Blair.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate once again the
European Union’s concern at the surge of violence in
and around Gaza. The EU calls on all the parties to
exercise the utmost restraint and to refrain from the use
of force. The EU appeals to all sides, for calm,
particularly at this time of renewal of the political
process.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now call on
the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Amil (Pakistan): On behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for responding to the
calls for the holding of this emergency meeting of the
Security Council to consider the grave humanitarian
situation prevailing in the occupied Palestinian
territory, in particular the Gaza Strip.
In the wake of the high hopes for peace rekindled
by the Annapolis Conference in November, the strong
support pledged for the future Palestinian State at the
international donors conference held in Paris in
December and the recent high-level diplomacy in the
region, the international community had nurtured
strong expectations for progress on the path of peace in
the region. It expected to receive some encouraging
feedback on the negotiation process launched in
Annapolis. On the ground, we expected to see respite
from the human rights violations and atrocities
committed by Israel in the occupied territories,
alleviation of the suffering of the Palestinian people

08-21448

S/PV.5824 (Resumption 1)

and tangible improvement in their living conditions.
Regrettably, those hopes continue to elude us.

reactions and the cycle of violence that have bedevilled
the peace efforts.

On the contrary, we are faced once again with
spiralling violence and further deterioration of an
already fragile humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, particularly the Gaza Strip. The
recent intensified military campaign and indiscriminate
use of force by Israel in Gaza have terrorized the
civilian population there and have resulted in gross
human rights violations and the deaths of more than 40
Palestinians, including several children and women,
during the past few days, in addition to injuries to
scores of others and the widespread destruction of
infrastructure, civilian property, farmlands and orchards.
At the same time, Israel’s continuing military incursions
and its campaign of arrests in the West Bank —
particularly the recent raids in Nablus — are also
undermining the security efforts of the Palestinian
Authority.

The international community must not allow
Israel to undermine the nascent peace process, in which
precious time, efforts and resources have been
invested. The United States, as the guarantor of the
Annapolis understanding, has a particular obligation in
this regard. Nevertheless, the primary responsibility
rests with the United Nations and the Security Council,
which must fulfil its Charter responsibilities. We call
on the Council to take immediate measures to address
the situation. We must make every effort to contain the
damage caused by the recent events and to help the
parties to get back firmly on the path of dialogue and
peaceful settlement.

In addition, the gravity of the situation
necessitated the convening of an emergency session of
the Human Rights Council to call for urgent
international action to put an immediate end to these
grave violations by Israel and for protection of the
Palestinian civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territory, in compliance with human rights law and
international humanitarian law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention. We urge all concerned parties to
respect the rules of international humanitarian law and
to refrain from violence against the civilian population.
Israel’s closure of the Gaza crossing points —
cutting off the delivery of humanitarian assistance, fuel
and electricity supplies and other essential medical and
relief items — is entirely unacceptable. We share the
international concern in that regard, and we call for an
immediate end to the brutal siege of the Gaza Strip by
Israel.
Nothing can justify this kind of behaviour and
unlawful action by Israel. This escalation by Israel —
coming on the heels of its decision to press ahead with
the construction of new settlements on Palestinian
lands, in defiance of its Road Map obligations and
international opinion — is a serious blow to
confidence-building and good faith, which are so
essential for an environment conducive to negotiations.
The construction of the illegal separation wall also
continues unabated. The impunity enjoyed by Israel is
a major factor in the incitement of the desperate

08-21448

The following steps are vital in order to
ameliorate the situation in the short term and to ensure
success in the long term.
There must be an immediate cessation of military
campaigns by Israel and an end to all violence by all
parties. A rapid and tangible improvement in the
situation on the ground in the occupied territories, is
needed, as is an end to collective punishment, a
prisoners release, a removal of all kinds of blockades
and restrictions and an immediate end to the siege of
Gaza. There must be an end to policies and actions by
Israel that seek to change the realities on the ground
that could prejudice a final settlement, including the
integrity and viability of the future Palestinian State.
This includes, inter alia, a halt to the construction of
the illegal separation wall, a freeze of all settlement
activity and the dismantling of unauthorized settler
outposts. There must be immediate and unfettered
provision of adequate humanitarian assistance and of
all essential goods and services in the occupied
territories, as well as enhanced economic and social
support from the international community. Support
must be provided to the Palestinian Authority for
building State institutions, including the security
apparatus. Finally, efforts must be made to revive intraPalestinian unity.
The root cause of the Arab-Israeli conflict is the
Israeli occupation of the Arab territories. Human rights
violations and recurring humanitarian crises are the
direct consequences of the continuing occupation. An
end to the occupation of all Arab territories is therefore
a necessary prerequisite for peace. The OIC calls for
the achievement of a just, comprehensive and lasting

5

S/PV.5824 (Resumption 1)

peace based on international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions. These resolutions require
Israel’s complete withdrawal from the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and all
other occupied Arab territories, including the Golan
and the Lebanese lands; the achievement of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to exercise
self-determination and sovereignty in their independent
and viable State of Palestine on the basis of the pre1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital;
and a just resolution to the plight of the Palestinian
refugees.
The participation of the Islamic countries in the
Annapolis Conference in response to the invitation
from the United States was solely to indicate their
commitment to a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
between Israel and Palestine and in the Middle East.
We welcome the commitment to the establishment of
the Palestinian State and the agreement to start final
status negotiations to resolve all core issues, including
borders, refugees, settlements and Jerusalem.
To be fair, these issues must be resolved on the
basis of previous agreements, especially the relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
the principle of land for peace, the Madrid Peace
Conference terms of reference, the Quartet’s Road
Map, and the Arab Peace Initiative. This approach will
entail Israeli withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. We hope a peace
treaty will be finalized before the end of 2008 and then
be implemented quickly and earnestly.
A just, lasting and comprehensive settlement of
the question of Palestine is our collective objective and
strategic imperative. It would have a positive impact on
regional and international peace and security. Its early
realization would require the full support and
commitment of the entire international community. The
Organization of the Islamic Conference will play its
rightful role in this collective endeavour.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, at the outset, to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. It is my hope that your wisdom and
experience will inspire the Council to live up to its
great responsibilities. I would like also to express our
appreciation to the Italian delegation for its presidency
of the Council last month. Allow me also to extend my
thanks to Mr. Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing. I

6

stress also that the Lebanese delegation endorses the
statement made by the representative of Saudi Arabia
on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
I will start by listing the names of some of the
“terrorists” whom Israel has killed in the Gaza Strip:
Amir al-Yaziji, 8 years old; Sara Sliman Abu Ghazaal,
8 years old; Mahmoud Moussa Abu Ghazaal, 8 years
old; Fady Mansour Al-kafarna, 10 years old. This is not
an exhaustive list of those killed, but merely a few
killed during the last several days and months of the
latest Israeli aggression in Gaza. They have now joined
the roster of “terrorists” who have been killed by
Israel. They have joined Aiya Al-Asdar, 8 years old;
Mohammad Amin, 6 years old; Nasr Allah Abu Salima,
5 years old; and many others.
That is indeed but a sample of the victims of the
punishment imposed by Israel on the population of the
Gaza Strip on the pretext that the regime there is
hostile to it. And killing is only one part of the last two
years of continuous and escalating punishment
involving
siege,
isolation,
starvation
and
impoverishment, none of which makes a distinction
between those who are armed and those who are
civilians, or between the old and the young, or between
the healthy and the sick.
Once Israel had worn Gaza down with its
strangulating siege, by which it restricted the mobility
of individuals and goods, it declared Gaza a “hostile
entity” and prohibited the delivery of fuel, gas, medical
supplies and food to the territory. In so doing, Israel
plunged Gaza into darkness, and brought it to the brink
of a humanitarian catastrophe, despite the warnings of
this Organization.
It is unacceptable to the human conscience to see
scores of people dying because they cannot find
enough bread to eat, or because they are too ill or
unable to find cars to move them to hospitals — or
because if they are moved, the hospitals do not have
the capacity to provide proper treatment.
Even those who have been killed are not spared
punishment. The situation is so bad that the spokesman
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
Mr. Christopher Gunness, has said that the Palestinians
cannot even find the cement to make graves for the
dead.

08-21448

S/PV.5824 (Resumption 1)

This is the policy of collective punishment
practised by Israel against the Palestinians of the Gaza
Strip through a clear decision. Israel threatens to
continue this policy despite the announcement of a
partial lifting of the siege. Yesterday, the Israeli Prime
Minister, Ehud Olmert, said, “We are trying to hit only
those involved in terrorism, but also signalling to the
population in Gaza that it cannot be free from
responsibility for the situation”.

“Recent action violates the strict prohibition on
collective punishment contained in the Fourth
Geneva Convention. It also violates one of the
basic principles of international humanitarian law
that military action must distinguish between
military targets and civilian targets... Those
responsible for such cowardly action are guilty of
serious war crimes and should be prosecuted and
punished for their crimes”.

This policy constitutes a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law, in particular the regime
for the protection of civilians enshrined in the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949. Specifically, article 33 of
the Convention explicitly states that

Some might say that Israel has ended its
occupation of the Gaza Strip. This is true: Israel has
withdrawn its forces from the Gaza Strip and
dismantled its settlements there. But it has kept its
stranglehold on the arteries of life in the Strip. It
controls the land, sea and airspace of the Gaza Strip,
and controls the daily life of its population. Thus, Gaza
can clearly and unambiguously be described as the
largest prison in the world.

“No protected person may be punished for
an offence he or she has not personally
committed. Collective penalties and likewise all
measures of intimidation or of terrorism are
prohibited.
“Pillage is prohibited.
“Reprisals against protected persons and
their property are prohibited.”
The same rules are set forth in article 50 of The Hague
Rules of War and Occupation of 1907. Furthermore, in
its explanation of aspects of article 33, the
International Committee of the Red Cross condemned
collective punishment because it punishes both the
guilty and the innocent equally and because it
contradicts all humanitarian concepts and notions of
justice.
There are some who might say that Israel has the
right to defend itself or some justification for the
crimes it commits. But this right to self-defence, which
is established by international norms and conventions,
in particular the Charter of the United Nations, is a
right that cannot be used as a pretext to wage war or
exact revenge against innocent civilians. In any case, it
is a right that does not permit the excessive or
disproportionate use of force — which is what is taking
place in Gaza today.
It is no coincidence that Mr. John Dugard,
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, in a
statement he issued on 18 January from the United
Nations Office at Geneva, stated that

It is true that Israel’s crimes in Gaza did not start
with the siege. These are continuing, escalating crimes
against the population of the Gaza Strip. The majority
of the population are the victims of a policy of
displacement and expulsion which coincided with the
establishment of the State of Israel.
Let us recall that more than two thirds of the
population of the Gaza Strip — around 70 per cent —
is comprised of refugees with no clear address in their
own land, save those of the refugee camps of Jabalia,
Shati, Nuseirat, Deir el-Balah, Maghazi, Khan Younis,
Rafah and Bureij. All are addresses targeted by Israel,
just as the terrorist organizations Haganah, the Stern
Gang and the Irgun targeted the original addresses of
the camps in southern Palestine in 1948 with massacres
and campaigns of intimidations to force residents to
flee Palestine. Those addresses are today part of Israel,
as are Asdood, Fallujah, Yasoor, Kalkabbah, Beer AlSaba’a and hundreds of other villages and towns.
The crimes are continuing to escalate. We will not
pose the question: Until when? The duty of the
international community is to save the Gaza Strip and
its population immediately from all forms of collective
punishment imposed by Israel. That is the only option.
That is a decision we must take if we are to fulfil the
hope of achieving just and comprehensive peace in the
region, instead of burying it piece by piece with every
child buried.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

08-21448

7

S/PV.5824 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): It gives me great pleasure to congratulate the
sisterly country of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya on its
election to the Security Council and on the great trust
that Member States have placed in it. I should also like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. I wish
you every success in your new responsibilities. I would
also like to thank the Permanent Representative of the
friendly country of Italy for his excellent leadership of
the Council in December.
When a given issue is put before the Security
Council on an urgent basis it is because that issue has
been, as it were, admitted to the intensive care unit.
That is precisely the case today. Israel’s escalation of
military aggression and its collective siege against the
Palestinian people in Gaza, which reminds us of dark
chapters of humankind’s history, both require the
urgent attention of the Security Council. The Council
must act in a manner that will serve to restore the trust
of the international community in the rule of law in a
way that does not exclude anyone. The Council must
also protect the unarmed Palestinian people against the
irresponsible Israeli war machine. In so doing, the
Council would foster the desire of peoples for peace.
Israel’s decision to declare the Gaza Strip a
hostile entity constitutes a unilateral interpretation of
international law that has been rejected as riding
roughshod over the principles of international law,
which hold that collective punishment is a war crime.
Israel must be held accountable for that crime and bear
its legal and political consequences. Israel’s
irresponsible decision gives free reign to its occupying
forces in occupied Palestinian territory to commit war
crimes against the unarmed Palestinian people,
implement its policy of collective siege, continue its
assassinations and closures of crossing points, establish
hundreds of military checkpoints and cut off electricity,
fuel, food and medical supplies from the residents of
the entire Gaza Strip.
Israel’s claim that it has withdrawn from Gaza is
a blatant distortion of the facts. Israel controls
international borders and all crossing points. It violates
Gaza hourly. It controls the flow of food, medicines,
water and electricity. In short, Israel, the occupying
Power, as defined under international law, has
transformed Gaza into a sealed ghetto and the West
Bank into besieged bantustans.

8

It is self-evident that Israel would not have dared
to commit those inhuman violations, continue to
violate international law, persevere in its defiance of
international public opinion and move ahead with its
feverish quest to undermine the already shaky peace
process in the Middle East, had it not been for the huge
vacuum in terms of commitment on the part of
influential countries vis-à-vis the launch of a genuine
peace process to establish a just and comprehensive
peace, in accordance with the well-known international
terms of reference. Its obstinacy is also due to the lack
of active pressure on Israel to abide by its legal
obligations under the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention
and international humanitarian law.
The Security Council and the international
community must break out of their impotence and
paralysis and deter Israel from its bloody policies.
They must take urgent steps with regard to those illegal
Israeli policies and abandon double standards, so as to
preserve the credibility of their role in the maintenance
of international peace and security.
Because the Security Council has yet to do that,
Israel continues to refuse to implement the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice (ICJ)
regarding the need to stop construction and to demolish
what has been built of the racist wall of separation that
Israel is building on occupied Palestinian land. Israel
also continues to refuse to halt the building of
settlements on occupied Arab territories and imposes
terms on the peace process that are impossible to meet.
Between 2000 and 2007, Israel killed 4,437
Palestinians, of whom 867 were minors. That is in
contrast to the 119 Israeli minors killed in the same
period. Those figures, provided by an Israeli human
rights centre, prove that Israel is a terrorist country that
is eight times more violent than the Palestinian
resistance, which Israel claims is a source of terrorism
against it. We must keep in mind that the Palestinians’
firing of rockets was initially a Palestinian reaction to
Israel’s assassination of Palestinians in Gaza. Given
this situation, it is therefore not surprising that former
United States President Jimmy Carter and Bishop
Desmond Tutu have described Israel as a racist State.
When the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) issues an urgent call for relief, it must be
heard by the Security Council as a loud alarm, for it
signals a great imbalance in terms of the reaction of the

08-21448

S/PV.5824 (Resumption 1)

United Nations, and of the Council in particular, in the
face of the tragic situation in Gaza as a result of
Israel’s criminal actions against the Palestinian people.
When hundreds of intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations and numerous United
Nations specialized agencies call for urgent action to
save the people of Gaza and the cities of the West Bank
under Israeli occupation, it means that there is
something wrong in some international moral and
political decision-making circles.
There is something wrong, and it is causing more
despair, tension, frustration and violence and damaging
the prospects for peace. Some might wonder what
prompts a certain group to issue one resolution after
another on a marginal issue that has nothing to do with
the maintenance of international peace and security,
while that same group resists any genuine and honest
international effort seeking to hold Israel accountable
before the Security Council for its criminal practices
and its barbaric aggression against the Palestinian
people. That aggression is clearly intended to deprive
Palestinians of their rights, bring them to their knees
and create chasms in their national defences. The only
result of such negativity by some parties will be to
push the region towards an explosion, to convince the
people of the region that resisting Israeli aggression is
the only solution and that any talk of a futile peace
serves only the continuation of Israeli occupation and
aggression.
The current escalating situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories can withstand no further silence
or disregard on the part of a Security Council that
exempts Israel from abiding by the principles of
international law. It requires strong intervention in
order to put a stop to that exemption and to make
Israeli policymakers and decision-makers understand
that they are not above the law and that they are
accountable for their transgressions, for their worship
of violence and for the extremism and racism to which
they have fallen prey. Those decision-makers must
understand that the continued occupation, over
decades, has left the Palestinian people with no other
choice but to resist the occupation, through legitimate
means guaranteed by international legitimacy and
international law.
Israeli aggression against the Palestinian people
started decades ago, long before the emergence of the
Hamas movement. Throughout that time, Israel has
continued its daily assassinations, daily violations,

08-21448

daily arrest campaigns, daily siege, daily starving of
the Palestinian people, daily building of settlements
and daily provocations.
Anyone who listened to the statement of the
Israeli representative would immediately understand
that Israel’s interpretation of its occupation of the
Palestinian territories is unique and without parallel.
He believes that the Palestinians must accept the
occupation, worship its practices and the oppression it
brings and praise the daily assassinations carried out
around the clock by Israel. The practices of the Israeli
Government against the Palestinian people constitute
true terrorism and must be stopped.
The Israeli representative’s claim that his country
desires peace is not substantiated by Israel’s actions,
which include settlement-building; the imposition of
sieges; assassinations; the building of the wall; the
forcible annexation of other people’s lands; the closing
of crossing points; the cutting off of electricity, water,
and supplies of food and medicine; and the arrests of
leaders of the Palestinian people and members of their
Legislative Council, who have been democratically
elected for years. The fruits of true peace and true
security must be enjoyed by everyone in the region, not
just the Israelis, because peace and security are human
rights belonging to all, regardless of colour, religion or
race. The right to self-defence too applies to all,
including the Palestinians; self-defence cannot be a
racist principle tailored to Israeli measurements and the
occupation’s standards.
The Security Council today is urgently required
to take immediate measures to compel Israel, the
occupying Power, to abide by the principles of
international law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949, by putting an end to the practice
of holding millions of Palestinians hostage to political
greed that aims at collectively punishing that people
for having made a political choice to reject Israeli
occupation.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to extend to you, Sir, and to your
brotherly country our congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I extend our thanks to the representative of
Italy, Ambassador Spatafora, for his wise management
of the work of the Council last month. We would also

9

S/PV.5824 (Resumption 1)

like to thank all the members of the Council for their
quick response in holding this emergency meeting.
Gaza is currently witnessing a special emergency
humanitarian situation, which requires the international
community to intervene immediately and deal with it
decisively. Any delay will expand the scope of the
crisis, double its impact and leave a lasting mark on the
entire peace process. Jordan is especially concerned
about the dangerous and serious humanitarian situation
in Gaza and about the fact that the Gazans’ basic daily
needs are not being met. We completely reject all
policies of collective punishment, which inflict
widespread suffering and use it for political purposes.
In response to this tragic situation, His Majesty
King Abdullah II has instructed the Jordanian
Government to send an immediate contingency relief
convoy, in continuance of the policy responsible for
hundreds of Jordanian convoys aimed at easing the
suffering of the Palestinian people. They are expected
to reach Gaza a few hours from now. What is now
required from the Israeli Government is that they
facilitate the passage of that Jordanian humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian people or any other
assistance provided by the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan.
However, this is only an immediate humanitarian
response. The true response to the situation should be
made by the Security Council. We call upon the
Council to immediately intervene in order to put an end
to this humanitarian tragedy, reverse it and create the
necessary conditions to continue the peace process, as
agreed upon in Annapolis and underscored in Paris a
few weeks ago. We call for nothing less than an
immediate end to the military campaign; the lifting of
all forms of siege; an end to the policy of collective
punishment; the opening of crossing points; enabling
all United Nations agencies to do their jobs; access for
emergency relief and humanitarian materials;
resumption of water, electricity, food and fuel supplies
to the Gaza Strip; and the reopening of the power
plants. The real challenge before the Council today is
to try to contain the situation and to provide the
necessary conditions for a return to the negotiation
table.
Our ultimate objective should always be present
before us: to bring about an independent, viable and
contiguous Palestinian State before the end of this year,
in accordance with what was agreed on at the

10

Annapolis Conference and with the resolutions of
international legitimacy, the Road Map and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States.
Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I wish to associate myself
with the statement made by the Chairman of the Group
of Arab States, the representative of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia.
I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
commend your wise leadership of the Council’s
proceedings. I also pay tribute to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Italy, for his distinguished
leadership of the Council last month. I also thank you
deeply, Sir, for responding promptly to the Arab
request to convene this meeting.
The dangerous and deteriorating situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, especially the Gaza
Strip, requires the Security Council — the principal
body tasked with the maintenance of international
peace and security — to take immediate action to put
an end to the Israeli aggression, particularly in the
Gaza Strip, and to compel Israel to lift the siege of
Gaza and open the border crossing points to allow for
the entry of humanitarian and relief supplies, protect
civilians and guarantee their rights under international
law. The Council must also request the SecretaryGeneral to submit an urgent report to the Security
Council on Israeli practices that are violations of all
international laws and norms with respect to the
residents of the occupied Palestinian territories.
We further ask the Security Council to conduct an
international investigation into Israel’s inhuman crimes
in the occupied Palestinian territories, especially Gaza,
and to declare the Gaza Strip a disaster area, which
would trigger an urgent call on the international
community to extend support and assistance to the
besieged Palestinian people. Moreover, we ask the
Council to consider Israel’s decision to declare the
Gaza Strip a hostile entity to be illegal and illegitimate.
The League of Arab States expresses its deep
concern over the deteriorating economic and
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories as a result of the ongoing and grave Israeli

08-21448

S/PV.5824 (Resumption 1)

violations against Palestinian citizens. The Palestinian
economy is at the point of total collapse due to the
noose-tightening practiced by Israel, the occupying
Power, forcing many Palestinian families to live hand
to mouth, barely surviving and deprived of the
minimum necessities of a dignified life and of
infrastructure, education and health services.
The Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territories, the Gaza Strip in particular, is the cause of
increasing social and economic suffering among
Palestinians because the continuous military operations
of the occupier against the occupied territories rely
also on the weapons of forcible land seizure, the
demolition of homes, the razing of agricultural lands,
the imposition of harsh restrictions on transportation
and movement, and the policy of closures, which is
deemed to be the principal cause of the poverty and
humanitarian crisis in the occupied Palestinian
territories. Israel has thereby completely flouted all
international and humanitarian laws, norms and values,
human rights and the Fourth Geneva Convention on the
protection of civilians in time of war.
The situation has reached the point at which even
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East is unable to deliver
humanitarian and relief assistance to the Gaza Strip
because of the comprehensive Israeli closures of all
entry points. That will precipitate an unprecedented,
Israeli-made humanitarian disaster in the region that
will have severe consequences.
Israel’s practices in the occupied Palestinian
territories, especially the Gaza Strip, are jeopardizing
the prospects of peace in the region and threatening the
outcomes of the Annapolis conference. Israel’s
continued occupation of Palestinian territories is the
principal cause of the Arab-Israeli conflict, the
settlement of which can be achieved only through
negotiations between the parties to end the occupation
and enable the Palestinian people to establish their own
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, on the basis of
resolutions of international legitimacy, international
law and the Arab peace initiative.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The
representative of Israel has asked to speak a second
time. I give him the floor.
Mr. Cohen (Israel): Thank you, Sir, for allowing
my delegation the opportunity to address the Council
once again.

08-21448

The Hamas terrorist organization that operates in
the Gaza Strip and is responsible for the current
situation facing the Palestinian people did not
materialize out of thin air. Hamas — like other terrorist
organizations, for that matter — is supported, financed
and backed by States in the region, such as Syria, in
violation of their obligations under international law
and, in particular, Security Council resolution 1373
(2001).
It is hence the height of hypocrisy, cynicism and
indecency for the representative of Syria to address the
Council and condemn Israel merely for defending itself
against the very Hamas terrorists that it supports.
Damascus is home and headquarters to numerous
terrorist organizations, including Islamic Jihad and
Hamas. Khaled Mashal, the political leader of the
latter, lives there while continuing to orchestrate the
killing of Israelis. Israel urges all States to end their
support for terrorists and terrorism, in accordance with
international law.
It is deeply regrettable that, during its statement
this morning, one State member of the Security
Council utilized the term “genocide” to refer to the
situation in the Gaza Strip. It is highly insensitive to
the survivors of genocide around the world and to the
sensibilities of this Council for language to be used so
cheaply. My delegation urges Member States to be
more responsible with the language used in their
statements.
Lastly, it is astonishing, though perhaps not
surprising, that some delegations that addressed the
Council today were able to refer to the situation in the
Gaza Strip through a one-sided prism, without any
understanding of the true causes of the situation. The
absence of reference to Hamas is validation of the fact
that the deliberations in this Chamber are often all too
detached from the reality on the ground.
I reiterate Israel’s commitment to facilitating the
necessary humanitarian aid to the Palestinian civilian
population in the Gaza Strip. The current situation that
Israel faces is the same challenge that every democracy
confronts when dealing with terrorism — to uphold the
standards of international law even while the terrorists
it fights wilfully violate those norms.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The
representative of Syria has asked to speak a second
time. I give him the floor.

11

S/PV.5824 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I regret that I have been compelled to speak
before the Council once again at this very late hour.
The representatives of Israel in all international
forums have yet to understand that the story of the
military occupation of Arab territory and the
deprivation of the Palestinian people of their usurped
inherent rights is one that is well known. It is so well
known, in fact, that even Israeli non-governmental
organizations have begun to contribute effectively to
bringing Israel’s inhuman practices against the
unarmed Palestinian population to light.
The play of shedding crocodile tears in the
Security Council because of the violence of
Palestinians — who have nothing more than stones to
face the arsenal of Israeli aggression on Palestinian
territory — has become raw, boring, unnecessary and
incapable of allowing the light of truth to shine before
the members of the Council.
Israeli State terrorism in our region began with
the inception of Israel in historical Palestine in 1948.
This Israeli terrorism, as the Council knows, has fallen
on representatives of international legitimacy such as
Count Bernadotte, who was killed by a terrorist
explosion carried out by a previous Prime Minister of
Israel targeting him. That terrorist activity has
repeatedly fallen on the UNIFIL forces and has killed
thousands of children in massacres perpetrated by the
Israeli occupation forces for decades in Egypt, Jordan,
Lebanon, Syria and Palestine. On this occasion, I wish
to remind members of the Council that the first
hijacking of a civilian aircraft in the world was carried
out by Israel against a Syrian aircraft in 1954. I also
wish to remind members of the Council that Israel shot
down a Libyan civilian aircraft in 1971.

Peace will not prevail in the Middle East except
when the representatives of Israel understand that
peace is in their interest before it is in ours. Peace is
not of interest to the Arab world alone. When Israel
understands that peace is also an Israeli need, before it
is an Arab and a Palestinian need, then peace will
prevail. Then the Council’s job will be much easier
than it is at present.
The Arab States have not invited millions of
Palestinian refugees to reside in the Arab States; those
millions of refugees, who live in dozens and hundreds
of refugee camps in Lebanon, Syria, Jordan, Egypt and
inside Palestine itself, have been forcibly displaced
from their homeland. Syria did not invite Khaled
Meshal to come to Damascus. Lebanon did not invite
half a million refugees to live in its land. They all wish
to return today, before tomorrow, to their homeland, on
the basis of a resolution adopted by international
legitimacy, General Assembly resolution 194 (III) —
the resolution on the right of return.
Those millions of Palestinian refugees who live
in exile are waiting to return to their homeland. Their
homeland is Palestine. It is on the map, and everybody
knows where Palestine is. The representative of Israel
here, or in any other international forum, will not stop
us from seeing that truth: the terms of reference of
international law. This Council is here to protect and
defend the law not to allow Israel to become an
exception to international law and its provisions.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more speakers inscribed on my list. In accordance with
the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite members of the Council to
informal consultations to continue our discussion of the
subject.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

12

08-21448
