S/2010/197

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 April 2010
Original: English

Letter dated 19 April 2010 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo
covering the period from 1 October to 31 December 2009 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

10-32125 (E) 260410

*1032125*

S/2010/197

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
Kosovo Force
1.

This report covers the period from 1 October to 31 December 2009.

2.
As at 31 December, the total number of troops in theatre was 11,600. This
number included 1,800 troops from non-NATO countries.

Security situation
3.
The overall security situation in Kosovo remained generally quiet but fragile
in the north. The electoral campaign and the electricity supply and distribution are
the main subjects of interest during the reporting period. The electoral campaign,
which began on 15 October and lasted until 14 November, was generally peaceful,
despite some politically motivated incidents, including acts of vandalism, theft and
assault. With regard to the power shortfalls, it should be noted there has been no
change to the status quo on electricity supply and distribution in the northern part of
Kosovo.
4.
Over the course of the reporting period close to 100 vehicles of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) were vandalized, in Priština and in Prizren in
particular. Locations of the reported vandalism match previous trends, and no one is
claiming responsibility. Historically, this type of activity is associated with either a
criminal case EULEX is investigating or as a statement towards EULEX for a recent
political event. The threat to security is assessed as low.
5.
Throughout the reporting period, members of the independent trade union
Elektrokosova, ranging from 30 to 200 protestors, staged a series of protests in front
of the main headquarters building of Kosovo Electric Company in Priština. The
protestors demanded the resignations of the Company’s General Manager and
Supply Manager in addition to better working conditions and annual vacations.
From 21 to 24 December, the Company workers in Gjakovë/Djakovica protested in
support of their Priština colleagues. A general strike starting on 28 December was
announced, but eventually cancelled.
6.
On 1 October, an unusual incident took place at a school in Kosovo
Polje/Fushe Kosovë. Students complained of nausea after breathing noxious air
while on the school grounds. Many students, some hysterical, were taken to hospital
for examination. To date no toxic material has been identified. None of the students
were detained in hospital with any lasting symptoms.
7.
On 19 October, Kosovo Electric Company temporarily suspended supply of
electricity to the Valac power substation, which feeds northern Kosovo, after
unseasonal weather conditions caused a demand spike beyond the capacity of the
line and personnel at the Valac substation refused the Company orders to implement
necessary safety precautions. On 20 October Serbian Electric Company employees
took steps to supply power to northern Kosovo through an alternate line from Novi
Pazar, Serbia. On 27 October, Kosovo Electric Company notified Serbian Electric
Company that maintenance was complete and it was ready to resume delivery of
power, but Serbian Electric Company employees at Valac denied Kosovo Electric

2

10-32125

S/2010/197

Company access to the substation to reconnect the lines. Elektrokosmet, a related
Serbian power company, began distributing electricity bills to those receiving
electricity supplies in northern Kosovo, with a proposed billing range of between 40
and 60 euros per household.
8.
On 29 October, a large quantity of old unexploded ordnance, ammunition and
weapons was discovered at the Kosovo Security Force (KSF) Ferizaj/Uroševać
training facility. It is thought that the find dates back to when Ferizaj/Uroševać was
a Yugoslav military facility; a Kosovo Force (KFOR) explosive ordnance disposal
team arranged for disposal and a clean-up of the area.
9.
On 24 November, multiple shots were fired from an automatic weapon at the
Gjakovë/Djakovica municipal building; no injuries were reported.
10. On 15 November, local elections for municipal assemblies and mayors took
place. No significant threats to security were reported.
11. On 7 December, a rocket propelled grenade was fired at a store in Suva
Reka/Suharekë Municipality. The grenade caused only minor damage and there were
no reported injuries.

KFOR operations
12. Operations in support of Operation Effective Knight continue, focused on an
effects-based approach. KFOR is to contribute to a safe and secure environment, in
close coordination with both international and local civilian actors, by conducting
intelligence-driven operations across the territory of Kosovo, using situational
awareness, rapid and determined deployment of manoeuvre forces, and reserves to
deter violence and deal with crisis situations. KFOR will use reduced forces and a
changed force posture as it moves to deterrent presence.
13. On 29 September the NATO Military Committee visited KFOR. The visit
included a tour of the KSF training centre at Ferizaj/Uroševać.
14. The German/Austrian Operational Reserve Force Battalion was deployed from
2 October to 8 November. The battalion was declared mission ready in theatre on
12 October.
15. KFOR put in place Operation Electric Knight, in coordination with EULEX, to
deter and prevent disturbances at the Valac electricity substation in the Kosovo
Serb-majority municipality of Zvecan; Serbian Electric Company employees
retained control over the substation. As from 23 November, KFOR and EULEX
began security patrols in the vicinity of the substation.
16. Within the general context of gradual “unfixing” from the nine Supreme Allied
Commander Europe-designated properties with designated special status, the
Gazimestan Monument unfixing plan and procedures were tested during the
reporting period. Effective coordination among the relevant actors in the security
domain in Kosovo was witnessed within this process.

10-32125

3

S/2010/197

New tasks of NATO
Kosovo Security Force
17. Following the school incident referred to in paragraph 6 of the present report,
the Commander of KFOR commended KSF on its immediate and professional
reaction, despite having just reached its initial operating capability.
18. Two hundred and thirty-four former members of the Kosovo Protection Corps
(KPC) who were potential candidates for KSF enlistment completed their basic
training. On 21 October, 147 were selected, based on their average scores achieved
in the training. They will be offered a contract for service in KSF, subject to vetting.
At the end of the reporting period, KSF strength was 1,800.
19. On 10 December, Glock pistols arrived from Austria to equip KSF. A well
organized and supervised inspection took place, in addition to receipt and
registration in the KSF property book. A follow-up report will also be forwarded to
the ministry for KSF. NATO Advisory Team members and KFOR representatives
monitored the entire operation.
20. The establishment of a plan for a new recruitment campaign was still ongoing
at the end of the reporting period.
21. The Military Civilian Advisory Division at KFOR is working according to
plan. It reviewed and, in principle, concurred on the KSF draft training concept. The
agreed training plan for 2010 was signed on 22 December by the Commander of
KSF and was handed over to the NATO Advisory Team, the Military Civilian
Advisory Division and Land Force Command. The Commander of KSF also
approved the training directive and revised training concept.

Conclusion
22. The overall situation in Kosovo remained generally quiet during the reporting
period despite some tensions related to the election campaign, electricity delivery
and bill collection difficulties, mainly in the north, and vandalism against EULEX
property. KFOR maintains its third responder status and will remain ready to assist
EULEX and the Kosovo Police Service upon request. KFOR continued to
implement the move to “Transition Gate 1” in line with the decision of the North
Atlantic Council of August 2009.

4

10-32125
