United Nations

A/RES/58/232

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 March 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 12

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2003
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/58/495 and Corr.1)]

58/232. Agreement between the United Nations and the
World Tourism Organization
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2529 (XXIV) of 5 December 1969, 32/156 and 32/157
of 19 December 1977 and 36/41 of 19 November 1981,
Having considered Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/2 of 10 July
2003, the annex to which contains the text of the draft agreement negotiated by the
Committee on Negotiations with Intergovernmental Agencies of the Economic and
Social Council and the World Tourism Organization Committee on the Negotiations
for the Conversion of the Organization into a Specialized Agency, intended to
transform the World Tourism Organization, an intergovernmental organization, into
a specialized agency, in accordance with Articles 57 and 63 of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Approves the agreement between the United Nations and the World Tourism
Organization as set forth in the annex to the present resolution.
78th plenary meeting
23 December 2003

Annex
Agreement between the United Nations and the World Tourism
Organization
Recalling resolutions 2529 (XXIV) of 5 December 1969 and 32/156 of
19 December 1977 of the General Assembly of the United Nations,
In consideration of the Charter of the United Nations and the Statutes of the
World Tourism Organization,
In further consideration of the provisions of Article 57 of the Charter of the
United Nations and of article 3, paragraph 3, and article 31 of the Statutes of the
World Tourism Organization,

03 50844

A/RES/58/232

The United Nations and the World Tourism Organization agree as follows:
Article 1
Recognition
1.
The United Nations recognizes the World Tourism Organization as a
specialized agency of the United Nations responsible for taking such action as may
be appropriate under its Statutes for the accomplishment of the objectives set forth
therein.
2.
The United Nations recognizes the decisive and central role of the World
Tourism Organization, as an intergovernmental organization, in world tourism, as
enshrined in its Statutes.
3.
Convinced that tourism can contribute significantly to the pursuit of the shared
objectives of achieving sustainable development and poverty eradication, the United
Nations notes that, in accordance with its Statutes, the World Tourism Organization
shall pay particular attention to the interests of the developing countries in the field
of tourism.
Article 2
Coordination and cooperation
1.
In its relations with the United Nations, its organs and the agencies of the
United Nations system, the World Tourism Organization recognizes the coordinating
role, as well as the comprehensive responsibilities in promoting economic and social
development, of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council under
the Charter of the United Nations.
2.
In exercise of its central coordinating role in the field of tourism undertaken in
accordance with its Statutes and with a view to contributing to economic and social
development, in particular opportunities for poverty eradication and employment
creation in the least developed countries, the World Tourism Organization
recognizes the need for effective coordination and cooperation with the United
Nations, its organs and the agencies of the United Nations system.
3.
The World Tourism Organization, accordingly, agrees to cooperate with the
United Nations in whatever measure may be necessary to effect the required
coordination of policies and activities.
4.
The World Tourism Organization agrees further to participate in, and to
cooperate with, any body or bodies that have been established or may be established
by the United Nations for the purpose of facilitating such cooperation and
coordination, in particular through membership in the United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination, and to furnish such information as may be
required for the carrying out of this purpose.
5.
The World Tourism Organization shall inform the Economic and Social
Council of matters of inter-agency concern within its competence and of any formal
agreement on such matters to be concluded between the World Tourism
Organization and another agency within the United Nations system.
Article 3
Reciprocal representation
1.
Representatives of the United Nations shall be invited to attend the meetings
of the General Assembly and the Executive Council of the World Tourism
2

A/RES/58/232

Organization and their subsidiary organs, and to participate, without the right to
vote, in the deliberations of these bodies. Written statements presented by the
United Nations shall be distributed by the secretariat of the World Tourism
Organization to the members of the above-mentioned bodies, in accordance with the
relevant rules of procedure.
2.
Representatives of the World Tourism Organization shall be invited to attend
meetings and to participate, without the right to vote and in accordance with the
relevant rules of procedure, in the deliberations of the Economic and Social Council,
its commissions and its committees, of the Main Committees and other organs of the
General Assembly and of the conferences and meetings of the United Nations, with
respect to items on their agenda relating to matters within the scope of the activities
of the World Tourism Organization and other matters of mutual interest. Written
statements presented by the World Tourism Organization shall be distributed by the
Secretariat of the United Nations to the members of the above-mentioned bodies, in
accordance with the relevant rules of procedure.
3.
Representatives of the World Tourism Organization shall be invited, for
purposes of consultation, to attend meetings of the General Assembly when matters
defined in paragraph 2 of the present article are under consideration.
Article 4
Proposals of agenda items
1.
After such preliminary consultations as may be necessary, the World Tourism
Organization shall arrange for the inclusion in the agenda of its General Assembly,
the Executive Council or their subsidiary bodies, as appropriate, items proposed by
the United Nations.
2.
After such preliminary consultations as may be necessary, the United Nations
shall arrange for the inclusion in the agenda of the Economic and Social Council or,
as appropriate and in accordance with the relevant rules of procedure, of other
organs or bodies of the United Nations of items proposed by the World Tourism
Organization.
Article 5
Recommendations of the United Nations
1.
Having regard to the obligations of the United Nations to promote the
objectives set forth in Article 55 of the Charter of the United Nations and the
functions and powers of the Economic and Social Council, under Article 62 of the
Charter, to make or initiate studies and reports with respect to international
economic, social, cultural, educational, health and related matters and to make
recommendations concerning these matters to the specialized agencies concerned,
and having regard also to the responsibility of the United Nations, under Articles 58
and 63 of the Charter, to make recommendations for the coordination of the policies
and activities of such specialized agencies, the World Tourism Organization agrees
to arrange for the submission, as soon as possible, to the appropriate organ of the
World Tourism Organization of all formal recommendations which the United
Nations may make to it.
2.
The World Tourism Organization agrees to enter into consultations with the
United Nations upon request with respect to such recommendations, and in due
course to report to the United Nations on the action taken by the World Tourism
Organization or by its members to give effect to such recommendations, or on the
other results of their consideration.
3

A/RES/58/232

Article 6
Assistance to the United Nations
In accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the Statutes of the
World Tourism Organization, the World Tourism Organization shall cooperate with
the United Nations by furnishing to it to the fullest extent possible such special
information or studies, and by rendering such assistance to it as the United Nations
may request.
Article 7
Regular reports
The World Tourism Organization shall submit to the United Nations regular
reports on its activities.
Article 8
Exchange of information and documents
Subject to such arrangements as may be necessary for the safeguarding of
confidential material, full and prompt exchange of appropriate information and
documents shall be made between the United Nations and the World Tourism
Organization.
Article 9
Public information
Having regard to the aim of the World Tourism Organization, as defined in
article 3, paragraph 1, of its Statutes, and with a view to coordinating the activities
of the World Tourism Organization in this field with the operations of the
information services of the United Nations, supplementary arrangements regarding
these matters shall be concluded between the United Nations and the World Tourism
Organization.
Article 10
Relations with the International Court of Justice
1.
The World Tourism Organization agrees to furnish any information which may
be requested by the International Court of Justice in pursuance of Article 34 of the
Statute of the Court.
2.
The General Assembly of the United Nations authorizes the World Tourism
Organization to request advisory opinions of the International Court of Justice on
legal questions arising within the scope of its competence other than questions
concerning the mutual relationships between the United Nations and the World
Tourism Organization or other specialized agencies.
3.
Such requests may be addressed to the International Court of Justice by the
General Assembly or by the Executive Council of the World Tourism Organization
acting in pursuance of an authorization by the General Assembly of the World
Tourism Organization.
4.
When requesting the International Court of Justice to give an advisory opinion,
the World Tourism Organization shall inform the Economic and Social Council of
the request.

4

A/RES/58/232

Article 11
Non-Self-Governing and other Territories
The World Tourism Organization agrees to cooperate within the fields of its
competence with the United Nations in giving effect to the principles and
obligations set forth in Chapters XI, XII and XIII of the Charter of the United
Nations and other internationally recognized principles and obligations regarding
colonial countries and peoples, and taking into account the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly of the United Nations, with regard to matters affecting the
well-being and development of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing and other
Territories.
Article 12
Technical assistance
The United Nations and the World Tourism Organization undertake to work
together in the provision of technical assistance in the field of tourism and tourism
development. In particular, they undertake to avoid undesirable duplication of
activities and services and agree to take such measures as may be required to
achieve effective coordination within the framework of existing coordinating
machinery in the field of technical assistance, taking into account the respective
roles and responsibilities of the United Nations and the World Tourism Organization
under their constituent instruments, as well as those of other organizations
participating in technical assistance activities. To this end, the World Tourism
Organization recognizes the overall responsibilities of the resident coordinators for
operational activities for development, as formulated in the relevant General
Assembly resolutions. As one of the smaller specialized agencies without field
representation, the World Tourism Organization may use resident coordinators to
ensure its representation and promote its role.
Article 13
Statistical services
1.
The United Nations and the World Tourism Organization agree to strive for the
maximum cooperation, the elimination of all undesirable duplication between them
and the most efficient use of personnel in their respective collection, analysis,
publication and dissemination of statistical information. They agree to combine their
efforts to secure the greatest possible usefulness and utilization of statistical
information, to guarantee close coordination in their respective statistical initiatives
and to minimize the burden placed upon Governments and other organizations from
which such information may be collected.
2.
The World Tourism Organization recognizes that the United Nations is the
central agency for the collection, analysis, publication, standardization and
improvement of tourism statistics serving the general purposes of international
organizations.
3.
The United Nations recognizes the World Tourism Organization as the
appropriate organization to collect, to analyse, to publish, to standardize and to
improve the statistics of tourism and to promote the integration of these statistics
within the sphere of the United Nations system.

5

A/RES/58/232

Article 14
Administrative cooperation
1.
The United Nations and the World Tourism Organization recognize the
desirability of cooperation in administrative matters of mutual interest.
2.
Accordingly, the United Nations and the World Tourism Organization
undertake to consult together, and with other agencies concerned within the United
Nations system, from time to time concerning these matters, particularly the most
efficient and harmonized use of facilities, staff and services and appropriate
methods of avoiding the establishment and operation of competitive or overlapping
facilities and services with a view to securing as much uniformity in these matters
as possible.
3.
The consultations referred to in the present article shall be utilized to establish
the most equitable manner in which any special services or assistance furnished, on
request, by the World Tourism Organization to the United Nations or by the United
Nations to the World Tourism Organization shall be financed subject to
supplementary arrangements to be concluded for that purpose.
4.
The consultations referred to in the present article shall also explore the
possibility of continuing or establishing common facilities or services in specific
areas, including the possibility of one organization providing such facilities or
services to one or several other organizations, and establish the most equitable
manner in which such facilities or services shall be financed subject to
supplementary arrangements to be concluded for that purpose.
Article 15
Regional and branch offices
Any regional or branch offices which the World Tourism Organization may
establish shall closely cooperate with the regional or branch offices which the
United Nations has established or may establish, in particular the offices of the
regional commissions and of the resident coordinators.
Article 16
Personnel arrangements
1.
The United Nations and the World Tourism Organization agree to develop, in
the interests of uniform standards of international employment and to the extent
feasible, common personnel standards, methods and arrangements designed to avoid
unjustified differences in terms and conditions of employment, to avoid competition
in recruitment of personnel and to facilitate any mutually desirable and beneficial
interchange of personnel. For this purpose the World Tourism Organization agrees to
accept the Statute of the International Civil Service Commission and participate in
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund in accordance with the Regulations of
the Fund and accept the jurisdiction of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal
in matters involving applications alleging non-observance of those Regulations.
2.
The United Nations and the World Tourism Organization agree to cooperate to
the fullest extent possible in achieving these ends, and in particular they agree:
(a) To consult together from time to time concerning matters of mutual
interest relating to the terms and conditions of employment of the officers and staff,
with a view to securing as much uniformity in these matters as may be feasible;

6

A/RES/58/232

(b) To cooperate in the interchange of personnel when desirable, on a
temporary or a permanent basis, making due provision for the retention of seniority
and pension rights;
(c) To cooperate with the agencies of the United Nations system in the
establishment and operation of suitable machinery for the settlement of disputes
arising in connection with the employment of personnel and related matters.
3.
The terms and conditions under which any facilities or services of the United
Nations or the World Tourism Organization in connection with the matters referred
to in the present article are to be extended to the other shall, where necessary, be the
subject of supplementary arrangements concluded for this purpose pursuant to
article 20 of the present Agreement.
Article 17
Budgetary and financial matters
1.
The World Tourism Organization recognizes the desirability of establishing
close budgetary and financial relationships with the United Nations in order that the
administrative operations of the United Nations and the agencies within the United
Nations system shall be carried out in the most efficient and economic manner
possible, and that the maximum measure of coordination and uniformity with
respect to these operations shall be secured.
2.
The World Tourism Organization agrees to accept the Statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit.
3.
The World Tourism Organization agrees to conform, as far as may be
practicable and appropriate, to standard practices and forms recommended by the
United Nations.
4.
Financial and budgetary arrangements that may be entered into between the
United Nations and the World Tourism Organization shall be approved in
accordance with their respective constitutive instruments.
5.
In the preparation of the budget of the World Tourism Organization, the
Secretary-General of the World Tourism Organization shall consult with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations with a view to achieving, insofar as
practicable, uniformity in presentation of the budgets of the United Nations and of
the agencies within the United Nations system for the purposes of providing a basis
for comparison of the several budgets without precluding the use by each
organization of different currencies to formulate its budget.
6.
The World Tourism Organization agrees to transmit its proposed budgets to the
United Nations not later than when the said budgets are transmitted to its members
so as to enable the General Assembly of the United Nations to examine them and
make recommendations, in accordance with Article 17, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations.
7.
Representatives of the World Tourism Organization shall be entitled to
participate, without vote, in the deliberations of the General Assembly or any
committee thereof established by it, at all times when the budget of the World
Tourism Organization or general administrative or financial questions concerning
the World Tourism Organization are under consideration.

7

A/RES/58/232

Article 18
United Nations laissez-passer
Officials of the World Tourism Organization shall be entitled, in accordance
with such special arrangements as may be concluded between the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the Secretary-General of the World Tourism Organization,
to use laissez-passer of the United Nations.
Article 19
Implementation of the Agreement
The Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Secretary-General of the
World Tourism Organization may enter into such supplementary arrangements for
the implementation of the present Agreement as may be found desirable.
Article 20
Amendment and revision
The present Agreement may be amended or revised by agreement between the
United Nations and the World Tourism Organization, and any such amendment or
revision shall come into force on its approval by the General Assembly of the
United Nations and the General Assembly of the World Tourism Organization.
Article 21
Entry into force
The present Agreement enters into force on its approval by the General
Assembly of the United Nations and the General Assembly of the World Tourism
Organization.

8
