Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committcc

forces of Portugal of certain sectors of the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau and the intensified acts of aggression
committed by them against the people of GuineaBissau,
Mindful that all States should, in conformity with
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter, refrain in their
international relations from thc thrcat or me of force
against the territorial integrity or national indepcndence
of any State or from taking any action inconsistent
with the purposes and principies of thc Charter,
Noting with satisfaction that the State of GuineaBissau assumes the sacred duty to cxpcl thc forces of
aggression of Portugucse coloniali:;m frnm that part
of the territory of Guinea-Bis.,;au which thcy still
occupy and to intensify thc strugf!le in the Cape
Verde Islands, which form an integral and inalienable
part of the national territory of thc peoplc of GuineaBissau and Cape Verde,
A ware of the urgent nced of the peoplc of the ncwly
established State of Guinea-Bissau for all possible international assistance in its naticmal rcconstruction programmes,
1. W elcomes the recent acccssion to indepcndcnce
of the people of Guinea-Bissau, thereby creating the
sovereign State of the Republic of Guinea-Bi~sau;
2. Strongly condemns the policics of thc Government of Portugal in perpetuating its illegal occupation
of certain sectors of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau
and the repeated acts of aggression committed by its
armed forces against the people of Guinea-Bissau and
Cape Verde;
3. Demands that the Government of Portugal des1st forthwith from further violation of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Republic of GuineaBissau and from a11 acts of aggression against the
people of Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde by immediately withdrawing its armed forces from those territories;
4. Draws the attention of the Sccurity Council, in
conformity with AJticle 11, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations, to the critical situation resulting from the illegal presence of Portugal in GuineaBissau and to the urgent need for taking, as a matter
of priority, all effective steps to restore the territorial
integrity of the Republic;
5. Invites all Member States, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations
system to render ali necessary assistance to the Government of Guinea-Bissau in its national reconstruction
and development programmes;
6. Decides to keep the situation under continuous
review.

2 J63rd plenary meeting
2 November 1973

3065 (XXVIII). Scientific work on peace research

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2817 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971 relating to scientific work on peace research,
Having considered with interest and appreciation the
first informative report on scientific works produced
by national and international, governmental and nongovernmental, public and private institutions with re-

3

gard to peace research, which was submitted by the
Secretary-General to the General Assembly in pursuance of paragraph 1 of the abovc-mentioned resolution,
Conscious of the fact that, in such ncw and dclicate
rcsearch, the bounds of information have by no
means yet becn reached, and that it is nccessary, in
such a wide and important field, to pursuc research
in spite of its difficultics and short-comings, in ordcr to
open the way to progress,
Considering that fundamental rescarch on th· foundations of and conditions for peace, and on thc origins,
motivations and spreading of conflicts. can contribute
considerably to thc peace mission of the United Nations,
Considering it desirable further to promotc thc rccording of the studies devotcd to this suhject, in pursuancc of paragraph 1 of resolution 2817 (XXVI),
1. Takes note of the first informativc report submitted by the Secretary-General;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to draw once
more the attention of Membcr States to the invitation
extended by the General Assembly in paragraph 2 of
its resolution 2817 (XXVI) and to submit to the
Asscmbly, at its thirtieth session, a second informative
report containing, in addition to thc titlcs of the studics
carricd out, a brief summary of their contcnts;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session the item entitled "Scicntific work
on peace research".
2164th plenary meeting
9 November 1973
9

3066 (XXVIII). Co-operation hetween the Unite1l
Nations anrl the Organization of African
Unity

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2011 (XX) of 11 October
1965, 2193 (XXI) of 15 December 1966, 2505
(XXIV) of 20 November 1969, 2863 (XXVI) of
20 December 1971 and 2962 (XXVII) of 13 December 1972 on co-operation between the U nited N ations
and the Organization of African Unity,
Noting with satisfaction the efforts of the Organization of African Unity and the United Nations, the
specialized agencies and other organizations within
the United Nations system to help to salve the serious
problemg which principally affect southern Africa,
Recalling in particular the urgent need to give effec-tive assistancc to thc victims of colonialism, racial
discrimination and apartheid resulting from political
and criminal acts of repression by the Governmcnts of
Portugal ami South Africa and the illegal racist minority régime in Southern Rhodesia,
1. Takes note with sati~faction of the report of thc
Secretary-General on co-operation between the Unitc{l
Nations and the Organization of African Unity 10 and
commends his efforts in promoting such co-opcratio11 ·
2. Reiterates the firm intention of the United N:1
tions, in co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity, to intensify its efforts to find a solution to th::
present grave situation in southern Africa;
o A/9130 and Add. l.
10 A/9162.
