Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

the measures envisaged under Article 41 of the
Charter and, having regard to their persistent refusal
to carry out the mandatory decisions of the Council,
to the need, as a matter of priority, to consider imposing sanctions against Portugal and South Africa;
7. / nvites all Governments, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations
system, the United Nations bodies concerned and nongovernmental organizations having a special interest
in the field of decolonization to take steps, as appropriate, to give wide~pread and continuous publicity
through all the media at their disposal to the work
of the United Nations, with particular reference to
the application of sanctions against Southern Rhodesia,
and requests the Secretary-General, having regard to
the mandate entrusted to him in General Assembly
resolution 2909 (XXVII) of 2 November 1972, to
take concrete measures in this connexion, including
the preparation and publication of a special issue of
the periodical Objective: Justice devoted to the efforts
of the Organization in this regard.
2102nd plenary meeting
7 December 1972
2977 (XXVII).

Papua New Guinea

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples,
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning Papua
New Guinea, in particular resolution 2865 (XXVI)
of 20 December 1971,
Having considered the report of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period 19 June 1971 to 16 June
1972, 14 the relevant chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples 15
and the report of the United Nations Visiting Mission
to observe the elections to the Papua New Guinea
House of Assembly in 1972, 16
Having heard the statement of the representative
of the administering Power, 17
Taking into account the conclusions and recommendations of the Trusteeship Council and the Special
Committee regarding developments in Papua New
Guinea,
Noting that the elections to the Third House of
Assembly in 1972 led to the establishment of a National Coalition Government and that in September
1972, on the motion of the Government, the House
of Assembly decided that full self-government for
Papua New Guinea should be attained by 1 December
1973 or as soon as possible thereafter, and bearing
in mind that the Government of Australia has accepted this timing,
14 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/8704).
1 5 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/8723/Rev.l), chaps. IV and

XX.
16 Official Records of the Trusteeship Council, Thirty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 2 (T/1739).
17 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyseventh Session, Fourth Committee, 2002nd meeting.

79

Noting that a Constitutional Planning Committee,
composed of members of the Papua New Guinea House
of Assembly, has been established to make recommendations concerning Papua New Guinea's future constitution,
Noting further with satisfaction that final responsibility in many areas of government has already been
transferred to the Government of Papua New Guinea
and that arrangements have been made for the transfer
of additional powers in the interim before full selfgovernment is attained,
Bearing in mind that the Governments of Papua
New Guinea and Australia have agreed that, while
foreign affairs and defence will remain the responsibility of Australia until independence, the Government
of Papua New Guinea will, until that time, be fully
involved in these matters,
Recalling the affirmation by the Government of Australia, as the administering Power, that the interval
between the attainment of full self-government and of
independence will be determined by the then Government of Papua New Guinea,
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations
!o render all help to the people of Papua New Guinea
m their efforts freely to decide their own future,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people
of Papua New Guinea to self-determination and indepen~ence in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) and the Trusteeship Agreement
of 13 December 1946;
2. Welcomes the establishment of a time-table for
the. attainment of full self-government by Papua New
Gumea and calls upon the administering Power to
prepare, in consultation with the Government of Papua New Guinea, a further time-table for independence;
3. Reaffirms the importance of ensuring that the
unity of Papua New Guinea is preserved throughout
the period leading to independence;
4. Deems it essential to continue accelerated localization in both the public and private sectors;
5: Emphasizes the importance of continuing an intensive programme of political education in Papua New
Guinea;
6. Stresses the importance of ensuring the preservation of the cultural heritage of the people of Papua
New Guinea;
7. Requests the organizations of the United Nations
system to assist in accelerating progress in all sectors
of the national life of Papua New Guinea;
8. Requests the Trusteeship Council to continue
to include non-members of the Trusteeship Council in
its periodic visiting missions on the basis recommended
in General Assembly resolution 2590 (XXIV) of 16
December 1969;
9. Requests the administering Power to report to
the Trusteeship Council and the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples on the implementation
of the present resolution;
10. Requests the Trusteeship Council and the
Special Committee to continue to examine this question and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its twenty-eighth session.
2110th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
