22

General Assembly -

Expressing the principle that. the ~nited Nati~ns
is duty bound to combat these mamfestahons, to establish
the facts and the causes of their origin, and to recommend resolute and effective measures which can bl'
taken against them,
1. Resolutely condemns all manifestations and practices of racial, religious and national hatred in the
political, economic, social, educational and cultural
spheres of the life of society as violat\ons of the Char~er
of the United Nations and the Umversal Declarat10n
of Human Rights ;
2. Calls upon the Governments of all States to take
all necessary measures to prevent all manifestations of
racial, religious and national hatred.
943rd plenary meeting,
12 December 1960.

1511 (XV). Teaching of the purposes and principles, the structure and activities of the
United Nations and its related agencies

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 137 (II) of 17 November
1947, which recommended to the Governments of all
Member States that they take measures to encourage
the teaching of the purposes and principles, the structure
and activities of the United Nations in schools,
Noting the action which the Economic and Social
Council has taken in the intervening years in promoting
this objective,
Noting in particular Economic and Social Council
resolution 748 (XXIX) of 6 April 1960,
1. Believes that teaching about the United Nations
and its related agencies in schools is important as a
means of promoting interest in, and support for, their
work;
2. Believes further that knowledge and understanding of the aims and activities of the United Nations
and its related agencies contribute to the fostering
among young people of the ideas of peace and international co-operation and should therefore be promoted
as widely as possible;
3. Endorses the action taken by the Economic and
Social Council in encouraging the implementation of
the recommendation contained in General Assembly
resolution 137 (II) ;
4. Expresses its appreciation of the co-operation
shown by the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization and the other specialized
agencies and the non-governmental organizations in
advancing the United Nations idea;
5. Urges all those concerned to continue their
efforts to promote in primary and secondary schools, as
well as in faculties of the social and human sciences
and audio-visual education centres, the teaching of the
purposes and principles, the structure and activities of
the United Nations and its related agencies;
6. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, with the co-operation of
the United Nations, to assist by preparing basic material
which may be used for these purposes.
943rd plenary meeting,
12 December 1960.

Fifteenth Session

1512 (XV). Main trends of inquiry in the natural sciences, dissemination of scientific
knowledge and application of such knowl,
edge for peaceful encls

The General Assembly,
Considering the important role which the natural
sciences in general continue to play in promoting the
ernno111ic and social progress of mankind,
H avrng recciz,cd the smvey of the main trends of
inquiry in the field of n:itural sciences, the dissemination of scientific knowledge and the application of such
knowledge for peacdnl encls,fi
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 804
B ( XXX) of 3 August 1960 requesting wide dissemination of the sttrvl'y ancl seeking comments from Governments of Member States, the appropriate specialized
agencir·s and the International Atomic Energy Agency,
I. T:ndorscs the decision of the Economic and Social
Council to give detailed consideration to the survey
at its thirty-second session, taking into account such
views thereon as may be expressed by the General
Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization;
:?. Recommends Governments of Member States,
agencies related to the United Nations, and appropriate
non-governmental organizations to publicize this survey
as widely as possible;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council, taking
into account the views obtained by the SecretaryGeneral in pursuance of Council resolution 804 B
( XXX) and the discussion on this item at the fifteenth
session of the Genl'ral Assembly, to report further on
this matter to the Assembly at its sixteenth session and
to recommend concrete measures including those relating
to:
(a) The possibility of utilizing the present achievements in the natural sciences for peaceful purposes, for
furthering the economic progress and welfare of
mankind, and especially for accelerating the economic
and social progress of the less developed countries;
( b) The possibility of extending international cooperation in the exchange of scientific information and
experience in the field of the natural sciences.
943rd plenary meeting,
12 December 1960.
1570 (XV). Draft Declaration on Freedom of
Information

The General Assembly,
Not having been able to consider at its fifteenth
session the draft Declaration on Freedom of Information
submitted by the Economic and Social Council in resolution 756 (XXIX) of 21 April 1960,
Decides to consider the draft Declaration at its
sixteenth session.
954th plenary meeting,
18 December 1960.
1571 (XV). Draft Declaration on the Right of
Asylum

The General Assembly,
Not having been able to consider at its fifteenth
session the draft Declaration on the Right of Asylwn,
~ See A/4461.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

---------------------Decides to take up this item as soon as possible at
its sixteenth session and at that session to devote as
many meetings as possible to the consideration of the
draft Declaration on the Right of Asylum.
954th plenary meeting,
18 December 1960.

1572 (XV). Measures designed to promote among
youth the ideals of peace, mutual respect and
understanding between peoples

The General Assembly,
Being convinced that, in order to achieve the aim
stated in the Charter of the United Nations, namely,
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
it is a matter of importance and urgency that the
younger generation of today should be brought up in
a spirit of peace, mutual respect and understanding
between peoples,
R.eaffirming the principle embodied in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the Declaration of the
Rights of the Child and article 14 of the draft Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights that young
people should be brought up in a spirit of peace, understanding, tolerance and friendship among nations,
Noting with concern that the education of youth in
various parts of the world has not yet been oriented
to achieve these objectives,
Considering that the free and unrestricted exchange,
through all means, between young people from
different countries, of ideas and opinions capable of promoting the ideals of peace, mutual respect and understanding among peoples will contribute to the strengthening of international confidence and the improvement
of relations between States,
Recalling its resolution 1397 (XIV) of 20 November
1959, and Economic and Social Council resolutiun 803
(XXX) of 3 August 1960 which, inter alia, invites
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization to study the possibilities of formulating

23

principles for bilateral regional and international actioll
regarding relations and exchanges in the fields of
education and culture,
I. Recommends that Governments, non-governmental
agencies and individuals should take effective action to
promote among youth the ideals of peace, mutual respect
and understanding between peoples ;
2. Invites Governments, non-governmental agencie.~
and individuals also to encourage the free and unrL·stricted exchange, through all means, between young
people from different countries, of ideas and opinions
capable of promoting the ideals of peace, mutual resiwct
and understanding among peoples ;
3. Invites the appropriate specialized agencies, and
especially the United K ations Edncational, Scirntific
and Cultural Organization, to consider ways of intensifying international, national and voluntary action in this
field, including the possibility of formulating a draft
of an international declaration setting out the basic
principles concerning the promotion among youth of
the ideals of peace, mutual respect and understanding
between peoples, and to report 011 these considerations
to the Economic and Social Council, if possibll' at its
thirty-second session ;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council, m
transmitting its recommendations on these reports to
the General Assemblv, to take into account the views
expressed by Member States at the fifteenth session of
the Assembly concerning the need to promote among
young people the ideals of peace, mutual respect and
understanding between peoples ;
5. Further requests the Economic and Social Co1111cil,
when transmitting its comments to the General Assembly
on the next report of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization requested in Council resolution 803 ( XXX), to take into account the
present resolution and the discussions which have taken
place thereon.
954th plenary meeting,
18 December 1960.
