A/61/PV.82

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

82

nd plenary meeting
Wednesday, 20 December 2006, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al-Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 68
Report of the Human Rights Council
Report of the Third Committee
(A/61/448 and Corr.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 28 of its report and a draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 29 of the
same report.
I should like to inform members that action on
the draft decision, entitled “Report of the Human
Rights Council”, has been postponed to a later date to
allow time for a review by the Fifth Committee of the
programme budget implications of the draft proposal
contained in the report of the Human Rights Council.
The Assembly will take action on the draft decision as
soon as the report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications is complete.
The General Assembly will first consider draft
resolution I.
The General Assembly is meeting today to adopt
the draft International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. The
practice of enforced disappearance is still widespread
throughout the world. Unfortunate victims are
abducted, and their families are kept in the dark,
uninformed of their well-being or fate. Even worse,

some of those who disappear are subject to torture and
extrajudicial killing. Since 1980, there have been more
than 51,000 enforced disappearances in more than 90
countries. More than 500 cases of enforced
disappearance were registered last year alone.
Adopting the draft convention will help to
prevent enforced disappearances and bring the
perpetrators to justice. It will also provide justice for
the victims and their families who have suffered. The
draft convention also contains an innovative follow-up
mechanism to ensure effective implementation.
Moreover, the adoption of the draft convention will
send a signal that the Human Rights Council can
deliver concrete outcomes that have a worldwide
impact. I hope that the General Assembly will be able
to adopt the draft convention by consensus. I also call
upon Member States to take, at the earliest opportunity,
all necessary steps to ensure the full implementation of
the draft convention.
We shall now take a decision on draft resolution
I, entitled “International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance”. The
Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
61/177).
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of the United Kingdom, who wishes to
speak in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

06-67270 (E)

*0667270*

A/61/PV.82

Mr. Lee-Smith (United Kingdom): My
delegation apologizes for taking up the Assembly’s
time to speak in explanation of position, but by this
resolution a new international human rights instrument
has been adopted, and it is important to my delegation
that the interpretation of the United Kingdom of some
of the Convention’s provisions be placed on record at
the time of adoption.
The United Kingdom welcomes the adoption of
draft resolution I contained in document A/61/448. We
particularly wish to pay tribute to the nongovernmental organizations that made an enormous
contribution to the process of agreeing upon a text. The
representatives of the victims of disappearances from
all regions have provided a constant reminder of the
need for us to finish our work and provide a tool to
combat that atrocious and ongoing practice.
That said, the United Kingdom wishes to place on
record the following understandings on certain
provisions of the instrument. In relation to article 2, the
United Kingdom notes that the placing of a person
“outside the protection of the law” is an important
element of the definition of an enforced disappearance,
additional to its other elements. As such, the United
Kingdom considers that the definition of an enforced
disappearance in article 2 comprises the following
elements: first, an arrest, detention, abduction or any
other form of deprivation of liberty; secondly, that such
acts are committed by agents of the State or by persons
or groups acting with the authorization, support or
acquiescence of the State; thirdly, that the act is
followed by a refusal to acknowledge the deprivation
of liberty or by concealment of the fate or whereabouts
of the disappeared person; and fourthly, that the
disappeared person is placed outside the protection of
the law.
The United Kingdom understands the term
“outside the protection of the law” to mean that the
person’s deprivation of liberty or detention is not
within the scope of relevant domestic legal rules
governing deprivations of liberty or detention, or that
those rules are not compatible with applicable
international law. Accordingly, the United Kingdom
understands article 20, which permits restrictions to the
provision of information as set out in article 18, to
apply to all situations where a person is not “outside
the protection of the law” — in other words, where that
person is within the State’s domestic legal rules

2

governing deprivation of liberty or detention,
consistent with applicable international law.
The United Kingdom also wishes to place on
record its understanding of article 43 of the
Convention. The United Kingdom understands this
provision to confirm that a State party’s obligations
under international humanitarian law, including its
obligations and rights under the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and their Additional Protocols of 1977, remain
lex specialis in situations of armed conflict and other
situations to which international humanitarian law
applies. The United Kingdom understands this article
to operate as a “savings clause” in order to ensure that,
where applicable, the relevant provisions of
international humanitarian law take precedence over
any other provisions contained in the Convention.
Finally, in relation to article 25 (4), we
understand that that article does not entail an
obligation to provide a legal procedure which would
lead to an automatic review of the adoption. We also
understand that the article does not require the
automatic annulment of an adoption which stems from
an enforced disappearance. We interpret the article to
require States parties to have a procedure or procedures
providing a possibility to apply for review of an
adoption covered by that article. Whether a review or
annulment is in fact ordered will be an issue to be
determined according to the applicable legal
procedures in the State concerned.
The President: I now call on those
representatives who wish to make statements following
the adoption.
Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Bulgaria and Romania; the candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and
Serbia; the European Free Trade Association country
Iceland, member of the European Economic Area; as
well as Ukraine and Moldova align themselves with
this declaration.
The European Union welcomes the adoption by
consensus of the International Convention for the
Protection of all Persons from Enforced Disappearance
as one of the major achievements of the General
Assembly this year. We would therefore like to thank

06-67270

A/61/PV.82

all delegations for joining the consensus. The very high
number of sponsors of the resolution through which the
Convention was adopted by the Third Committee is
very encouraging, in particular with a view to universal
ratification of that new instrument.
For over 25 years, victims’ families, nongovernmental organizations, many Governments —
especially the Government of France — and
international organizations have undertaken continuous
and unflagging efforts for the adoption by the United
Nations of an international instrument against enforced
disappearances in order to tackle that heinous and
inhuman affliction. And finally, here we are.
The adoption of the Convention by the General
Assembly is a significant step forward in the
promotion and protection of human rights. The
Convention recognizes the right not to be subjected to
enforced disappearance, as well as the right of victims
and their relatives to justice and reparation. Enforced
disappearance is qualified as a crime both in peace and
in wartime, and no exceptional circumstance, be it a
state of war, internal political instability or any public
emergency, may be invoked as a justification for
enforced disappearance.
In the Convention, States parties pledge to
criminalize enforced disappearances and, accordingly,
to try the perpetrators and masterminds. Moreover,
pursuant to the new instrument, States parties
undertake to prohibit secret detention and unofficial
places of detention, as well as to reaffirm their
obligation to provide legal guarantees in cases of
deprivation of liberty. Such legal commitments are key
to preventing situations in which a person could be
relegated to total vulnerability at the hands of the
perpetrators of the crime, deprived of all of his or her
rights, and placed outside the protection of the law.
The Convention also lays the ground for an
obligation on the part of States parties to guarantee the
victims’ relatives the right to know the truth about the
circumstances of an enforced disappearance and the
fate of the disappeared person. By those means, we can
at least alleviate the torture caused by endless waiting
and uncertainty about the return of one’s beloved.
In our view, the adoption of the Convention by
consensus fills a substantial gap in international human
rights law, and sends a strong political signal from the
international community that this shameful and still
widespread practice must come to an end. It also

06-67270

demonstrates the will of the international community to
put a stop to impunity for that grave human rights
violation. The European Union is fully convinced that
the Convention will serve as a powerful tool to prevent
enforced disappearances and torture and to fight
impunity for those crimes in the future.
In that regard, the adoption of the instrument is
not just a token of our achievement; it also denotes a
new starting point. The next step is to ensure that the
Convention comes into force as soon as possible. The
European Union therefore calls on all States Members
of the United Nations to consider signing the
Convention at the signing ceremony to be held in Paris
on 6 February.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
France congratulates and thanks the Member States for
the adoption by consensus of the International
Convention for the Protection of all Persons from
Enforced Disappearance.
This is an important text at the crossroads of
human rights, international humanitarian law and
international criminal law, which fills a legal void. Its
adoption emphasizes once again the quality of the
normative work of the General Assembly. The new
instrument is emblematic of United Nations action to
benefit each human being.
The Assembly’s adoption of the Convention
against enforced disappearance is the culmination of a
struggle waged by victims’ families for over 25 years.
A new offence is recognized in international law, in
peacetime as in wartime. The act of causing a person to
disappear without any form of due process is what we
call enforced disappearance.
On this historic day, let us remember a moment
what forced disappearances meant in certain countries,
especially in Latin America in the 1960s and 1980s. In
practice, men, usually in civilian dress and armed,
arrived at a person’s home, generally a human rights
defender or member of the opposition; they took that
person away by force, without explanation, to an
unknown place. There was no sign or news of this man
or woman for many long days and weeks. When the
relatives of the kidnapped person sought to inquire
about the person’s fate from the authorities, they were
given no answer. In the best of cases an official inquiry
would be opened; the inquiry was never successful or
concluded with the release of the persons presumed
guilty. Torture, and very often death, awaited the

3

A/61/PV.82

disappeared person, whose rights were flouted and
whose existence was passed over in silence. All too
frequently, the family remained grief-stricken,
sometimes for decades, in the agony of waiting and the
uncertainty about a loved one’s return; any closure
from mourning was denied them. We therefore have at
this moment an emotional thought for the victims’
families — the mothers of the Plaza del Mayo in
Argentina and the loved ones of more than 40,000
human beings whose disappearance has been recorded
since 1980 in over 90 countries.
The shameful practice I have just described in the
past tense is, unfortunately, not a practice of the past.
We cannot present it to our children as a long-gone
practice from a barbarous epoch. Enforced
disappearance remains, unfortunately, a tangible
reality. According to United Nations data, 535 people
were victims in 2005, while 41,000 cases have been
recorded around the world since 1980 and have still not
been elucidated.
The drafting of the Convention we have just
adopted was guided by two major requirements:
prevention and justice.
The Convention is primarily an instrument of
prevention. First, by acceding to the Convention, States
will undertake to prohibit secret detentions and
unofficial places of detention. They will also
strengthen the procedural guarantees surrounding
detention. Those are key commitments. Secondly,
through the new treaty, the States parties will undertake
to make enforced disappearance an offence and to
bring to justice the perpetrators and those who ordered
it. Lastly, an innovative international follow-up
mechanism is established. The Committee on Enforced
Disappearances, composed of 10 members, will assume
a preventive function by making urgent appeals and by
carrying out field visits if necessary. It may also, in the
event of massive and systematic violations, alert the
Secretary-General.
Thus, the Convention will be first an instrument
of prevention. However, the new international
instrument will also meet the requirement for justice.
The relatives of a disappeared person will be able to
claim their right to know the truth about the person’s
fate and the circumstances surrounding the
disappearance. Victims and their families will be
entitled to reparations for harm suffered. Lastly, any

4

child adoption having its origin in an enforced
disappearance will be illegal.
In order for the new treaty to enter into force as
soon as possible — we hope by 2007 — I have the
honour to announce that it will be open for signature
and ratification to all Member States at a ceremony to
be chaired by Mr. Douste-Blazy, the French Minister
for Foreign Affairs, in Paris on February. The adoption
of the Convention by consensus, with the support of
over 100 sponsoring countries, allows us to hope that
the new instrument will be ratified universally. It is in
that spirit that we invite all Member States to be
represented in Paris on 6 February.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks you, Madam, for the opportunity to
deliver this statement following the adoption by the
General Assembly of the International Convention for
the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance, an instrument of utmost importance to
my country and its history. It is also a step forward for
human rights, one of the pillars of our Organization.
The Convention is not only the result of the
struggle of Member States and Governments, but has
also involved the whole human rights movement for
several decades. Argentina would like in particular to
highlight the role played in that struggle by the
organizations of civil society and by the associations of
relatives and victims of human rights violations
throughout the drafting, negotiation and approval of
the instrument. In that context, I should like to make
special mention of the efforts and sacrifices of the
Grandmothers and Mothers of Plaza de Mayo from my
own country.
The notion of the disappeared person is certainly
one of the most horrific facts of the twentieth century.
For Argentina, it has a particularly sad significance,
since in the 1970s the military dictatorship
systematically carried out that abhorrent practice.
Worse yet, unfortunately, it was not possible for the
former Human Rights Commission of the United
Nations to condemn Argentina publicly, which
undoubtedly undermined the Commission’s credibility.
Far from belonging exclusively to yesterday’s
nightmares, disappearances are also a current terrible
political fact. Some 40,000 cases were registered by
2005. Every day, men and women in all continents
disappear, abducted by security forces of the State that
later deny having them in custody.

06-67270

A/61/PV.82

We are convinced that the Convention, once in
force, will be an essential tool in the prevention of such
cases and in the fight against the scourge of enforced
disappearances, putting an end to the suffering of many
who today are facing the abuse of power by
Governments with no choice but to give in to such
abuses. Thus, the Convention will also serve to punish
the perpetrators.
From the perspective of the progressive
development of international human rights law, the
Convention recognizes the right of all persons not to
become victims of enforced disappearances; contains
the first definition of the concept; includes a series of
measures to investigate disappearances and to bring
those responsible to trial; establishes that the
systematic practice of this crime constitutes a crime
against humanity; and acknowledges the right to
reparation, justice and the truth.
We hope that the adoption of the Convention will
be not the end of the road, but the beginning of a new
phase in the promotion and protection of human rights
and a tangible step forward in the fight against
impunity. Therefore, on behalf of my country, I urge all
Member States to participate in the signing event that
will take place in Paris on February 6, and all their
Parliaments subsequently to ratify it.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Jaime
Robotham was a friend from secondary school, the
Liceo de Aplicación in Santiago de Chile, many
decades ago. He was a happy young man, intelligent
and a good football player. We called him “Baldy”
because even as a teenager he had a receding hairline.
The study hours shared with him and other friends
were always an adventure, as Jaime invented games
and made us dream.
I did not see him for many years after we left
secondary school. I heard that just, like me, he was a
supporter of President Salvador Allende. I did not
receive any news about him until after the military
coup in 1973, with the appearance of a fatidic list of
disappeared persons in July 1975. He had been
detained and tortured towards the end of 1974. Jaime
was included in a shameful intelligence operation
carried out by the Chilean dictatorship and other
dictatorships of neighbouring countries to obfuscate his
disappearance and those of more than 100 other people
as if they had died fighting one other in Argentina. The
fake list was published in magazines in Brazil and

06-67270

Argentina. Both magazines, until then unknown,
published only one edition and then ceased to circulate.
That was a clear demonstration that enforced
disappearance crossed borders and was an international
crime. Until today, the mortal remains of my friend
have not been found.
That is why today is an important day for human
rights. The adoption of the International Convention
for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance represents the culmination of years of
work by Governments, governmental organizations and
civil society to combat the scourge of enforced
disappearance.
A tool of repression and political control,
enforced disappearance spread across the Latin
American continent as an inherent component of the
actions of the military dictatorships of the 1970s and
1980s. In my country alone, 1,200 cases of enforced
disappearance were documented during the Pinochet
dictatorship. Enforced disappearance was always
accompanied by other crimes, such as torture and
extrajudicial execution.
For my country, the General Assembly’s adoption
of this Convention reflects a profound sense of ethics
and historical acknowledgement, because it addresses a
reality that, prior to the restoration of democracy in
Chile in 1990, affected hundreds of our compatriots on
the sole basis of political dissent. As the President of
Chile, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, stated on 30 August
2006 when declaring the National Day of the Detained
and Disappeared:
“The cruelty of forced disappearance is
incommensurable. It is not just illegal arrest, not
just torture — which is a crime against humanity
in itself — not just summary execution without
due
process,
not
just
extermination.
Disappearance is not just a cowardly way of
trying to hide a murder; it is a way of
perpetuating the pain of the victims’ families,
depriving them of mourning and creating
uncertainty that, for hundreds of families, will
last for years. And, of course, it is all the more
serious when this is carried out as part of State
policy.”
The Convention that we have just adopted fills an
important gap in international law, which had not
envisaged a specific convention to combat enforced
disappearance. The Convention stipulates that no one

5

A/61/PV.82

shall be subjected to enforced disappearance. This is
enshrined as an absolute right without exceptions, even
under exceptional constitutional circumstances. It
appropriately characterizes the widespread or
systematic practice of enforced disappearance as a
crime against humanity.
The Convention places due emphasis on the
aspects of prevention of enforced disappearance
through provisions such as a prohibition on secret
detention; a guarantee that deprivation of liberty will
take place in officially recognized and supervised
places of deprivation of liberty; an obligation to
investigate until the fate of the disappeared person is
established; and an obligation to take measures to
ensure that enforced disappearance constitutes an
offence under criminal law, to ensure access to persons
deprived of liberty in all circumstances and to ensure
the right to a prompt and effective judicial remedy,
which may not be suspended or restricted in any
circumstances.
Within the set of recognized rights, we highlight
the right to obtain information on persons deprived of
liberty and the right of all victims to know the truth
regarding the circumstances of the enforced
disappearance, the progress and results of the
investigation and the fate of the disappeared person.
The latter right is intended to respond to one of the
most heartfelt demands of the families of disappeared
persons.
In our view, the establishment of a Committee on
Enforced
Disappearances,
responsible
for
implementing the provisions of the Convention, is an
appropriate institutional option that will undoubtedly
have an impact on the Convention’s effectiveness.
In short, we believe that the Convention is
sufficiently well equipped to impose specific
obligations on States to protect the rights of victims
and their families.
“The forgotten past is full of memories” is a
phrase inscribed on a monument in a former secret
prison in Santiago, where hundreds of Chilean women
and men disappeared and were murdered. To them, we
dedicate as a modest tribute the Convention that we
have adopted today, reaffirming the commitment of the
Government of Chile to the fight against enforced
disappearance.

6

Mr. Takase (Japan): My delegation would like to
congratulate the Assembly on its adoption by
consensus of the International Convention for the
Protection
of
All
Persons
from
Enforced
Disappearance. The Government of Japan strongly
supports the idea that no one shall be subjected to
enforced disappearance, as stipulated in article 1 of the
Convention.
It is for that reason that we participated actively
in the elaboration of this important document and that
we are satisfied with the text we have produced. Our
interpretation of the Convention was made clear when
we adopted the draft text in the Third Committee. We
highly appreciate the sustained efforts of all interested
parties, especially the delegation of France, to bring
our work to a successful conclusion.
Enforced disappearance is a terrible and hideous
crime. Today, we gain a valuable legal tool to combat
it. My delegation believes that the international
community must make the best use of this tool in order
to ensure that enforced disappearance is no longer
committed anywhere in the world and to bring its
victims back to their families.
Mr. Romero-Martínez (Honduras) (spoke in
Spanish): Today, we have participated in the adoption
of a Convention that we regard as historic. Honduras is
very pleased to have the honour to be a sponsor of the
draft resolution by which the Assembly adopted this
important Convention. We believe that we have taken a
very significant step forward in international law today.
We believe that our States and Governments are
undertaking a great commitment with full awareness
and responsibility. Those terrible nights and days in our
countries — days of horror and terror — must be left
behind. That is why the adoption of the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance is the beginning of a new
phase in the genuine realization of human rights and
the end of impunity.
For our new democracies, this is a very
significant step forward in guaranteeing freedoms. We
congratulate all those — particularly the members of
civil society, the non-governmental organizations, the
States, the organizations and the individuals — who
were involved in the long process that was completed
today. Today is a day to be remembered in the hearts
and minds of all democrats, all who cry out for greater

06-67270

A/61/PV.82

justice and all those of us who hope for a world that is
free, just and without human rights violations.
We hope that through the signing of this
Convention, this crime against humanity will be
eliminated once and for all.
Mr. Sin Song Chol (Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea): Today, we adopted the
International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance. My delegation
would like to avail itself of this opportunity to mention
its views for the sake of better understanding among all
delegations on the matter.
First of all, the abduction issues that Japan has so
vainly tried to get support for on every occasion are
those that are already fully resolved, thanks to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s sincere and
humanitarian measures and endeavours. Thus, they do
not need to be discussed any further. The abduction
issue is abused by right-wing political forces in Japan
solely to realize their political ambitions, and thus has
nothing substantially to do with human rights. The only
reason why Japan is so obstinate on the already
resolved abduction issue is to cover up its crimes
committed during the 40-odd years of its occupation of
Korea, forcibly drafting and abducting 8.4 million
Koreans and forcing sexual slavery upon 200,000
women and girls.
The reason why my delegation is today pointing
out those facts is to cite one example that has recently
arisen. My delegation takes this opportunity to inform
all delegations of the following most vivid and recent
case of abduction of a citizen of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea by Japanese. I quote a
letter sent by Mr. Kim to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea Education Commission on 30 April
1992, right after he was reported missing:
“I am Kim Thae Yong, room chief of Kim Hyong
Jik University of Education, and had been
teaching the Korean language in Yuzhno
Sakhalinsk in Sakhalin Province of the Russian
Federation. I was taken here while making
arrangements for a trip to my country after I was
told late in December of last year to celebrate the
New Year’s Day there. I was instructed to write a
programme for teaching Japanese the Russian and
Korean languages and methods of teaching them.
Those who instructed me to do so are well
informed of me. They say they will let me go

06-67270

back only after Korea is reunified. I have written
to the best of my ability despite the high blood
pressure that torments me. I fell unconscious due
to a serious attack of brain haemorrhaging early
in the morning of last 16 February. Though my
trouble has passed the critical point, I remain
completely paralyzed on the left half of my body.
I am under treatment with a Japanese family at
present. They say I am in Sapporo in Hokkaido,
but it is a place far from human habitation. It is
my assumption that I am in a place farther away
from Sapporo. They seem to be doing their best
to cure me so that I may finish my writings. I
tried to let you know about my situation as
quickly as possible, but there was no way. I am
under strict control to prevent me from getting in
touch with the outside world. I am writing this
letter unobserved by anyone. An old person who
cooks for me is sympathetic to me, who am in the
grip of anxiety and unable to eat. The old person
is kind-hearted. It is hard to believe that this
letter will reach my country. It may be my last
chance. I long to see the country where I was
born and grew up and very much miss my
trustworthy disciples and comrades and the
beloved members of my family, who eagerly
await me. I swear I will remain true to the
beloved country to the last moments of my life.
Best regards. 30 April, 1992.”
Stamped on the envelop of the letter was the
symbol “6.V.92 12-18 Japan HOKKAIDO WAATSU”,
part of the designation of a Japanese post office.
The members of Kim’s family have since made
painstaking efforts to learn his whereabouts through
various channels. They have repeatedly asked the
Japanese side to settle the points raised as soon as
possible, extremely worried about their father, who was
well above 70 years old.
Through the bilateral channels of the Red Cross
Societies, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
asked Japan to render cooperation in finding Kim’s
whereabouts, at the request of his family. So far,
however, no sincere or concrete cooperation and
answer have been received from Japan at all. The
insincere approach taken by Japan towards the issue of
probing the case is intolerable both from the basic
humanitarian point of view and from the standpoint of
improving bilateral relations between the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and Japan.

7

A/61/PV.82

We strongly condemn this case as a serious
infringement on the sovereignty of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, as Kim, an able linguist of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, has been
lured away and abducted by Japan. We once again
strongly urge Japan, which has so welcomed the
adoption of the Convention today, to exert sincere
efforts to ensure that the truth behind the case is
thoroughly probed and clarified so as to help the
members of Mr. Kim’s family realize their desire for
reunion with him as early as possible. We also request
Member States’ kind assistance in pressing Japan to
settle the current case of enforced disappearance and to
return the victim to his native home.
The President: I call on the representative of
Bangladesh on a point of order.
Ms. Ahmed (Bangladesh): I apologize for taking
the floor at this stage on a point of order.
My delegation joined the consensus in the
adoption of resolution 61/177 on the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance. We wish to thank all
interested delegations, particularly the delegation of
France, for their role in that regard.
The name of my country has been erroneously
recorded in the list of sponsors of the resolution. I seek
your kind indulgence in requesting its deletion,
Madam, and my delegation hopes that the correction
will be duly reflected in the final document.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Japan, who has asked to speak in
exercise of the right of reply.
Mr. Takase (Japan): My delegation should like to
exercise its right of reply to the statement made by the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
My delegation regrets very, very much that the
delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has again made a false allegation on the issue of
abduction, especially on this important day, when we
have adopted the important International Convention
for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance.
As my delegation has repeatedly explained, all
such allegations made by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea are unsubstantiated and the figures

8

are exaggerated. My delegation cannot accept all such
allegations. This morning, my delegation would like to
make it clear again that the Government of Japan has
never been involved in any abduction of any nationals.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate once again that,
with the adoption of the International Convention for
the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance, the world community should make the
best use of that tool in order to ensure that enforced
disappearance is no longer committed anywhere in the
world.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
Mr. Sin Song Chol (Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea): My delegation really did not wish
to take the floor at this time, but we have been
somewhat compelled to do so.
The abduction issue has already been cleared up
thanks to the sincere efforts of the Government of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The abduction
issue
has
been
somehow
and
purposely
internationalized by the Japanese because they really
wish to abuse it for their political agenda. It is so well
known to the world that my delegation does not really
wish to repeat it again at this moment.
The Japanese delegation referred to the so-called
unsubstantiated allegation of my delegation regarding
the recent abduction, saying that Japan is not at all
involved in such cases of enforced disappearance.
However, with respect to the case that I referred to in
my statement, I should like to read out a part of the
statement issued by our Ministry for Public Security
this year, in order to make it very clear that cases of
abduction of citizens of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea by Japanese nationals are quite real:
(spoke in French)
“Japanese
provocations
against
the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea have
recently intensified. Right-wing reactionary
forces in Japan are calling for the imposition of
sanctions and are fanning hostility against the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea with
respect to the issue of abductions, which has
already been resolved. They are also continuing
their unprecedented repression of Koreans
residing in Japan. Moreover, with the

06-67270

A/61/PV.82

manipulation of the United States and Japanese
intelligence and plot-breeding agencies and other
right-wing conservative forces, anti-Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea organizations and
individuals have abducted some of our fellow
citizens in broad daylight by masquerading as
non-governmental
organizations
supposedly
providing humanitarian assistance.
“We consider such acts to be serious
violations of our national sovereignty and the
sovereignty of our citizens, and part and parcel of
a conspiracy to overthrow our country’s regime.
Among its first measures in response, the
Ministry has issued arrest warrants for members
of a Japanese non-governmental organization,
including Fumiaki Yamata, Hiroshi Kato and
Takayuki Noguchi, in accordance with the
relevant articles of criminal law and criminal
procedure law of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. They worked in secret
operations to lure and abduct citizens of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
including those who had returned to their
homeland from Japan, their children and Japanese
women living in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
“Through diplomatic channels, we have
demanded that the Japanese Government
extradite those criminals. The Ministry, which is
responsible for protecting and defending our
system and the lives and property of our people,
will take the measures necessary to that end in
territory under the sovereignty of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and wherever
cooperation is possible.”
That statement of the Ministry of Public Security
fully demonstrates that the case referred to in the
statement made by my delegation earlier is in no way a
mirage. It is a real, concrete fact of which the world is
not aware. We now wish to bring it to the international
community’s attention.
(spoke in English)
The abduction issue is not solely one of
abductions by citizens of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The abduction issue was created
long ago by the Japanese and has a very long history
that has not been forgotten by the Korean people.
Appropriate compensation and apologies from the

06-67270

Japanese Government are still due. How could that
country, Japan, dare to welcome the adoption of this
very important Convention when it has dared to do
such inhumane and anti-humanitarian acts? Those are
considered crimes, and if the Japanese really wish to
cover up their past and to sustain their crimes like that,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will take
every measure possible to let the international
community know everything about those cases and to
take every possible measure within its scope to settle
all those issues and to get its citizens back to their
country.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Japan to speak again in exercise of
the right of reply.
Mr. Takase (Japan): My delegation reiterates
first that the Government of Japan has never, ever been
involved in any abduction of any nationals. Secondly,
as for the issue of the past, we have repeatedly made
our position clear, so I will not repeat it this morning.
However, we should like to say once again that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea should not
confuse a past issue that has already been resolved with
the abduction of Japanese citizens that has not yet been
resolved.
The Government of Japan can never accept the
statement made by the representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the effect
that the issue of the abduction of Japanese citizens is
resolved. The issue is not resolved. There are at least
17 Japanese nationals who have been abducted by the
North Korean authorities. Five of them have been
returned to Japan, but the fate of the rest of the victims
is not yet known.
The Government of Japan would like to urge the
authorities of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to respond sincerely to the inquiries of my
Government and to reveal the whereabouts of the rest
of the victims.
Again, I would like to reiterate that the
Government of Japan can never accept the allegation
made by the delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea that the issue of the abduction of
Japanese citizens is resolved. It is not resolved, and we
urge the authorities of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to respond sincerely to this issue.

9

A/61/PV.82

The President: I call on the representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to speak again
in exercise of the right of reply.
Mr. Sin Song Chol (Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea): I am sorry to take the floor again,
but my delegation would like to exercise its second
right of reply just because the Japanese delegation has
tried to cover up and evade its legal and historical
responsibility and accountability to liquidate its past
crimes. The past crimes, they say, are unsubstantiated,
but there are still many elderly people in Korea who
remember vividly the crimes that were committed by
the Japanese military during its occupation of Korea.
That cannot be forgotten so easily, unless some disaster
should happen.
I think that the Japanese delegation, instead of
commenting wrongly, with false information and not
on the basis of realities, should try to sincerely
apologize, which it strives not to do. But the Japanese
should do their utmost to compensate and duly
apologize to the Korean people. That is the only thing
we ask of them, but they are trying to evade that
responsibility, which is a historical duty and obligation
of Japan.
About the cases of abduction of citizens of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea by the
Japanese, they are also a de facto reality. They are not
known to the world because the Japanese exercise their
influence through money and by exerting political
pressure on other countries not to recognize that
reality.
When we consider the issue of enforced
disappearance, we must acknowledge that it is very
important to liquidate such crimes, but we should
certainly not tolerate any act of compelling other
nations not to recognize all the forced drafting and
abduction of a nation’s people — in particular, the
Korean people — by Japan in the past, at present
and — who knows? — in the future. It could happen
again. That should not be forgotten, and the
international community, instead of taking Japan’s side
because of its influence, should also strongly ask Japan
to duly compensate and apologize to the Korean people
for what it has done and what it is doing.
That is my delegation’s last word.
The President: We shall now take a decision on
draft resolution II, entitled “Working group of the

10

Commission on Human Rights to elaborate a draft
declaration in accordance with paragraph 5 of General
Assembly resolution 49/214 of 23 December 1994”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Australia, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados,
Belarus, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Mali,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Micronesia
(Federated States of), Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, New Zealand,
Niger, Nigeria, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South
Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burundi, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Moldova,
Monaco,
Montenegro,
Nauru,
Nepal,
Netherlands,
Nicaragua,
Norway,
Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,

06-67270

A/61/PV.82

Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay
Draft resolution II was adopted by 85 votes to
none, with 89 abstentions (resolution 61/178).
[Subsequently the delegation of Saudi Arabia
advised the Secretariat that it had intended to
abstain.]
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
68.
Agenda item 67 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and followup to the Vienna Declaration and Programme
of Action
Report of the Third Committee
(A/61/443/Add.4)
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to take note of the report of the Third
Committee (A/61/443/Add.4)?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (d) of agenda item 67?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 98
Crime prevention and criminal justice
Report of the Third Committee (A/61/444)
The President: The Assembly has before it four
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 25 of its report (A/61/444) and one draft
decision recommended by the Committee in paragraph
26 of the same report. We will now take a decision on
draft resolutions I to IV, one by one, and on the draft
decision.

06-67270

Draft resolution I is entitled “International
cooperation in the prevention, combating and
elimination of kidnapping and in providing assistance
to victims”. The Third Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
61/179).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Improving the coordination of efforts against
trafficking in persons”. The Third Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
61/180).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Strengthening the United Nations Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice Programme, in particular its
technical cooperation capacity”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
61/181).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
61/182).
The President: We now turn to the draft
decision, entitled “Documents considered by the
General Assembly in connection with the question of
crime prevention and criminal justice”. May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to adopt the
draft decision recommended by the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 98?
It was so decided.

11

A/61/PV.82

Agenda item 99
International drug control
Report of the Third Committee (A/61/445)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 12 of its report (A/61/445). We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled
“International cooperation against the world drug
problem”. The Third Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/183).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 99?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 110 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Third Committee (A/61/446)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 5 of its report (A/61/446). We will now take

12

action on the draft decision. The Third Committee
adopted the draft decision, entitled “Programme of
work of the Third Committee for the sixty-second
session of the General Assembly”. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
110.
Agenda item 118
Programme planning
Report of the Third Committee (A/61/447)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report (A/61/447). We will now take
action on the draft decision. The Third Committee
adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
118.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

06-67270
