S/2021/218

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 March 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 2 March 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General; Mr. Oren Gian, Israeli student;
and Ms. Malak AbuSoud, Palestinian student, as well as the statements delivered
by the representatives of China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico,
the Niger, Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States of America and Viet Nam in connection with the video-teleconference on
“The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question” convened on
Friday, 26 February 2021.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Linda Thomas-Greenfield
President of the Security Council

21-03126 (E) 090321 310321

*2103126*

S/2021/218

Annex I
Briefing by the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Tor Wennesland
I extend my greetings to the young guests with us today, Oren Gian and Malak
AbuSoud. Your voices are important, and what I will say to the Security Council
now will illustrate that point.
Significant developments in the coming weeks and months will influence the
dynamics and the prospects for advancing peace going forward. Palestinians and
Israelis are fully engaged in their respective electoral processes. The coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) crisis remains a persistent health threat that has triggered a
massive economic fallout. Meanwhile, unilateral steps on the ground are eroding the
prospect for establishing a viable and contiguous Palestinian State and are moving
the parties further from constructive dialogue and compromise.
The United Nations is continuing its engagement to meet these challenges.
We are working actively with the parties and with our partners in the international
community to address the pressing socioeconomic needs of the Palestinian people,
including in the context of the pandemic. We are also advancing the goal of ending
the occupation and realizing a negotiated two-State solution based on United Nations
resolutions, international law and prior agreements.
Palestinian factions are making progress towards holding legislative,
presidential and Palestinian National Council elections. Earlier this month they
met in Cairo, reaching agreement on several outstanding issues and advancing
the election process. The factions also emphasized that elections must be held
throughout the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip,
without exception. I welcome the positive steps to date and appreciate the leadership
of Egypt in helping move this process forward.
Meanwhile, the Palestinian public is doing its part. On 17 February, the
Central Elections Commission closed voter registration and announced 421,000 new
registrants during the period, raising the total registered voters to over 2.6 million,
93 per cent of all eligible voters according to population estimates from the Palestinian
Central Bureau of Statistics. An estimated 40 per cent of registered voters are under
the age of 30 years old. It is encouraging to see such strong public participation in
the democratic process. The United Nations will continue to work collectively to
support the Palestinian people, including by facilitating and supporting preparatory
processes towards these important elections.
In a number of recent meetings, the international community has demonstrated
that it is focused on helping the parties return to the path of negotiations and
signalled its continued support to the Palestinian people and institutions, including
in COVID-19 response.
On 8 February, the League of Arab States issued a statement reiterating its
support for the establishment of an independent and sovereign Palestinian State
based on the 1967 lines, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
On 15 February, the Envoys of the Middle East Quartet — from Russia, the
United States, the European Union and the United Nations — met virtually to discuss
the latest political developments and the situation on the ground. All agreed to meet
on a regular basis to continue their engagement.
On 23 February, members of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of the International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC) met virtually in
a meeting chaired by the Foreign Minister of Norway and the European Union High
2/37

21-03126

S/2021/218

Representative. The Chair’s summary highlighted that the parties expressed renewed
commitment to enhancing cooperation. The donor community called on the parties
to take specific steps to improve their relations on the economic front, to facilitate
critical infrastructure and assistance projects on the ground. They were also called
to avoid unilateral actions that could undermine the resumption of negotiations. The
donor community also pledged increased assistance to the Palestinians in a variety
of areas, including to support the Government’s COVID-19 vaccination efforts.
In the United Nations report to the AHLC meeting, it was clearly underlined
that the Palestinian economy had contracted, mostly due to the negative effects on the
economy of the COVID-19 pandemic and to the Palestinian Authority’s suspension
of coordination with Israel. Let me be clear, it may take years for the economy of
Palestine to recover.
The AHLC Chair also noted the critical importance of rolling out a safe and
effective COVID-19 vaccine programme as rapidly as possible, both in the West
Bank and Gaza.
In this respect, the United Nations welcomes the announcement of the
Palestinian vaccination strategy and the initial allocation to the Palestinian Ministry
of Health of at least 37,440 doses of vaccines by the COVID-19 Vaccine Global
Access Advance Market Commitment Facility. In addition, in February, 30,000
doses of vaccines were delivered to Palestinians, including in Gaza, by Russia and
the United Arab Emirates. This is in addition to the Israeli’s earlier transfer of 5,200
vaccines to the Palestinian Authority, the vaccination of 5,000 Palestinian education
and health workers working in Israel and efforts to vaccinate the population in East
Jerusalem, which is 50 per cent completed.
The Palestinian Government’s efforts to prepare and plan these vaccination
efforts are to be commended, as is the dedication of United Nations agencies, in
particular the World Health Organization, UNICEF, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and their partners. Israeli
facilitation of vaccine deliveries has also been essential, and I appreciate efforts
by the Israeli Government to support the Palestinian response to COVID-19. It
is critically important that this cooperation continue and be enhanced to ensure
that Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza receive a fair and timely share in the
distribution of vaccines.
Turning to Gaza, I welcome Egypt’s reopening of the Rafah crossing on
9 February in both directions until further notice. The Rafah crossing is the main
gateway to the world for 2 million residents of Gaza.
I also commend the decision of the Government of Qatar to significantly
increase its financial contribution for Gaza, including the agreement signed with
the United Nations Office for Project Services to provide fuel to the Gaza power
plant to the end of this year. This arrangement will generate over 12 hours of stable
electricity per day. The United Nations stands ready to play its part and will continue
to work closely with donors to ensure the continuity of existing commitments.
Unfortunately, concerning developments on the ground continued throughout
the reporting period. Overall, Israeli authorities demolished or seized 170
Palestinian-owned structures in Area C and 10 in East Jerusalem, displacing some
314 Palestinians, including 67 women and 177 children. The demolitions were carried
out due to the lack of Israeli-issued building permits, which are nearly impossible for
Palestinians to obtain.
In a particularly concerning series of incidents, on 1, 3, 8, 16 and 22 February,
Israeli security forces demolished or confiscated 80 structures in the Palestinian
21-031263/37

S/2021/218

Bedouin community of Humsa Al-Baqai’a, in an Israeli-declared firing zone in the
Jordan Valley. The actions reportedly displaced 63 people multiple times, including
36 children, and followed a similar demolition in November 2020. On 23 February,
my Deputy and the Humanitarian Coordinator visited the site and called on Israeli
authorities to cease further demolitions, in accordance with international law, and
to allow the humanitarian community to provide shelter, food and water to this
extremely vulnerable community.
I reiterate the Humanitarian Coordinator’s message and urge Israel to cease the
demolition and seizure of Palestinian property throughout the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, and to allow Palestinians to develop their communities.
Daily violence also continued throughout the occupied Palestinian territory
during the reporting period. In the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
clashes, attacks, search and arrest operations and other incidents resulted in the death
of two Palestinians, including one child, reportedly while they were attempting to
stab Israeli soldiers, as well as injuries to 34 Palestinians, including 6 children.
In addition, 10 Israelis, including two women and three children, were injured by
Palestinians during the reporting period.
On 26 January, a 17-year-old Palestinian boy tried to stab a female Israeli
soldier near the settlement of Ariel and was subsequently shot and killed by Israeli
security forces.
On 31 January, a 36-year-old Palestinian man was shot and killed by Israeli
security forces as he ran towards officers stationed at the Gush Etzion junction,
south of Bethlehem, reportedly while holding an improvised weapon.
Meanwhile, Israeli settlers and other civilians perpetrated some 25 attacks
against Palestinians, resulting in five injuries and damage to property. Palestinians
perpetrated 59 attacks against Israeli settlers and other civilians in the West Bank,
resulting in eight injuries and damage to property.
On 5 February, a Palestinian man was shot and killed by Israeli settlers in
the Sadeh Ephraim Farm outpost, near the village of Ras Karkar, after reportedly
attempting to break into a house. Israeli security forces stated that the incident was
a terrorist attack and that the man was unarmed — no weapons were found in his
possession. I call on Israeli authorities to conduct a thorough investigation into the
circumstances of the incident.
On 15 February, Israeli civilians vandalized nine vehicles belonging to
Palestinian workers near the West Bank settlement of Shiloh. The Israeli police
opened an investigation into the incident, noting that it occurred following the
removal of an unauthorized structure from a nearby outpost by Israeli security forces.
On the same day, Israeli police announced that they had arrested several
Israelis in the West Bank on suspicion of stone-throwing that injured Palestinians,
illegal possession of weapons and membership in a terrorist organization.
On 23 February, Israeli authorities filed an indictment against a 17-year-old
Israeli boy accused of throwing stun grenades into Palestinian homes in the West
Bank village of Sarta and causing damage to property. Israeli police also arrested
four additional individuals suspected of involvement in the incident.
I underscore that all perpetrators of violence must be held accountable and
swiftly brought to justice. Particular care should be taken to protect children from
all violence.
On 5 February, the International Criminal Court Pre-Trial Chamber decided
that the Court’s jurisdiction extends to the occupied Palestinian territory.
4/37

21-03126

S/2021/218

In the Golan, the ceasefire between Israel and Syria has generally held. However,
the security situation continues to be volatile, with continued violations of the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement by the parties, leading to heightened tensions
between Israel and Syria. Late on 3 February, the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force observed kinetic activity in its area of operation. The next day, the
Israeli Defense Forces informed the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) that they had
“carried out a precision strike against infrastructure [in Damascus International
Airport] that is utilized by proxies for transfers of weaponry and mobilization
against the State of Israel”.
UNDOF continues to liaise with both parties to remind them of their obligations
to respect the terms of the Disengagement Agreement and prevent escalation of the
situation across the ceasefire line.
In Lebanon, the population faces increasing hardship as a result of the steadily
deteriorating economic situation and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. On 26 and
27 January, in Tripoli, two protesters died following clashes with security forces.
In the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area of operations,
incidents of weapons-pointing between the Israel Defense Forces and the Lebanese
Armed Forces across the Blue Line contributed to heightened tensions. UNIFIL
remains engaged with the parties to defuse tensions, including through its liaison
and coordination efforts.
In conclusion, allow me to underline that it is critical to begin the process
of restoring hope to Palestinians and Israelis that the achievement of the two-State
solution and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace can be realized. Given the
reality of developments on the ground, the scale of the task is daunting, but not
insurmountable. We must seize emerging opportunities.
The upcoming elections in Palestine may be one such opportunity. The
extraordinarily high registration rate among Palestinians is a resoundingly positive
response from the people of Palestine in support of President Abbas’ call for elections.
The holding of free and fair elections across the occupied Palestinian territory is a
crucial step towards re-establishing Palestinian national unity that can renew the
legitimacy of national institutions, including a democratically elected Legislative
Council and Government in Palestine.
The democratic right to vote, particularly for young people, is the right to
decide one’s own political future and should be carefully guarded. The United
Nations and the international community will continue to play an active part in
supporting the election process.
Elections will also help to clear the path towards restoring a legitimate political
horizon to realize a two-State solution. The United Nations, alongside its partners in
the Middle East Quartet, will continue to support Palestinians and Israelis in their
efforts to achieve that goal.

21-031265/37

S/2021/218

Annex II
Briefing by Israeli student Oren Gian
Shabbat Shalom from the British Embassy in Israel. My name is Oren Gian,
and I am Jewish, Israeli and Persian.
I would like to thank the United Kingdom for the honour to speak to you
today in the Security Council, and I also thank Ms. Malak AbuSoud for sharing
her perspective.
I am only a teenager, but my story starts 40 years ago, in Iran. In 1979, during
the Iranian revolution, my mother, her two brothers and my grandmother escaped
Iran. But my grandfather decided to stay since he owned a big plastics company that
he needed to take care of.
In 1980, one year later, something happened. One of my grandfather’s closest
friends visited his company. At that very moment, a machine fell from a crane
and killed the man. My grandfather went to visit the grieving family and offer his
condolences, but they accused him of being responsible for the death of his own
friend. At first, my grandfather was sure that they were just angry because they
were hurting, but a few days later, a good friend of my grandfather came to warn
him that a death warrant was issued against him. My grandfather had been sentenced
to death.
My grandfather had no choice; he had to leave everything behind — his house,
his company and his friends. But at least he was alive. That Muslim friend who
warned him also helped my grandfather to escape Iran and he saved his life.
My grandfather’s story taught me that friendship is not about religion or
ethnicity. Friendship is about trust and it can be given to anyone regardless of their
background, but trust needs to be gradually built and earned.
Allow me to take you back with me to one of my first interactions with Arab
students, at a Model United Nations conference in Sakhnin, an Arab city in northern
Israel. The conference took place in an Arab school and, truth be told, I was not so
thrilled by the idea of attending a conference in an Arab school. I remember that I
started to get stressed during the ride to the conference — and it was not just because
of the speech that I had to deliver to the committee as the representative of Hungary.
It was mostly because I did not know what to expect from the experience of meeting
Arab students. I remember thinking that as our bus reached Sakhnin and I slowly
entered the school to participate in my first Model United Nations conference. I felt
overwhelmed because I was a 15-year-old Israeli Jew entering an Arab school in
Sakhnin. I remember asking myself: What are the students going to be like? Will
I even be able to communicate with them? What is the food going to be like? Is it
even safe? I thought that maybe it was not worth it, maybe I should not have gone,
maybe I should have stayed home and spent time with my friends in Netanya, where
I felt comfortable.
But I knew that leaving was not an option, so I stayed to participate in the
conference. I talked to a few students from that school and I noticed that interacting
with them was not so bad after all. I did not feel completely comfortable in their
presence and I was unable to fully communicate with them, but I certainly felt more
comfortable at the end of the conference than I did at the beginning.
That year, I attended five more Model United Nations conferences. All of
them included Arab students. I noticed that with each successive conference and
interaction, I felt more and more comfortable being around people from the Arab
or Palestinian community and even talking to them. At the end of that year, in the
6/37

21-03126

S/2021/218

summer of 2019, I attended a programme at an institute in Houston, Texas. The
programme mainly consisted of Arab and Palestinian students, with a few Jewish
students. It dealt with the topics of interfaith and citizenship and sought to have
participants learn about the other side. In order for us to truly get to know one
another, we handed over our cell phones for two weeks and disconnected from
the world.
On the flight to Texas, I remember experiencing the same feelings as before
my first interaction with Arab students in Sakhnin. I thought to myself: how am I
going to spend two weeks with total strangers in a foreign country without being able
to use my cell phone if I do not get along with these people from completely different
backgrounds? I remember feeling stressed and uncomfortable. I just wanted to be
done with it so I could go back home.
When I got to Texas, it took me some time to open up to the other students,
especially those from different backgrounds than me, and I noticed that I disagreed
with most of the political views of the Palestinian students. But, as time went by,
I started to feel more comfortable because I realized that — obvious as it may
sound — we were all humans. I still disagreed with them on a political level about
most subjects, but that did not stop us from discussing those and other subjects in a
respectful way. I befriended one of the Palestinians in the programme and we stayed
in touch even after returning to Israel. Sometimes we send each other text messages
and discuss politics. Although we still disagree about most things, we stay in contact
and enrich each other with our two different perspectives.
Unfortunately, most Israeli and Palestinian students do not have such
experiences. We live in different towns and go to different schools. Israeli and
Palestinian students need opportunities to meet so they can get to know the people
on the other side. We are tomorrow’s school principals, doctors, teachers and leaders.
Instead of growing up hating each other, we must learn how we can share our different
perspectives as friends, and the only way that can happen is if we meet and interact.
In addition to Model United Nations, I had the opportunity to join a unique
project called Empathy Storytelling, in which eight students — four Jewish and four
Arab — were paired up. We learned each other’s family story and then presented our
partner’s story. I met Ameer and learned that, even though he lives in a town near my
city, his father was from Gaza. And Ameer learned my grandfather’s story of fleeing
Iran and returning to Israel.
Hearing Ameer tell my family’s story and telling his story showed me that
we all have our stories, we all have our problems and achievements, and we all
have families and a history. I learned that only after empathizing and understanding
people, the individual human beings on the other side of the conflict, can we begin
to negotiate properly.
I believe that it is much more effective to start to negotiate peace with people
who you have learned to respect and gotten to know; people who are no longer the
enemy, but human beings who you now see as neighbours; and people who you
actually care about and with whom you can properly negotiate.
A few years ago, I was afraid to go to an Arab school, but today I have
Palestinian friends with whom I can debate politics over lunch and stay friends. I
believe that if more students are given the opportunity to meet with the other side
from a young age, we will be able to build a brighter, better future for us all.

21-031267/37

S/2021/218

Annex III
Briefing by Palestinian student Malak AbuSoud
I would like to thank the members of the Security Council for providing me
this platform today and empowering youth in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to speak
about their experiences. My name is Malak AbuSoud. I am a third-year student in
the Walsh School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University in Washington, D.C.,
where I am majoring in international economics. I was born and raised in Jerusalem,
and I am proud to call myself a Palestinian.
To begin, I would like to acknowledge my privilege in speaking here today.
I am a white, middle-class female from Jerusalem who speaks English, which is
why I have the privilege to brief the Council today. I also need to acknowledge that
I do not, by any means, represent all Palestinian youth. The various restrictions
imposed by the Israeli Government not only separate Palestinians from one another,
but also define our experiences within the conflict. While I cannot speak for all
experiences of the youth in Gaza, the West Bank or the diaspora, I hope that I can
use my experiences to bring to Council members a clearer vision of what it is like on
the ground in Palestine.
I have called Jerusalem my home for the past 20 years. I grew up two kilometres
away from the Al-Aqsa mosque, in one of the largest streets in Jerusalem. However,
I have never fully felt comfortable there. I lived in constant fear of being hurt both
physically and emotionally as a result of living under military occupation. Worried
about being verbally assaulted for being Palestinian, I was always on edge whenever
I walked anywhere, especially on the Israeli side. Israeli sales clerks would be nice
to me until they heard which side of Jerusalem I lived in, and then they would frown
at me. Soon enough, I stopped speaking in Arabic to hide that I am a Palestinian.
When Israeli soldiers at the checkpoint would point their guns at me, I would speak
in English trying to force an American accent to protect my life. I lived in constant
fear of being who I am because I knew my life was not worth much to them.
I acknowledge, however, that I have received a lesser degree of the hate and
violence that a young person can experience in Palestine. When I think of how
violent and ruthless the occupation can be, I think of my cousin Mohammad, who
lived in the Al-Azzeh refugee camp where the houses piled on top of each other
looked like they were on the verge of collapse, just like the people who lived in
them. Mohammad was quiet, shy and soft-spoken. I always felt for him. Even though
Mohammad was a child, he seemed like a young man to me. It is common that when
violence and scarcity are prevalent, children have to grow up too soon.
At the age of 11, Mohammad was detained by the Israeli Government. Israeli
soldiers had entered the camp for the sole reason of wreaking havoc. Apparently,
Mohammad had thrown a rock at a soldier, so what the Israeli Government thought
was most appropriate was to imprison an 11-year-old. At the time, I was very naive to
think that he would be out the next day. But days turned into months and into years.
The minute he got out of prison he was quickly detained again and ever since he has
been going in and out of prison. And he will likely continue to do so for the rest of
his life, all because of one rock. With Mohammad and countless others, Palestine’s
potential is wasting away in prison.
Palestinian youth face constant insecurity owing to the atrocities committed
against them by the Israeli police and military. Israeli police are trained to see every
Palestinian as a possible terrorist. Without any repercussions to the hundreds of
lives they end, Israeli police continue to kneel on our necks. Earlier this year, Israeli
police shot seven bullets at Eyad Al-Hallaq, a young man on the autism spectrum, on
8/37

21-03126

S/2021/218

his way to school. What was his crime? Eyad was shot because, fearing the soldiers,
he ran away from them.
A few months ago, Ahmad Erekat crashed into a checkpoint on the day of
his sister’s wedding. Israel claimed that Erekat was like all Palestinians, a terrorist
committing an attack. Earlier this week, Forensic Architecture, a British research
body, confirmed that there is mounting evidence indicating that Ahmad Erekat
crashed into the checkpoint by accident. Of course, that does not matter anymore.
On the day of his sister’s wedding, Ahmad, an innocent man, walked away from the
soldiers with his hands up, whereupon he was executed with six bullets fired in two
seconds and denied medical aid as he slowly died on the ground.
How does the international community expect Palestinian youth to look
forward to peace when Israel antagonizes us every day? How do you expect us to
invest, grow and prosper when our future is full of uncertainty?
Another issue that Palestinian youth face is the lack of investment in their
lives and livelihoods. At the age of 14, I had great ambition and wanted to fill my
college applications with extracurricular activities. However, owing to the lack of
funding and programming for Palestinian youth organizations, the only activity I
could do was joining peace programmes. In peace programmes, Palestinians and
Israelis are brought together to talk — directly or indirectly — about the conflict.
Peace programmes glamorize the idea that Palestinians and Israelis are
coming together to make peace, when in many cases the only reason Palestinians
join is to get a diploma, practice their English or learn a skill or two. However,
Palestinian youth realize soon enough that they get more than they bargained for. In
my experience, these peace camps caused me emotional and mental distress.
What people-to-people peace organizations do not understand is that success
or justice looks very different from different sides. Many of my Israeli friends
champion these organizations for the “life-changing experiences” they offer. Many
Israelis come to these camps steeped in years of their Government’s propaganda on
how Israel is a peaceful actor and not an occupier in a land of indigenous people. They
are fed the idea that all Palestinians wear hijabs, are uneducated and are terrorists
looking for a conflict. What these programmes offer them is a chance to realize that
maybe Palestinians are not that bad. Maybe they are normal people. After all, how
can the conflict exist if we shared a plate of hummus together?
However, what we need to acknowledge is that Palestinians do not experience
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict the same way Israelis do, and so a Palestinian’s idea
of justice differs significantly from an Israeli’s. Palestinian youth have grown up in
violent conditions caused by Israel where they live in scarcity in an open-air prison
or, in my case, as a second-class citizen constantly being profiled and discriminated
against. My problem is not that I do not know that Israelis are humans; I know that
they are humans. My problem is that they choose to live in my house on my land and
tell me I do not get to protest. Therefore, when I arrive at these programmes, my goal
is different than that of my Israeli peers. I have the exhausting responsibility that
no 14-year-old should have: to prove that I am a human — a human who deserves
human rights. All these Israelis can offer me in return is a pat on the back and a
few apologies for what their Government does. This is why I believe that peace
programmes, by themselves, cannot fundamentally achieve peace. The problem is
not the lack of conversation, as the media and perhaps even the Security Council
broadcast; the problem is the lack of justice for Palestinians.
Indeed, these programmes have the opposite effect of what they are looking to
achieve. In my experience, I was shocked to find that the lives of Israelis on the other
side were nothing like mine. Quite the opposite — while I had barely any access to
21-031269/37

S/2021/218

water or electricity at my grandma’s house in the refugee camp, my Israeli peers were
enjoying their “normal life” on the beach with their friends. I started comparing my
Israeli friends’ lives to mine and truly realized the extent of the humiliation and
oppression I have experienced because of the occupation.
What made matters even worse was that after graduating from peace
programmes, my Israeli friends started enlisting in mandatory military service,
thereby eroding any progress we may have made. The same people I called my
friends are now participating in my oppression. The same people I called my friends
are currently the ones of whom I have always been scared. The same people I called
my friends are currently pointing a gun at me and my family.
In 1974, President Yasser Arafat addressed the General Assembly saying,
“Today I have come bearing an olive branch and a freedom-fighter’s gun. Do
not let the olive branch fall from my hand. I repeat: do not let the olive branch
fall from my hand” (A/PV.2282, para. 82).
Some 46 years later, that olive branch has withered into the slow but painful
crippling of the Palestinian cause. Once active actors in their destiny, Palestinians
are now passive observers as their land and rights are usurped every single day.
The international community has the responsibility to empower Palestinian youth
to become decision makers in their lives by investing in their security, education,
opportunities and employment.
If peace programmes are to succeed, oversight is essential to ensure that the
youth participating in them are kept safe in the presence of those who are licensed
to work with minors. More importantly, peace programmes should be preoccupied
not only with bringing Israelis and Palestinians together but also with fixing the
structural differences between Israeli and Palestinian life experiences. Programmes
should provide such resources as access to mental-health care and grants. They
should also advocate policies that improve the living conditions of Palestinian youth
participating in these programmes. Bringing Palestinians and Israelis together will
not achieve anything unless they are equal parties in the conversation.
When I consider whether peace is possible, I think of my home, Jerusalem.
Jerusalem is the biggest experiment in seeing whether Palestinians and Israelis can
live together. While in most instances the violence and injustice make it seem like
the experiment has failed, at times the experiment appears successful. My proof for
that is that when I go down the international aisle in American supermarkets and I
see an Israeli snack from my childhood, as much as I resist it, I am flooded with the
feeling of home.

10/37

21-03126

S/2021/218

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: Chinese and English]
I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland and the youth representatives of
Palestine and Israel for their briefings.
The question of Palestine has remained unresolved for over 70 years. In the
occupied Palestinian territories, one generation after another of young people have
suffered deeply from conflict, violence, historical grievances and poverty. The
international community is obligated to show courage in honouring commitments,
demonstrate conscience in upholding justice and find a comprehensive, just and
lasting solution to this question at an early date, thus giving young people a peaceful
home and a bright future. In this context, I would like to stress three points on
this question.
First, we must continue moving in the right direction, namely, towards a twoState solution. Independent statehood is a national right of the Palestinian people that
cannot be denied. The two-State solution is a bottom line of international justice that
cannot be compromised. The relevant United Nations resolutions and the principle
of land for peace, inter alia, are the basic tenets that cannot be deviated from in
resolving Palestinian-Israeli conflict. On that basis, the international community
must join hands to seek an early solution.
For some time now, the issue of settlement activities has been fermenting,
severely weakening the prospects for a two-State solution. All actions that
undermine mutual trust must cease immediately, and resolution 2334 (2016) must
be implemented in earnest. China calls upon Israel to end its settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territories, stop the demolition of Palestinian homes and the
destruction of Palestinian property, and take measures to prevent violence against
civilians. That having been said, Israel’s right to survival and its legitimate security
concerns must also be fully respected and guaranteed.
Secondly, international synergy in promoting peace talks must be forged.
Currently, new changes are on the horizon for the Middle East. The international
community must seize this opportunity, act with a greater sense of urgency and
conduct a new round of diplomatic efforts in order to vigorously make progress in
the Middle East peace process. An effort that is conducive to the political settlement
of this question will have China’s active participation and support.
The international community must explore and establish a multilateral
mechanism with broad participation so as to generate robust synergy in promoting
peace talks. Parties that have major influence on Palestine and Israel must uphold an
objective and impartial standard and sincerely strive to help the two parties narrow
their differences and build mutual trust. The Security Council should play its due
role by working actively towards relaunching Palestinian-Israeli dialogue on an
equal footing. China supports the early holding of an international conference on
peace in the Middle East, which is an initiative promoted by President Abbas.
At the ministerial meeting of the League of Arab States on 8 February, Foreign
Ministers of members of the League emphasized the core nature of Palestinian
statehood and reaffirmed their common position on the two-State solution and the
Arab Peace Initiative. This reflects the spirit of unity and justice of Arab States, for
which China expresses its appreciation.

21-0312611/37

S/2021/218

Thirdly, stronger support must be given to boost unity and development in
Palestine. The general elections this year represent an important political agenda
there. Two weeks ago, Palestinian political parties successfully held a dialogue in
Cairo at which they agreed on election arrangements, thus making a major stride
in intra-Palestinian reconciliation. China welcomes such results and commends
Egypt for the positive role it is playing. The international community must work
together to support and ensure the smooth holding of the elections, with a view to
strengthening intra-Palestinian unity and safeguarding and promoting the interests
of the Palestinian people.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has severely affected
socioeconomic development in Palestine. The international community must continue
its assistance to Palestine in combating the pandemic, growing the economy and
improving livelihoods. Concrete actions must be taken to support the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
As a sincere friend of the Palestinian people, China firmly endorses the
legitimate demands of Palestine and supports the establishment of an independent
State of Palestine with full sovereignty, on the basis of the 1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital. This month, through UNRWA, anti-pandemic supplies
donated by China have been officially distributed to the 141 health-care centres
located in Palestine, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. China has also decided to donate
COVID-19 vaccines to Palestine; these vaccines will be delivered very soon. We will
continue to do our best to help Palestine fight the pandemic, and we will actively
contribute to seeking a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the question of
Palestine at an early date.

12/37

21-03126

S/2021/218

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing. Let me also express
my appreciation to Mr. Oren Gian and Ms. Malak AbuSoud for sharing their
experiences on connecting Israeli and Palestinian youth.
We are encouraged by some positive developments, which will hopefully
contribute to reviving the Middle East peace process. In addition to the normalization
of relations between Israel and certain Arab States, we have also seen thrust in the
work of the Middle East Quartet, which held a virtual meeting last week.
We welcomed the decree by President Abbas on holding legislative,
presidential and National Council elections. The recent agreement reached in Cairo
between the Palestinian factions on the arrangements of the elections is another
positive step towards holding free, fair and inclusive elections, which should take
place throughout the occupied Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem.
Estonia also welcomed the resumption of civilian and security coordination
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority. We encourage the parties to build
upon these developments and take further practical steps, which will hopefully
lead to more favourable conditions for resuming direct negotiations to achieve a
two-State solution.
Those steps should include further coordinated efforts to combat the
coronavirus disease pandemic, as well as increased economic cooperation. In this
context, we welcome the participation of the representatives of the Government of
Israel and the Palestinian Authority at the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to Palestinians held on
23 February.
We call on all parties to refrain from any unilateral steps that increase tensions
and undermine the viability of the two-State solution.
We reiterate our call to Israel to halt the continued settlement expansion
and demolitions in the occupied Palestinian territories. The recent demolitions and
confiscation of items and structures at Humsa Al-Baqai’a, in the Jordan Valley, are
worrisome and contrary to international law.
It is also essential to prevent any acts of violence against civilians, including
acts of terror and acts of provocation, incitement and destruction.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Estonia’s continued support to all efforts
to resume meaningful negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians on all
final-status issues, based on international law, relevant Security Council resolutions
and agreed parameters.

21-0312613/37

S/2021/218

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I would like to thank the Special Coordinator as well as Oren Gian and Malak
AbuSoud for their briefings.
France is consistent in its support for a two-State solution in accordance
with agreed parameters, international law and Security Council resolutions. This
framework is the only basis to date that has made it possible to bring about a just and
lasting peace and thus contribute to the stability of the region. This is what Israeli
and Palestinian youth aspire to, as our two briefers reminded us. This solution is the
only one likely to ensure Israel’s security, on which France will never compromise,
and to respect the Palestinians’ right to self-determination, to which we are deeply
committed. That is why France will continue to give its full support to the creation of
two States, living in peace and security, within secure and recognized borders based
on the 1967 lines, with Jerusalem as their capital.
In this context, we regret the growing number of faits accomplis, which threaten
the viability of the two-State solution. We are very concerned about the record level
of demolitions of Palestinian structures, and the figures for 2021 already exceed
those of 2020. In this regard, we condemn the new demolitions and confiscations
by the Israeli authorities, including those of humanitarian structures financed by
the international community, including by the European Union and France, in the
Palestinian village of Khirbet Humsa. France calls on the Israeli authorities to put an
end to this as soon as possible, to facilitate humanitarian access and to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention, to which Israel is a party.
We condemn the continued colonization of the West Bank and East Jerusalem,
in particular its progress in sensitive areas, such as Givat Hamatos, Har Homa and
Area E-1. We call again on Israel to reverse these decisions.
It is important to make progress on the Palestinian electoral process. France
welcomed the publication by President Abbas of the decree on elections. Those
elections must be an opportunity to give a new voice to Palestinian civil society and
to renew the democratic legitimacy of institutions. France and its European partners
are ready to support the organization of transparent, free and impartial elections.
France calls on all stakeholders to act constructively to enable the Palestinian people
to choose their representatives. The elections must also be organized throughout the
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem.
France will remain mobilized to help gradually rebuild trust between the
parties with a view to resuming negotiations. We will continue to work on that with
our German, Egyptian and Jordanian partners.
The meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
the International Assistance to Palestinians once again stressed the importance
of increased cooperation between Israelis and Palestinians in order to strengthen
the resilience of the Palestinian economy and the effectiveness of their economic
relations. This cooperation is all the more necessary in the face of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. We welcome the efforts made, including by Israel, to enable the
Palestinian Ministry of Health to provide several thousand doses of vaccine. We
hope that positive momentum will continue and benefit all Palestinians, including
in Gaza.
14/37

21-03126

S/2021/218

In this difficult context, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East is providing vital assistance to millions of
Palestinians. France calls on all States to provide it with support that is commensurate
with their financial means.
It is around this pragmatic results-oriented agenda that France calls on the
Security Council to unite in order to relaunch the peace process.

21-0312615/37

S/2021/218

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, Nagaraj Naidu Kakanur
I thank the United Kingdom presidency for its initiative of inviting youth
representatives Malak and Oren to this meeting to share their perspectives. We also
thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing.
Let me begin by reaffirming India’s support to the Palestinian cause and the
establishment of a sovereign, viable and independent State of Palestine living side
by side in peace and security with Israel. We firmly believe that only a two-State
solution will deliver enduring peace, which the people of Israel and Palestine desire
and deserve. This should be achieved through direct negotiations between both
sides on final-status issues. Both sides must avoid any unilateral action that could
prejudice those final-status issues.
Recent diplomatic efforts to revive the stalled peace talks are encouraging.
The meeting of the Quartet’s Special Envoys is timely. We urge the Quartet to initiate
engagement with the Israeli and the Palestinian leadership. In this regard, we also
appreciate the Munich Group’s recent outreach. India welcomes all efforts that are
aimed at strengthening the collective commitment of the international community to
resume direct negotiations and facilitate the peace process.
We are pleased to note that preparations for the Palestinian elections are
moving forward. The Cairo agreement between the Palestinian parties on the conduct
of parliamentary and presidential elections — to abide by the electoral timetable,
accept the results of the election and on other election-related arrangements — is
a positive step in the right direction. The commitment undertaken by all parties to
release political detainees will also help build trust between them. We acknowledge
Egypt’s efforts in facilitating this agreement.
The high percentage of Palestinians who have registered to vote in the elections
reflects their desire to take part in the democratic process.
The opening of the Rafah border crossing is a significant development, which
will ease the humanitarian and health situation in Gaza.
The recent announcements pertaining to the gas pipeline to Gaza are
also encouraging.
The pandemic’s impact on the people of Gaza has been particularly severe
owing to the fragile health-care infrastructure. We note that coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) vaccines are being made available to the people of Palestine, including
in Gaza. India strongly believes that equity in access to vaccines across the world is
important for mitigating the impact of the pandemic. India earlier provided critical
medicines and medical equipment to Palestine as COVID-19 assistance. We are now
in the process of sending a second batch of medicines as a grant to the Palestinian
people in the coming weeks. We will also facilitate an early supply of vaccines
to Palestine.
India has been consistently supporting Palestinian nation-building efforts
under the India-Palestine developmental partnership. In addition to our ongoing
projects in health, education and technology sectors, we recently signed agreements
for funding quick-impact projects to be implemented through partnerships with
grass-roots Palestinian institutions.
Before I conclude, let me also reiterate our continued support for the
humanitarian and development work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) for the Palestinian refugee
16/37

21-03126

S/2021/218

community. UNRWA faced a dual crisis of unprecedented magnitude in 2020 —
a drastic financial shortfall compounded by the unparalleled public health crisis
triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic. Recognizing the gravity of the Agency’s
situation, India has pledged an annual financial contribution of $5 million to support
UNRWA for the next two years.

21-0312617/37

S/2021/218

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
First, I thank you, Oren Gian and Malak AbuSoud. Seeing you here in the
Security Council today, listening to you both, reminds me in a powerful way of why
we are here, what our purpose should be: to alleviate the human impact of conflict,
and really frankly to wake up to the toll it takes on young people. You have a critical
role in building peace and in resolving the conflict that you live with. I have high
hopes that in future you will be real agents for preventing conflict too.
As an Irish woman I grew up on an island that was troubled. We learned the
hard way that actually achieving and sustaining peace is indeed an intergenerational
process. Including young people, as we recognized in several Security Council
resolutions here on youth, peace and security, builds better peace. It builds more
sustainable peace. And that is true whether it be in Ireland or in the Middle East. So
I want to thank you for what you said to us this morning.
We see youth engagement in political processes, including in the upcoming
elections in Israel and Palestine, as really crucial. We know that Palestinian youth
are especially affected by occupation. Over half of the Palestinian population, we
know also, is under the age of 29. Palestinian youth sadly remain disempowered and
disenfranchised, with high unemployment rates and low political representation.
Ireland is a strong supporter of education for Palestinian youth, which we
believe is crucial for Palestine’s own long-term economic viability. Ireland is proud
of its long-standing support for the delivery of services, including quality education,
to Palestine refugees by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). We call on other donors, and on Council
members here today, to support UNRWA’s vital work.
We also recognize the disproportionate impact of occupation on Palestinian
women and girls, who face greater constraints in all areas of economic, social and
political life. Ireland actively supports a range of initiatives focused on building
Palestinian women’s political participation and the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda more broadly. I have welcomed Palestinian women
and girls to our deliberations here at the United Nations, and I can tell you they are
powerful advocates for the role of women anywhere in the political process.
I want to thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing today.
Together with the European Union, Ireland strongly opposes illegal Israeli
settlements. Settlements are a major obstacle to peace and undermine the viability
of the two-State solution — a two-State solution that Ireland fully supports and is
affirmed in resolution 2334 (2016).
Ireland is gravely concerned by the repeated demolition of Palestinian homes
and other structures in Humsa Al-Baqai’a and elsewhere. The rules of international
humanitarian law prohibit the unnecessary destruction of private property, and Israel
must immediately cease such practices.
Israel, as the occupying Power, also has obligations under international
humanitarian law to allow and facilitate full and unhindered humanitarian assistance
to those in need. The destruction and confiscation of humanitarian aid is unacceptable
and causes harm and suffering to ordinary Palestinians.
Fifty-three Palestinian schools across the West Bank, including in East
Jerusalem, are at risk of demolition. The rights of children to protection, safety and
well-being must be upheld at all times.
18/37

21-03126

S/2021/218

We recall that the Oslo Accords provided for gradual transfer of Area C
to Palestinian jurisdiction. Current Israeli actions and trends make this transfer
increasingly difficult to envisage and have a real impact on the prospects and lives
of Palestinians, especially young Palestinians.
Persistent acts of violence, as well as movement and access restrictions and
violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law,
damage trust between Israelis and Palestinians and within their own communities,
making a peaceful settlement more difficult to achieve. Where accountability is
absent, a climate for further human rights abuses is fostered. Breaking this cycle is
integral to achieving a peaceful settlement.
Ireland congratulates the Government and the people of Israel on its
commendable achievements on the vaccination of its citizens. We urge Israel, as
the occupying Power, to ensure free and equitable access and distribution of the
coronavirus disease vaccine to Palestinians, in line with international law.
Ireland renews its call on Israel to end its illegal blockade on Gaza. For many
young people in Gaza, their life has been defined and limited by the blockade.
They live in a protracted humanitarian crisis. Ireland is also very concerned by
the provisions announced earlier this month by the Gaza authorities allowing male
guardians to restrict travel by unmarried women relatives. We oppose the curtailing
of the rights of women and girls to move independently.
Ireland reiterates its support for the holding of elections in Palestine. We
encourage the Palestinian factions in their efforts to ensure a free, fair and inclusive
electoral process, and we call on Israel to facilitate voting, particularly in East
Jerusalem. We encourage all efforts to ensure the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women and young people in those elections.
Finally, Ireland reiterates its willingness to assist Palestinians and Israelis in
their efforts to re-engage on the path to peace. We welcome the recent meeting of
Quartet Envoys and the efforts of the Munich Group. We echo Tor Wennesland’s
call for reinvigorated efforts by the Quartet and other international actors, including
the League of Arab States and by members of the Security Council. Ending the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict requires ongoing sincere, coherent engagement by the
international community as a whole, and by the Council in particular. We stand
ready to play our part.

21-0312619/37

S/2021/218

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Martin Kimani
I thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for the briefing.
I would also like to thank Mr. Oren Gian and Ms. Malak AbuSoud for giving
us insightful perspectives on the value added when local young women and men
participate in the prevention and resolution of conflict within their communities.
I reaffirm Kenya’s condemnation of all violations, by all parties, that endanger
the peace and prosperity of the people in the Middle East.
We look forward to a time when reports of rockets and mortars aimed at
civilian population centres and of settler-related violence will be the exception in
these monthly briefings.
Kenya urges the Israelis and Palestinians to do their utmost to build bridges
of understanding and respect using multiple forums. Often, politics follow where the
people lead. The work of our young briefers today should be strongly supported and
scaled up. They may be the ones who inspire their elders to build real political and
security bridges.
As the civil component of cooperation is strengthened, Kenya welcomes
all existing efforts to strengthen security and civilian cooperation between the
Israeli Government and the Palestinian Authority. We also acknowledge the steps
to reverse the negative trends on the ground, including increased intra-Palestinian
reconciliation in preparation for the upcoming legislative and presidential elections.
The 12 February meeting in Cairo was an important step towards stronger
Palestinian unity.
Over recent months, there have been a number of initiatives to re-engage
Israelis and Palestinians in peace talks, including the call to reinvigorate the spirit of
the Madrid Conference, the proposal to hold an international conference on the finalstatus issues, and the revitalization of the Middle East Quartet. Kenya welcomes
these efforts by the international community to advance the peace process with the
aim of resuming meaningful negotiations to achieve a comprehensive peace based
on the two-State solution in line with the pre-1967 borders.
Kenya also welcomes the normalization of relations between Israel and multiple
majority-Arab countries as an important step towards lasting peace in the region. We
hope that these welcome developments make it easier — rather than harder — to
undertake the normalization of relations between the Israelis and Palestinians as two
viable States, living side by side, within secure and recognized borders.
Kenya calls for the removal of impediments to the equitable distribution of
coronavirus-disease vaccine. We therefore welcome the recent increase in cooperation
between the Israeli and Palestinian authorities on the delivery of critical supplies,
including food and medicine, and the movement of health and other essential workers
in and out of the West Bank, East Jerusalem and Gaza. In particular, we applaud the
meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians, held yesterday under the chairmanship of Norway, to
have both parties agree on ensuring equitable vaccine access.
Kenya joins other delegations in recognizing the important role played by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
reiterates the call for its funding to be reinforced.

20/37

21-03126

S/2021/218

Annex X
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Mexico to
the United Nations, Alicia Guadalupe Buenrostro Massieu
First, as this is the last meeting under the presidency of the United Kingdom,
I would like to congratulate you, Madam, on the successful conduct of our work
during this month. I also extend my gratitude to Special Coordinator Wennesland
for his informative briefing, and to Oren Gian and Malak AbuSoud for their
inspiring contributions. Believe me, your presentations help us to understand the
situation more directly and to be sensitive to your visions. Thank you very much for
your participation.
Mexico reiterates its conviction that the establishment of two independent
States, living side by side in peace and within secure and internationally recognized
borders, based on the resolutions of the Council and the General Assembly, is the
only alternative that ensures peace and prosperity for Israelis and Palestinians.
This must address Israel’s legitimate security concerns and its right to exist, while
enabling the consolidation of a politically and economically viable Palestinian State.
On this occasion, I will focus my participation on three points: first, the
Palestinian elections; secondly, demolitions; and, finally, equitable access to vaccines.
On the issue of the Palestinian elections, we welcome the rapprochement
among the various Palestinian factions. We acknowledge the mediation by Arab
countries, in particular Egypt. The establishment of a united and democratic
Palestinian Government committed to peace would represent an important step
towards negotiating a solution to the conflict. Likewise, international assistance will
be critical to strengthening integration between the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
and thereby advancing in the construction of a democratic State.
My country, Mexico, welcomes the large number of Palestinian citizens
who have already registered to participate in these elections, reflecting the will
of the electorate to be part of this process. We urge Palestinian leaders and civil
society to encourage the participation of women, youth and minority representatives
as candidates.
While recognizing the continued civil and security cooperation between Israel
and the Palestinian Authority in recent months, we also urge the Israeli Government
to facilitate the development of Palestinian elections, especially in East Jerusalem.
This could represent a genuine confidence-building measure to demonstrate Israel’s
interest in consolidating a united Palestinian partner in the peace negotiations.
In terms of demolitions, Mexico notes that, according to the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, at least 199 Palestinian-owned
structures were seized or forced to be demolished this year, including 77 funded by
international donors. Such actions have resulted in the displacement of 285 people,
including 150 minors.
Mexico once again condemns any action seeking to alter the demography,
character or status of the occupied Palestinian territories, such as the confiscation
of land, the demolition of homes, the displacement of civilians and the construction
and expansion of Israeli settlements. Not only are these measures a violation of
international law and United Nations resolutions, but they also represent an obstacle
to the two-State solution. Mexico urges an immediate halt to the construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories.
As for the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, it has had devastating
social and economic effects throughout the world. As has been mentioned in this
21-0312621/37

S/2021/218

forum, the distribution of vaccines has been inequitable. We recognize the results of
Israel’s strategy to vaccinate a high proportion of its population in a record time as an
example to the rest of the world, and we applaud the donations of vaccines, medicines
and medical equipment made to other countries. We also call on Israel to increase
cooperation with the Palestinian Authority to support the fight against COVID-19 in
the West Bank and in Gaza, including by increasing donations of vaccines as well as
facilitating the entry and distribution of immunizations from overseas.
We deeply regret the continued acts of violence and condemn the attacks
against civilians by both sides. Attacks launched from the Gaza Strip on Israeli
cities must be stopped and we call on Palestinian authorities and political leaders to
prevent armed groups from perpetrating acts of violence that could be detrimental
to the peace process.
Recognizing the right to security of both, Israel and Palestine, Mexico
strongly calls on both to exercise maximum restraint. We also call on the parties to
stop incitement and inflammatory rhetoric.
Finally, the establishment of diplomatic relations between a number of Arab
countries and Israel, as well as some signs of easing tensions in the Middle East,
seem to be clear signs that this is a favourable moment for renewed dialogue, and this
opportunity should not be missed.
I should not like to conclude my remarks without stating that Mexico
welcomes the announcement by the United States in support of the Palestinian
refugee population.

22/37

21-03126

S/2021/218

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
At the outset, I should like to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his detailed
briefing on the situation in the Middle East.
I also thank the students, Mr. Oren Gian and Ms. Malak AbuSoud, whose
particularly moving testimony calls on us to act and demonstrates how urgent it is
to do so.
The Niger has followed with great concern the recent developments in the
region, especially the operations by Israeli forces at Hamsa Al-Foqa, in the northern
Jordan Valley, during which 46 structures belonging to Palestinian families were
confiscated and demolished.
This new wave of demolitions, which follows on the heels of those
conducted only three months ago in the West Bank village of Huma Al-Baqai’i,
left around 60 Palestinians, including 35 children, homeless amid a pandemic and
cold temperatures.
The Niger condemns the continuation of this alarming practice, which, in
the course of the year 2020, led to the destruction or seizure of approximately 849
Palestinian properties, including 175 in East Jerusalem.
The Niger recalls, once again, that the demolition and destruction of
private property in the occupied territory are prohibited under the Fourth Geneva
Convention; they violate United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016); and they undermine the efforts devoted, over more than 70 years, by the
international community to bring a peaceful resolution to the dispute between Israel
and Palestine.
This practice, which characterizes the policy of Israel in the occupied
Palestinian territories, remains counterproductive to prospects for the two-States
solution, which is the only solution that would allow both peoples, Palestinians and
Israelis, to peacefully coexist within secure and recognized borders. It is also the
only formula that would allow Israel to guarantee its people the security they need.
At this point in my remarks, I should like to raise, in order to strongly condemn
it, another, particularly distressing aspect of the demolition of homes in the occupied
territories — that of the trauma inflicted on the Palestinian population. Indeed, the
nocturnal intrusion into and invasion of Palestinian homes, often perpetrated at very
late hours, by Israeli soldiers expose Palestinian families, including women and
children, to unbearable and unacceptable acts of violence and intimidation. This was
indeed recently documented and denounced by an Israeli civil society organization in
a report establishing the link between these traumatizing practices and the resulting
psychological prejudice they instil among Palestinian populations.
These serious violations of the rights of the Palestinian populations, including
thousands of women and children, under illegal occupation by Israel must call us to
act with greater commitment and determination to bring an end to the distress and
tragedy these populations have now endured for several decades.
While the positive developments achieved over recent months, with the
normalization of relations between Israel and some Arab countries, fuelled hopes
for a turning point in Israeli policy in the occupied Palestinian territories, we must
recognize that this has not been the case. It is no longer possible to keep turning a
21-0312623/37

S/2021/218

blind eye to the ongoing abuses perpetrated by the occupying Power in terms of the
demolition of Palestinian structures and arbitrary expropriations, which must cease
completely — just as must cease the forced displacement, eviction and movement
of Palestinian civilians and the expansion of settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories, which likewise represent flagrant violations of relevant Security Council
resolutions on this matter.
At a time when the Palestinian people are working towards the holding of
elections — which we hope will help, by bringing Palestinian factions together, to
strengthen the foundations for peace, we call on Israel to capitalize on this positive
momentum by refraining from any acts that could stoke tensions or deter the
resumption of peace talks, including in the context of the Quartet, with a view towards
a negotiated two-State solution, as supported by the international community.
With regard to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis in the region, my
delegation welcomes Israel’s decision to deliver nearly 5,000 vaccine doses to the
Palestinian Authority. This commendable gesture will allow for 2,500 people to be
vaccinated but, while symbolic, it does not go far enough, given the size of the
Palestinian population living under Israel’s control.
The vulnerability of this population to the COVID-19 pandemic remains
heightened due to the combination of factors resulting from the occupation, such as
overcrowding, poverty, food insecurity and lack of medical equipment and personnel,
as well as various restrictions.
That is why we call on Israel, as the occupying Power, to uphold its obligations
under international law by supporting the Palestinian populations, including those in
the occupied West Bank and under blockade in Gaza, by guaranteeing their access
to vaccines on an equal footing with Israeli citizens. Indeed, Israel, which currently
has the highest rate of vaccination in the world, should take into account the risk of
further spread of the virus in its own territory if vaccination is not extended among
Palestinians, since it has been well demonstrated that this virus respects no borders.
We call on the international community to support the efforts of the Palestinian
Authority to immunize its population against the COVID-19 pandemic. In this
context, it is also essential to continue providing financial support to the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East so that it
can continue to provide vital services to thousands of Palestinian families in need.
In conclusion, the Niger welcomes the tireless efforts of Tor Wennesland
and reaffirms its full commitment to supporting the efforts and initiatives of the
international community aimed at swiftly resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
which undoubtedly has an impact on the peace, stability and security of the entire
Middle East.

24/37

21-03126

S/2021/218

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing. We also welcome the
briefings from Oren Gian and Malak AbuSoud. The voices of civil society and youth
provide us with new perspectives and continue to offer vital input into the work and
considerations of this Council. Their contributions today underscore exactly why
Norway encourages the inclusion, at an early stage, of young women and men in
peace negotiations and conflict resolution.
Three days ago, our Minister for Foreign Affairs, together with European
Union High Representative Borrell, hosted a virtual meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International Assistance to Palestinians.
The purpose of that Committee is to build viable institutional and economic
foundations for the realization of the two-State solution. The Committee welcomed
the resumption of the cooperation between Israel and the Palestinian Authority last
November, which has contributed to a more positive dynamic between the parties.
Several delegations commended the normalization agreements, welcomed the
United States’ voice in the meeting and strongly recommended to the parties —
and their international partners — that a meaningful political process be relaunched
without delay. The immediate priority is, of course, to combat the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
While the concerted, and largely successful, efforts of both parties to contain
the spread of the pandemic give ground for hope, 2020 saw the Palestinian economy
face one of the largest contractions since the establishment of the Palestinian
Authority. The donor community must continue to strengthen the Palestinian public
health system, including by helping to provide sufficient vaccines. It must help
alleviate the burden on the affected population and stimulate the recovery of the
Palestinian economy.
Taking a longer-term perspective, the donors emphasized that the Palestinian
Authority needs higher, stable and predictable revenues.
Norway called on donors to step up and to frontload their contributions to the
Palestinian Authority and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. The parties were also asked to resume their work on a
series of fiscal issues related mainly to the Paris Protocol and to improving access
and movement for people and goods, as well as facilitating trade. As Chair, we plan
to hold a ministerial meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee in September to
review progress on the recommendations made this week.
Turning to the developments on the ground, Norway is deeply concerned by
the continued Israeli settlement activities on occupied Palestinian territory. The
settlements are illegal under international law and undermine the prospects for the
two-State solution.
We call on both sides to fully implement resolution 2334 (2016), with all its
provisions. We are particularly worried by Israel’s decision to advance plans for
thousands of housing units in sensitive areas such as Givat Hamatos and Har Homa.
Those activities acutely erode the prospects of establishing a contiguous Palestinian
State. We urge Israel to reverse those decisions.
Norway is equally concerned by the house demolitions and confiscations
carried out by Israel in the West Bank, especially in Humsa Al-Baqai’a, as the
Special Coordinator has elaborated on.
21-0312625/37

S/2021/218

Many children are particularly affected by those actions. Indeed, children
should always be protected. We are heartened by the scheduled Palestinian elections
and encourage all actors on both the Palestinian and Israeli sides to contribute
constructively to the election process.
Norway will continue its support for the Palestinian Central Election
Commission and encourages the mobilization and better inclusion of women and
youth in the elections as both candidates and voters. We also welcome the recent
meeting of the Quartet, which is mandated by the Council to facilitate Middle East
peace process negotiations. A revitalization of that format is a positive step.
While the two-State solution seems increasingly elusive, that does not make
it any less urgent. Norway is a strong and consistent supporter of the two-State
solution, based on international law, the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the internationally agreed parameters. That is the only viable solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. The changed dynamics in the region, including the normalization
agreements between Israel and several Arab countries, can and should be used to
revitalize the peace process, and the United Nations should play a key role.

26/37

21-03126

S/2021/218

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
We thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for the briefing. We also
listened with great interest to the representatives of the Palestinian and Israeli
student communities.
The task of ensuring lasting peace and security in the Middle East and North
Africa ranks among the priorities on the international agenda. One of the basic
components of sustainable stability in the region is clearly the promotion of a Middle
East settlement with a focus on finding a just solution to the Palestinian problem.
We note that Palestine and Israel have resumed contacts to address issues of
security and tax payments. At the current stage, fighting the common enemy — the
coronavirus disease pandemic — has become an important track for interaction. The
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, which coordinates the delivery of international aid to
the Palestinians, held a video-teleconference meeting on 23 February at which we
informed our colleagues about the efforts we are making jointly with the Palestinians
to counter the spread of the coronavirus disease.
At the same time, the unilateral steps that Israel is taking in order to create
irreversible trends on the ground raise serious concerns. Those include illegal
construction activities, the demolition of houses and plans to annex the occupied
territories, all of which undermine the prospects for a lasting settlement.
The international community should play a constructive role in both the
Palestinian-Israeli settlement and in alleviating the acute humanitarian and
socioeconomic problems in the occupied territories, most of all in Gaza. We believe
that it is very important that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East continue its effective work in lending support
to the Palestinian people, both in the occupied territories and in neighbouring Arab
States. The mobilization of comprehensive humanitarian assistance is especially
needed amid the pandemic in order to overcome the socioeconomic challenges and
contain the virus, including in the context of vaccination.
We believe that the process of Arab-Israeli normalization, which gained
momentum in 2020, will contribute to pan-regional stabilization, promote a Middle
East settlement and ensure that the Palestinian problem is not forgotten.
Russia unswervingly supports the two-State solution, which provides for the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, based on the universally recognized international legal
framework, including the relevant decisions of the United Nations and the Arab
Peace Initiative. There is no alternative to Palestinians and Israelis engaging in direct
negotiations to determine parameters of the final settlement, including the problem
of refugees, borders, water resources and the status of Jerusalem. We also expect
that the upcoming elections in both Palestine and Israel will contribute to domestic
consolidation and to the strengthening of the State institutions of both sides. Israel’s
security concerns also need to be taken into account.
We intend, together with our Egyptian friends, to continue to help the
Palestinians achieve national unity on the Palestine Liberation Organization platform.
The pending elections in Palestine also provide an opportunity to overcome existing
controversies and strengthen institutional power.
21-0312627/37

S/2021/218

For our part, we are taking steps to support the collective efforts aimed at
achieving equitable peace in the region. We believe that one of the necessary tasks
is to give impetus to the activities of the Quartet of international mediators and
ensure that its meetings are convened on a regular basis. That would allow for the
Quartet — Russia, the United States, the United Nations and the European Union —
to keep an ear to the ground and coordinate their actions at all times. The Quartet
met via video-teleconference on 15 February, and we can say that our partners in this
inclusive and Security Council-endorsed mechanism demonstrated their readiness to
cooperate constructively.
We deem it reasonable to engage regional stakeholders in promoting a Middle
East settlement. It would therefore be useful to hold a ministerial meeting in the
spring or summer of 2021 in 4+4+2 format — the Quartet plus Egypt, Jordan, the
United Arab Emirates and Bahrain, plus the Palestinian and Israeli sides — with
the possible inclusion of Saudi Arabia. Such a meeting would be in line with the
initiative of the President of the State of Palestine, Mahmoud Abbas, to convene an
international conference on a Middle East settlement. Such a Quartet-plus meeting
could provide a review of the current state of affairs and outline key tracks for joint
work aimed at overcoming the impasse in the settlement process. We hope that
this idea will enjoy broad support and encourage all interested sides to share their
comments and proposals in order to ensure that comprehensive preparatory work for
the meeting is carried out.

28/37

21-03126

S/2021/218

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing, and Mr. Oren Gian and Ms. Malak AbuSoud for their
excellent and deeply profound presentations.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines takes note of the ruling of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) that it has jurisdiction over war crimes committed in the
Palestinian territories. It is critical for the international community to actively
participate in the global fight against impunity and to render our unwavering support
to the ICC. Moreover, we reaffirm that all States must comply with their obligations
under the Rome Statute and the relevant Security Council resolutions to cooperate
with the ICC.
We welcome the recent announcement that Israel will vaccinate 100,000
Palestinians who regularly cross into Israel for work. That notwithstanding, the rollout
of the coronavirus vaccine, with more than half of the occupied West Bank and Gaza
yet to receive supplies, needs the urgent attention and support of the international
community. We urge Israel to provide more coronavirus vaccines to Palestinians in
the West Bank and Gaza. We also commend the efforts of those countries that have
supplied vaccines to the Palestinians and call on the international community to
help fill the large funding gap for the Palestinian coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
vaccine plan. We must all work together tirelessly to confront the coronavirus crisis,
in line with the United Nations principle of leaving no one behind.
In East Jerusalem, as in the rest of the West Bank, settlements, the demolition
of homes and the displacement of Palestinians are of deep concern. We condemn the
ongoing demolition of Palestinian homes and the forced displacement of Palestinian
families, and we call upon the Israeli authorities to halt such unlawful evictions
and end the illegal demolitions of Palestinian property. Israel’s occupation of the
Palestinian territory must immediately and completely cease. We reiterate that
settlements have no legal validity, constitute a flagrant violation under international
law and must be dismantled. Continued settlement activity violates the fundamental
rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination and dangerously imperils the
viability of a two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders.
The social and economic impacts of the occupation on the Palestinians in
the occupied territory, particularly the Gaza Strip, are increasingly dire. The
humanitarian crisis in Gaza remains of deep concern for my delegation, especially
now, during the COVID-19 pandemic. In that connection, we call on the Israeli
Government to take additional steps to lift the blockade on Gaza, particularly to
allow medical treatment and humanitarian aid to those in need. Similarly, we call on
the international community to address the financial situation of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which remains a
serious concern for millions of Palestinian refugees.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reiterates its support for President Abbas’s
decree issued on 15 January setting legislative, presidential and Palestinian National
Council elections for later this year and welcomes the steps taken so far towards
Palestinian unity. All Palestinians should be granted the opportunity to exercise
their constitutional right to vote and contribute to Palestinian unity. Moreover, we
welcome the presidential decree guaranteeing a minimum of seven parliamentary
seats for Palestinians of Christian faith.

21-0312629/37

S/2021/218

It is our firm belief that a lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
can be achieved only by peaceful means in accordance with international law and
the relevant United Nations resolutions and through credible and direct negotiations.
Consequently, we reiterate the call made by President Abbas for the United Nations
to convene an international peace conference and encourage the Middle East Quartet
to assist in that regard, in an effort to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict based on
the pre-1967 borders. Finally, we call on the Council to explicitly uphold international
law in promoting peace and security for the Middle East.
From our outstanding youth briefers today, we heard that we need to build
trust, and we need a just solution for the Palestinians; those are two aims that are
inextricably linked.

30/37

21-03126

S/2021/218

Annex XV
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Tunisia

to

the

[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I should like to thank Tor Wennesland sincerely for his important
briefing and his promising start in promoting the Middle East peace process. We
also appreciate the Secretary-General’s efforts to achieve the two-State solution and
support security and stability in the region.
Tunisia commends the international consensus that materialized at the
high-level Security Council meeting (see S/2021/91) on this agenda item held on
26 January 2021, under the Tunisian presidency, on the need for the international
community to work together to overcome the current stalemate in the Middle East
peace process and take practical steps to bring about real change in international
engagement with the Palestinian issue by launching serious, credible negotiations
to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli conflict through a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace, on the basis of international law, internationally recognized resolutions and
the agreed-upon terms of reference.
Tunisia reiterates its support for the initiative launched by the President of
the State of Palestine, Mahmoud Abbas, to convene a plenipotentiary conference in
which all stakeholders will participate, with a view to embarking upon a genuine
peace process on the basis of established principles. In accordance with that vision,
we support the proposal that a ministerial-level meeting of the Middle East Quartet
be held in an expanded format in the coming months. We wish to emphasize that the
Palestinians must be involved in any efforts or initiatives to resolve the conflict and
achieve peace in the region.
Tunisia appreciates the constructive views expressed recently by components
of the Quartet and their stated willingness to interact with the international drive to
revive the peace process. We hope that, without further delay, those views will be
translated into practical, inclusive action, particularly in the light of the seriousness
of the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, given the occupying authorities’
continuing repressive policies and settlement activities, which run counter to
international law, and their gross violations of the Palestinian people’s most
fundamental rights.
Tunisia also reaffirms the Security Council’s responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security; ensuring that its resolutions related to the Palestinian
question, the most recent of which is resolution 2334 (2016), are implemented; and
pushing towards the settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict in accordance with
internationally recognized resolutions, particularly by prevailing on Israel, the
occupying Power, to withdraw from all the occupied Arab territories.
We listened with grave concern to the statements in the briefing by the United
Nations Special Coordinator about the intensification by the occupying Power of
settlement activity, home demolitions, displacement of the Palestinian population
and efforts to cut the geographical connection between East Jerusalem and the West
Bank. That intensification represents a direct challenge to the two-State solution
and a serious obstacle to a peaceful settlement of the conflict. In view of those
grave violations, we urge the Council and the international community as a whole
to assume their responsibilities by enforcing respect for internationally recognized
resolutions and obliging the occupying authorities to cease their settlement activities
immediately and completely, abandon their plans to annex the territories definitively
and end their occupation of the Palestinian territories.
21-0312631/37

S/2021/218

We also reiterate the international community’s call for the Palestinian
civilian population to be protected and for Israel, as the occupying Power, to be held
accountable for the crimes that it has committed. Israel must be compelled to end
the unjust blockade of the Gaza Strip and all other forms of collective punishment.
Tunisia urges regional and international actors to step up the humanitarian
response in the occupied Palestinian territory, particularly in the light of the
threat posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic and the effects of the economic
restrictions imposed by the occupiers. Tunisia also emphasizes the importance
of responding to the appeal of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East for its financial needs for 2021 to be met. In
that regard, my country welcomes the international commitment reflected at the
most recent meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians, held on 23 February 2021, and the return of
the United States of America to its position at the heart of the Committee.
In conclusion, Tunisia reaffirms its steadfast support for the legitimate
demands of the Palestinian people, particularly the right to self-determination and the
establishment of an independent, sovereign State based on the 4 June 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with the agreed-upon terms of
reference, internationally recognized resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
principle of a two-State solution.
From our position at the heart of this United Nations organ, which is capable
of bringing about real change for justice, freedom, dignity and long-awaited peace,
we would emphasize the fact that millions of Palestinians and the peoples of the
region, especially young people, have pinned their hopes on our common efforts.
Our shared responsibility and the credibility of our Council hang in the balance,
and we have no choice but to act in accordance with the fundamental principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, to reaffirm our faith in fundamental human rights,
in the dignity of the human person and in the equal rights of nations large and small.

32/37

21-03126

S/2021/218

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Barbara Woodward
Let me start by thanking the Special Coordinator for his briefing. I also thank
Malak and Oren for sharing their personal reflections with us today, including on
how to help foster peace and understanding among new and older generations alike.
In order to build trust between the parties and populations, unilateral acts
must also cease. The United Kingdom has called on the Government of Israel to
end the demolition of Palestinian homes and structures in the occupied Palestinian
territories. The latest demolitions in Humsa Al-Baqai’a have again made that
vulnerable Palestinian community, including children, homeless. We urge the
Government of Israel to allow the unimpeded delivery of vital humanitarian aid. We
also call on the Government of Israel to refrain from the destruction or confiscation
of such aid once it is delivered.
The United Kingdom will continue to champion the rights and freedoms
of women, young people and marginalized groups. We join Palestinian women,
and all Palestinians, in rejecting the recent changes made by Hamas, the de facto
authorities in Gaza, to travel arrangements from Gaza, which will limit Gazan
women’s independence and liberty. We call for that decision to be fully reversed and
for all parties to ensure greater freedoms and protections for women in the occupied
Palestinian territories.
We are clear that the parties must work together to deliver meaningful
improvements for Palestinians and Israelis. In that context, I would also like to
welcome, as others have done, the constructive discussions held this week at the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians. We must now drive progress on measures that can alleviate the health
and economic challenges in the occupied Palestinian territories. We welcome the
cooperation on vaccine access, and we encourage the Government of Israel to
facilitate the transfer of vaccines to the Palestinian Authority when required. We also
need to see tangible and time-bound commitments from the parties to address longstanding barriers to the development of the Palestinian economy. Progress on those
issues will help to foster an environment conducive to future peace negotiations.
Finally, I would like to welcome the continued progress towards legislative and
presidential elections in the occupied Palestinian territories. As we have heard today,
Palestinians need free and fair elections as a pathway to accountable institutions,
based on respect for the rule of law and human rights.
The United Kingdom remains committed to a two-State solution. We will
continue to work with the parties to the conflict to build the conditions for a
permanent agreement. As our briefers today made clear, we must work towards a
better future for Israelis and Palestinians alike. A just and lasting resolution that
ends the occupation and delivers peace is the best way to achieve such a future.

21-0312633/37

S/2021/218

Annex XVII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations, Richard Mills
I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing. We heard two
challenging and powerful reports from our civil society briefers on the impact of this
conflict on young people and how young people can work towards its resolution. As
the Special Coordinator said, there will not be a resolution without the involvement
of young people like Malak and Oren, so it was important to hear from them today. I
am grateful, Madam President, that you have given us the chance to do that.
As I said the last time that we met on the Palestinian question in the Middle
East (see S/2021/91), the United States remains committed to working towards a
more peaceful, secure and prosperous future for the people of the Middle East. For
both Israelis and Palestinians, that means focusing our efforts on advancing their
freedom, security and prosperity in tangible ways in the immediate term. That is the
best way of advancing towards a negotiated two-State solution, in which Israel lives
in peace and security alongside a viable Palestinian State.
Our diplomatic engagement is based on active consultation with both Israelis
and Palestinians. Since the Biden Administration took office last month, United
States engagement with senior Palestinian Authority officials has resumed, opening
up some important channels of communication. At the same time, we continue our
very close consultations with the Israeli Government, including through last week’s
telephone call between President Biden and Prime Minister Netanyahu.
As we work to address the critical needs of both Israelis and Palestinians,
we note that the humanitarian crisis in the region is complicated by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19), and I listened closely to the Special Coordinator’s words
about how vaccinations are being handled. We encourage Israel and the Palestinian
Authority to work together on the facilitation of COVID-19 vaccines. COVID-19 is a
health and security threat to us all, and we must all work together so that people are
vaccinated no matter where they live.
We must also recognize the unsustainable disparity in economic development
between two groups of people inextricably bound together and living in close
proximity. Israel ranks as one of the top economies in the world, with a gross
domestic product per capita on a par with France and Japan, while the West Bank
and Gaza continue to experience severe economic instability and poverty, with the
people of Gaza facing one of the highest unemployment rates on Earth. That is not a
talent gap; it is a structural issue that should be diagnosed and addressed. We have
no choice but to do that if we are to preserve and advance the two-State solution.
As such, and as we noted last month, the United States intends to resume
United States assistance programmes that support economic development and
humanitarian aid for the Palestinian people. That is to assist Palestinians in real need
and to bring stability and security to both Israelis and Palestinians.
There has been a long history of bipartisan consensus in the United States on
the value of United States assistance to the Palestinians, and we intend to provide
assistance that will benefit all Palestinians, including refugees. We intend to do that
not as a favour, but because it is in the interests of the United States. The funding
ultimately supports Israel’s security as well.
We look forward to resuming those important programmes, consistent
with requirements under United States law. Related to that, we must see an end to
Palestinian payments that are linked to those who have committed acts of terrorism.
34/37

21-03126

S/2021/218

At the same time, repeated terrorist attacks on Israel from Gaza must cease, and
violence and incitement to violence by all parties must end.
I want to be clear. Our efforts to re-engage the Palestinian people and
leadership do not detract in any way from our commitment to Israel. We continue to
be dismayed by the sheer number of one-sided United Nations resolutions that single
out Israel, while the United Nations and other international organizations ignore a
full range of destabilizing actions by other countries in the region and across the
globe. The United States remains committed to Israel’s standing and participation in
United Nations bodies and other international organizations, free from unfair bias
and attacks.
The Human Rights Council is an example of an international body that places
a disproportionate focus on Israel. The United States continues to strongly oppose
the one-sided and biased approach of the Human Rights Council against Israel under
its agenda item 7, the only standing country-specific agenda item of the Council.
Defending Israel from being unfairly singled out in the Human Rights Council will
be a key element of our re-engagement with that body.
Earlier this month, the International Criminal Court (ICC) also issued a
decision claiming territorial jurisdiction in the West Bank, East Jerusalem and Gaza,
while expressly recognizing the serious legal and factual questions that surround
its ability to do so. Such actions against Israel at the ICC increase tensions and
undermine efforts to advance a negotiated two-State solution. The only realistic path
to end the conflict is through negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians, and
we will continue to urge other countries to join our efforts to support meaningful
engagement between the two sides.

21-0312635/37

S/2021/218

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to
the United Nations, Tra Phuong Nguyen
I thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his valuable briefing. I welcome and
thank the two student briefers from Israel and Palestine for their touching and
informative presentations.
At the outset, I would like to welcome the recent developments towards
holding the first elections in Palestine in more than a decade. The agreement
between Palestinian factions in Cairo earlier this month was a crucial step for
national unity and reconciliation. We encourage all political actors in Palestine
to continue their talks in a constructive manner to tackle all outstanding issues in
preparation for the elections. We once again emphasize that the elections must be
free, fair and inclusive. We echo the Secretary-General’s call on the Palestinian
authorities to support women’s participation throughout the electoral process. We
urge the Israeli authorities to facilitate the holding of elections across the Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. We also call upon all international and regional
stakeholders to join hands to assist the Palestinians in electing their representatives
and forming a unified Government.
Regarding the peace process, Viet Nam welcomes all efforts and initiatives
by international and regional actors towards a comprehensive, just and long-lasting
peace between Israel and Palestine in line with international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions. We were delighted to see the new momentum created
by the stronger engagement of the relevant parties in the peace process. We look
forward to working with the members of the Security Council on the proposal of
President Abbas for an international conference, as well as other proposals that may
bring new hope for the two-State solution. We hope to see the Quartet play a stronger
and more active role in that process. We also encourage all regional actors, including
the League of Arab States, to take concrete steps so as to build momentum for the
current promising trends.
At this critical juncture, trust-building measures are particularly needed. Viet
Nam repeats its call on all parties to refrain from any unilateral acts that could
erode trust and undermine the prospects for a peaceful and negotiated solution. In
that connection, we urge the Israeli authorities to halt all settlement activities in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and to stop the demolition and confiscation
of Palestinian-owned structures and properties. We are encouraged by the reports
of the two sides having worked closely with the United Nations and its partners
to ensure that equipment and supplies, and more recently vaccines, are delivered
throughout the occupied Palestinian territories. We welcome the recent step by the
Egyptian Government to lift the blockade on the Gaza Strip, and we urge the Israeli
authorities to take the same measure in that direction.
With regard to the humanitarian crisis in the occupied Palestinian territories,
Viet Nam once again emphasizes the dire conditions of the Palestinian people. We
welcome the continued and resumed humanitarian assistance from international
donors. We reiterate our support for United Nations agencies, notably the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, in their
efforts to alleviate the plight of the Palestinian people in the face of the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
Before I conclude, I would like to reiterate our unwavering support for
the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian people and their inalienable rights. We
strongly support the two-State solution, including the establishment of the State of
Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital, peacefully co-existing alongside the
36/37

21-03126

S/2021/218

State of Israel, within secure and internationally recognized borders on the basis of
the pre-1967 lines and a negotiated settlement and in accordance with international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant United Nations resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016).

21-0312637/37
