S/PV.9065

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9065th meeting

Thursday, 16 June 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Xhaçka. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
European Union

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-38548 (E)
*2238548*

S/PV.9065

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

principles, and first and foremost to refraining from the
use of force in international relations.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
European Union
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite His
Excellency Mr. Josep Borrell, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Borrell.
Mr. Borrell: I thank you, Madam President, for
giving me this opportunity to speak and for the great
work that Albania is doing at the United Nations and
as a future member of the European Union (EU). I
very much regret that I am unable to be in the Security
Council in person. I had planned to travel to New
York to attend today’s meeting, but the pandemic is
not over yet. I tested positive in Jordan two weeks ago
and have now tested positive again, so I had to cancel
the trip. Nevertheless, we have an opportunity here to
have our exchange via video link. I thank everyone for
the attention.
We are certainly meeting at a historic juncture.
We are all very aware of that. The United Nations
was created 76 years ago to save humankind from the
scourge of war and build a system of global cooperation,
safeguarding the sovereign equality of all human beings
and protecting the rights of both States and people.
Gradually, the United Nations developed into a whole
system of rules, norms and organizations, dealing with
the full range of international relations. The United
Nations has always been the embodiment of the bigger
idea that we share one planet and need global governance
to live together peacefully and sustainably, and it has
continued to play its role even in the worst moments.
At the height of the Cold War, it kept functioning. The
bedrock of it all was respect for the international rule of
law. It is the bedrock of the United Nations system. All
States, no matter their size or political orientation, have
committed to respecting international law and core
2/24

16/06/2022

The European Union claims, and I believe it is
right, that multilateralism is in its DNA and is intrinsic
to its way of being. We are multilateral by nature. It
is one of our deepest convictions that that we need
agreed rules — not imposed rules — to tame the
passions of States, provide public goods, guarantee
fair competition among economic actors and ensure
that there is global cooperation even among States
with different ideologies. Even when our ideas about
organizing our societies differ, we need to cooperate.
And while it is certainly easier to cooperate with
friends and like-minded people, it is still necessary to
cooperate with countries that are not friends or of like
mind. We need to cooperate in spite of our differences.
We have always been a strong supporter of
the United Nations, investing in it politically and
financially, which is important. We pay our dues in full
and on time. We back major United Nations initiatives
such as the Sustainable Development Goals and the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change, and we work on
human rights. We cooperate closely here in New York
and in the field in a number of areas, starting with
crisis management operations. The European Union
works with the United Nations as its most important
partner. In spite of that, the hard truth is that today the
multilateral system is under pressure as never before.
The major global trends and challenges, for which
we need global cooperation, are becoming worse and
worse. The supply and demand of multilateralism do
not match. There is a strong demand for an approach
to global problems based on multilateralism, but the
supply is not following because the speed and scale
of cooperation are falling short of what is needed to
manage the global commons. The most popular one is
climate change and, more recently, fighting pandemics.
Climate change, vaccines and the digital revolution
are global commons that require an approach based on
multilateralism. In each case that I mentioned, science
and technology are advancing, but diplomacy and
rule-making are not, or are not enough.
That is why we have been witnessing a rise in
power political competition. The competition among
power politics is back. In recent years, we have seen
more distrust, more point-scoring and more vetoes at
the United Nations. That has a price. The price has
been paid in terms of problems not being solved, wars
22-38548

16/06/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.9065

and conflicts that fester and people left at the mercy
of events.

member of the European community, be they big or
small, to help Ukraine by doing the same.

When we met last year (see S/PV.8792), I talked
about a deficit in multilateralism — supply and demand
not matching. That situation has only worsened
since then.

I think that, in the face of such an aggression, no
one can be neutral. What does neutral mean in this
case? Being neutral means being on the side of the
aggression. No one can live safely in a world where the
illegal use of force is normalized or tolerated.

The Charter of the United Nations has entrusted
the Security Council to maintain international peace
and security. To sit on the Security Council is therefore
a great responsibility. The world needs the Council to
be able to take decisions and protect the people whose
lives — we are talking about people’s lives — depend
on it.
I unhappily have to say that Russia’s war against
Ukraine has come on top of such structural problems
and has amplified them. It is now threatening to create
a new one, which is hunger. The war has already left
tens of thousands dead and more than 5 million refugees
and displaced Ukrainians. This is the fastest growing
refugee crisis since the Second World War. The war is
taking place on European soil, in Europe, but this is not
a European war. This is an attack on the foundations
of the United Nations and the Security Council by a
permanent member of the Council, making someone
believe that it is happening in another way in which
they are not directly affected. That is not true. Everyone
is being affected.
In a globalized world, faraway does not exist.
Everything is close to everyone. A war or major security
crisis in one region affects everyone, everywhere. It is
also impossible to compartmentalize, to look for small
pieces and to think that security tensions will not affect
the economy. We are witnessing that. The economy is
being strongly affected by price increases and shortages
in energy and food. It is going to create inflation and
high interest rates. We are facing a big world economic
crisis. We can see that from the shockwaves that the
war against Ukraine is sending around the world. It is
exacerbating previous tensions over food and energy
that existed before the war. But that has now been
exacerbating the situation, and it threatens to disrupt
the global balances and to lose past gains in the fight
against hunger, for example.
At the European Union, we are fully mobilized
to keep Ukraine economically afloat and militarily
able to defend its people, its territorial integrity and
its democracy. I take this opportunity to call on every

Once again, this war is sending ripple effects
throughout the world. Those compound a pre-existing
food crisis, with yields suffering because of climate
change before the war. The World Food Programme
(WFP) estimates that the number of food-insecure
people doubled from 135 million before the pandemic
to 276 million at the start of 2022. Immediately
afterwards, with the start of the war, that number has
now increased to 323 million people. We have therefore
lost all the gains that we had made in the fight against
hunger, and we are going backwards in the fulfilment
of the Sustainable Development Goals.
That is why I must urge all Council members to
help to end the war, restore Ukraine’s sovereignty
and ensure that the global fallout is being contained,
especially, most important, the increasing food crisis
affecting millions of people around the world. Those
people will starve because now more than 20 million
tons of Ukrainian grain cannot reach global markets.
They cannot reach global markets because they are
being blocked. That is the equivalent of 300 massive
ships, which should be docking at ports all over the
world. If they do not transport those millions of tons
of wheat, someone will suffer hunger. But, instead of
contributing to those millions of tons being exported,
Russia is bombing Ukraine’s ports. It is bombing
the storage of wheat. It is bombing infrastructure
and farmland.
Just after President Putin spoke with the
Chairperson of the African Union, who went to see him
in order to express the African concerns about what was
happening, Russian forces bombed Ukraine’s secondlargest grain silo, in Mykolaiv. At the same time, they
claimed that it was the European sanctions that were
preventing Ukrainian and Russian wheat from being
exported. What is happening speaks for itself. It is not
us who are bombing the storages of grain. It is not us
who are blocking the export with our navy.
We fully support the United Nations efforts so that
Ukraine can reopen its ports and resume its deliveries
of grain to the world. That must be a top priority of the

22-385483/24

S/PV.9065

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

16/06/2022

international community. The easiest way to do that is
for Russia to stop its aggression, withdraw its troops
from all Ukrainian territory and, finally, work with the
United Nations and others to reopen the Black Sea. Only
Russia can do that. The military risks to commercial
navigation in the area inevitably drive up the cost of
insurance and transport. That is fuelling the current
crisis by unavoidable price increases, which, once
again, are not the consequences of European sanctions.

with all partners in that regard. We need to work all
together in order to prevent these possible effects.

Until such time comes, we will have to deal with the
global consequences of this war. On that, the Council
has our word. Europe stands by its partners. We support
the United Nations role, especially and including the
Global Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and
Finance. We have already increased our support to some
of the most affected regions. The European Union and
its member States — what we increasingly call Team
Europe — have pledged €1 billion for the Sahel and
Lake Chad regions and over €600 million for the Horn
of Africa. We have also put in place a €225 million food
facility to assist our partners in the Middle East and
North Africa.

I want to make special mention of our operations in
the Mediterranean, off the Somali coasts and in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Let me add a word on sanctions and respond
directly to Russian disinformation. Our sanctions
are not the cause of food shortages. They target
only the Kremlin’s ability to finance the military
aggression — not the conduct of legitimate trade. Our
sanctions do not prohibit the import and transportation
of Russian agricultural goods, food and fertilizers, or
the payment for such Russian exports. Furthermore,
our financial sanctions only apply on EU territory. We
are against secondary sanctions against anyone as a
matter of principle and law. Our measures therefore do
not affect the ability of third countries to purchase from
Russia if they wish.
I have been discussing with Secretary-General
Guterres, Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
Secretary-General Grynspan efforts to unblock
Ukrainian grain exports in the Black Sea, and we are
scanning for preventable difficulties related to the
Russian export of food and fertilizers.
In support of United Nations efforts, we are ready
to look into possible misinterpretation of our sanctions
that could lead to overcompliance or market avoidance
by some financial and trade actors. We are ready to
further clarify to economic operators what is and what
is not targeted in our sanctions. We are ready to work
4/24

Even as war has returned to Europe, it has not
stopped anywhere else. That is why the European
Union continues to help prevent and solve conflicts
and crises around the world. We have 4,000 men and
women deployed in 18 crisis-management missions and
operations on three continents, always working in close
cooperation with the United Nations.

In the Mediterranean, the European Union Naval
Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI plays a unique
role in implementing the United Nations arms embargo
and preventing illicit petrol exports from Libya. The
European Union Naval Force Operation Atalanta has
been successfully helping counter piracy off the coasts
of Somalia since 2008, and it is now also addressing
other illicit trafficking, including drugs. Between
March and April alone, it intercepted 10 tons of
narcotics. And the European Union-led peacekeeping
force Operation Althea supports the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in maintaining a safe and
secure environment in a very difficult and worsening
political context.
Beyond crisis management and peace operations,
the European Union and its member States make large
contributions to the work of the United Nations on
mediation, peacebuilding and transitions. For example,
for the period 2021 to 2022, we tripled our contribution
to the Peacebuilding Fund.
In that context, I want to underline the strategic
nature of cooperation on peace and security between the
EU and the African Union. We work together to offer
tailor-made forms of support for training, capacitybuilding and equipment because we want to put into
practice our maxim of producing “African solutions to
African problems”.
Moving to the rest of the world, let me make some
quick comments on specific regional crises where the
EU has a deep stake and where we work closely with
the United Nations:
In Syria, 11 years into the crisis, we cannot forget
the Syrian people. We continue to support Special
Envoy Pedersen. We need a solution so that crossborder humanitarian aid can continue to flow. That is
22-38548

16/06/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

absolutely necessary because millions of people depend
on it. At the most recent Brussels Conference on Syria,
we pledged €4.8 billion for 2022, which represents
75 per cent of the total sum pledged to support the
Syrian people.
In Iran, I am the Coordinator because the United
Nations nominated my predecessor to assume that
role, and I inherited that job. I am in charge of
coordinating communication between the parties to
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action in order to try
arrange a return to the fulfilment of the deal and to
ensure its implementation. I have to say that the basic
elements and terms to do this are known and on the
table. However, the time for decision is now. We cannot
continue endlessly discussing collateral issues that are
not at the core of the nuclear deal.

S/PV.9065

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of Albania.
I would like to thank High Representative Borrell
Fontelles for his in-depth perspective of the cooperation
between the United Nations and European Union.
His participation in this meeting, even via videoteleconference, is a testament to the importance of
this issue.
Cooperation between United Nations and the
European Union (EU), based on Charter of the United
Nations, has evolved significantly throughout the years.
It has strengthened and expanded. That cooperation
reinforces rules-based multilateralism, at the core of
which is the observance of international law and the
protection and promotion of human rights.

In the Sahel, the trends are very worrisome. We
will stay engaged in the region, with our operations,
working with the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. But we
do need commitments from local partners, both on
the security situation on the ground and the state of
democratic governance, because we are also there to
provide support in that endeavour.

We applaud the close cooperation between the
United Nations and the European Union in their joined
efforts and engagement in different ways, especially
in the implementation of peacekeeping missions
and peacebuilding processes and mandates. This
partnership is essential to addressing the growing scale
and complexity of challenges to international peace
and security.

I now move to Afghanistan, which one year ago was
in the headlines of all newspapers around the world, and
we only had eyes for what was happening there. Today
Afghanistan is somewhat forgotten, but not by us. We
will continue to support the Afghan people. I welcome
the new mandate, but it is clear that the human rights
situation is getting worse, especially for women and girls.
The Taliban has not fulfilled any of its commitments.
And now we see the miserable situation of girls being
prevented from going to school — their basic right to
education. We need sustained international pressure on
the Taliban to reopen education in full to all girls and
women. It is awful that we have to continue discussing
these basic rights, but we are doing so because they are
not being respected.

The previous time we met on this issue, Mr. Borrell
Fontelles rightly pointed out in this Chamber that

There are many other crises I could mention, such
as Myanmar, Yemen, Venezuela and others but, in the
interest of time, let me stop here. I am sure that we
will have an interesting debate. I wanted to be frank
and honest and put on the table the issues that really
deserve the Council’s attention. I look forward to any
and all comments.
The President: I thank Mr. Borrell Fontelles for
his briefing.

“... we need the Security Council to provide the
necessary decisions ... The price of inaction is going
to be paid in conflicts not solved, humanitarian aid
not delivered and in lives lost.” (S/PV.8792, p. 3)
Unfortunately, I have to say, this remains a fact and an
ever-more acute necessity nowadays.
This year, European security has been threatened
and the international rules-based order has been
seriously challenged by Russia’s military aggression
against a neighbouring country, Ukraine. The
unprovoked and unjustifiable war has entered its fourth
month, and not only are its consequences being felt in
Ukraine — with thousands of lives lost, the large-scale
destruction of civilian infrastructure and millions of
refugees — but it has also seriously affected world trade
and induced a sharp rise in food insecurity worldwide.
While the aggression continues to endanger the
lives and physical security of Europeans, it also poses
a challenge to the values of freedom, democracy and
justice that bind Europeans together. Those 6.8 million
refugees who have crossed international borders are not

22-385485/24

S/PV.9065

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

tourists looking for places to discover — they are mostly
women and children who have been brutally uprooted
from their homes seeking to find shelter. We commend
the generosity and hospitality of those neighbouring
and other countries that have opened their homes and
hearts to Ukrainians fleeing a war they did not choose.
My country, Albania, is doing its modest part to host
and support them.
That unprecedented wave of refugees, unseen on
the continent since the Second World War, has seriously
challenged Europe, but it has not affected its unity. On
the contrary, it has strengthened its long-established
values and principles through the promotion and
protection of human rights and solidarity.
The war in Ukraine has severed key supply chains
and added surging costs to moving products around the
world. As always, such costs are passed on to consumers.
Keeping trade open for food, fuel and fertilizer is crucial
to containing the increase in food insecurity globally.
The blockade of Ukrainian ports must end immediately
in order to ensure that food produced in Ukraine can
flow freely to the rest of the world. We commend the
efforts under way by the United Nations and Türkiye to
find the best practical solutions, with critical impacts
for millions worldwide.
Let us not forget that increased insecurity will
always result in increased spending on defence and
armaments, which in turn could lead to decreased
investments in other areas, such as innovation,
education and public services. Wars that have defined
our past cannot and should not dictate our future.
The aggression against Ukraine stands at centre
stage of our joint efforts for peace and security, but
it must not make us lose sight of other conflicts and
security risks in other parts of the globe. Conflicts
always have a local, a regional and a global dimension,
and the best solutions can be found when those three
dimensions align. To that end, we need a strong and
united multilateral framework.
We strongly believe that the crisis the world is
going through demands more multilateralism and more
concerted and united actions, including primarily
in the Security Council, the General Assembly and
throughout the United Nations system. The European
Union is a central actor in global political, development
and humanitarian issues. It is the largest financial
contributor to the United Nations — not only to its
regular budget but also in terms of funding for official
6/24

16/06/2022

development assistance and peacekeeping missions. It
therefore exerts its influence not only in its immediate
neighbourhood but everywhere, projecting its actions
related to humanitarian, development and conflict
resolution efforts worldwide.
That is particularly important for the six States of
the Western Balkans. They are all involved, in various
stages, in what we commonly call the perspective
avenue of Euro-Atlantic cooperation. We have made
that choice knowing that, by following that path, we
are investing in a future that will bring us enhanced
development, increased security and stronger
institutions accountable to their citizens. That is the
value of EU enlargement, which the events in Europe
have again brought rightfully and for good reason into
the spotlight.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
what we share in Tirana and Brussels and to thank the
European Commission for its continued close and everstrengthening cooperation, including through a realistic,
objective and time-bound approach and support for EU
enlargement. It has always been a clear two-way street,
in which the parties deliver in conformity with their
commitments. We are happy to be able to say that we
have done our part and are ready for the next chapter in
a process that should advance thanks to its invaluable
political weight and that constitutes an irreversible
investment in stability, security and a common, safe
and secure future. I thank High Representative Borrell
Fontelles for his continued clarity in that respect.
Equally, we expect the European Union to speed
up its efforts in facilitating dialogue between Serbia
and Kosovo, which should lead to mutual recognition.
It is time to look for concrete results and lasting
deliverables. The sooner that chapter is definitively
closed by an agreement, the better it will be for
everyone, irrespective of their ethnic or ideological
identity. The European Union has long proved its peace
dividends for its 550 million citizens. We cherish that
and would like it to be extended to the Western Balkans
as well.
Let me conclude by reiterating our view that, just
like those of us in Europe, the United Nations — and
through it the world — needs more of the EU and its
strong multifaceted action in all important areas.
That can be achieved only through increased and
strengthened cooperation between the United Nations
and the EU, which Albania fully supports.
22-38548

16/06/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles. His presence is
proof of the European Union’s unwavering commitment
to the United Nations.
The European Union and its member States are
mobilizing alongside the United Nations with common
objectives. The States members of the European Union
collectively represent the second-largest contributor to
the peacekeeping budget and together deploy nearly
5,300 military and civilian personnel in peacekeeping
operations. Since 1948, they have paid a heavy price,
with 683 European personnel killed in those operations.
The European Union presence is widespread, as the
High Representative reminded us. In the Sahel, it uses
all the tools at its disposal to support its partners in
the region.
Off the coast of Libya, it deploys the European
Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI,
while the European Union Border Assistance Mission
in Libya is a support point for the Libyan authorities.
In Somalia, together with the United Nations,
the European Union supports the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia and Somali forces in the
security transition.
In the Middle East, the European Union has
provided a humanitarian and civilian presence in Gaza
since 2005.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, it has made an essential
contribution to the security and stability of the region
within the framework of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force Operation Althea since 2004.
Finally, in Mozambique, it has supported the
Mozambique Defence Armed Forces in their fight
against terrorist groups since December 2021.
The European Union is a key partner of the United
Nations in responding to the world’s most serious crises.
Since the beginning of the Russian aggression, the
European Union has mobilized more than €4.6 billion to
help Ukrainians. That commitment is comprehensive,

S/PV.9065

covering budgetary and humanitarian needs as well as
the fight against impunity. The restrictive measures
adopted by the European Union have only one
objective — to bring Russia back into compliance with
the Charter of the United Nations.
The European Union is a tireless defender of the
values it shares with the United Nations. It has therefore
put in place restrictive measures targeted at those
responsible for serious violations of human rights law
and humanitarian law. That specific regime, which was
created in 2020, does not in any way hinder the delivery
of humanitarian aid, of which the European Union and
its member States are one of the leading suppliers.
In Myanmar, in the face of the repeated human
rights violations committed by the junta, the European
Union is ensuring that those responsible enjoy neither
impunity nor support.
In Afghanistan, the European Union is participating
in efforts to alleviate the immediate suffering of the
population, but no reconstruction aid can be provided
as long as the Taliban continues its policies of
rights violations.
The same is true in Syria, where the European
Union will not fund reconstruction in the absence of a
credible political process.
Finally, the European Union defends a crosscutting, universal and demanding vision of human
rights, which has led us to suspend training for certain
armed forces, as is currently the case in Mali.
The fight against terrorism, in the European view,
cannot be used as a pretext to waive the application of
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. That will determine their effectiveness in
the long term.
The French presidency of the Council of the
European Union has served as an opportunity to
translate the European Union’s commitment to the
values and actions of the United Nations into three
priorities: the promotion of the rights of women and
girls, in particular by advocating for the universal
ratification of the Istanbul Convention; support for
pluralism and freedom of the media; and the fight
against disinformation, while defending a human
rights-based approach in the digital environment.
The European Union is not only the largest
contributor to the United Nations budget, but it is also

22-385487/24

S/PV.9065

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

an unwavering ally. It makes its singular voice heard
within the multilateral system in cooperation with
other relevant regional organizations, in particular the
African Union, in order to strengthen the system itself.
It remains steadfast in its belief in the importance of a
strong multilateralism, which is the only way to ensure
security and peace.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
you, Madam President, for organizing this important
and timely briefing on cooperation with the European
Union (EU).
The United States deeply appreciates the European
Union’s contributions across the globe, which the
High Representative just enumerated, including its
cooperation with the United Nations and especially in
concert with the Security Council. For example, as we
know, the EU has played a valuable role in supporting
Somalia through its support, first to the African Union
Mission in Somalia and now to the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia. We appreciate the fact
that the EU security engagement across Africa is so
significant, with 11 of its current 18 missions deployed
in or off the coast of Africa. Its coordination with allies
in the United Nations, Mali and the Central African
Republic creates important mechanisms for promoting
stability and achieving our shared objectives.
Similarly, the United States welcomed the recent
adoption of resolution 2635 (2022) and its renewal of
the vessel inspection authority that supports the United
Nations arms embargo on Libya, and we applaud the
European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation
IRINI for its use of that authority. Operation IRINI
provides a deterrent to would-be arms smugglers, and it
helps the Panel of Experts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
as well as others, gather critical information. And I
want to emphasize that to its credit, the EU has clearly
demonstrated its support for the values enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, with its actions to uphold
the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity
after Russia’s unjustified, unprovoked and illegal war
on Ukraine.
As the High Representative said, Russia’s
actions are especially spiking global food insecurity.
International sanctions do not target agricultural
exports, despite Russia’s efforts to have people around
the world, including members of the Council, believe
otherwise. While Russia spreads disinformation, as we
8/24

16/06/2022

have heard, the EU is spending more than $1 billion
in areas affected by food insecurity. We welcome
the EU’s efforts and are pleased that today, even as I
speak, United States Secretary of Agriculture Vilsack
is in New York meeting with delegations to pursue the
call for action that came out of Secretary Blinken’s
ministerial-level meeting on food insecurity last month
(see S/PV.9036), an important step that demonstrates
the commitment of the United States and our friends
to addressing the crisis in food insecurity that Russia’s
invasion has caused.
Let me also say that we are heartened by how
Ukraine’s EU neighbours have opened their borders to
refugees of all nationalities during the largest refugee
crisis in Europe since the Second World War, and how
the EU’s Temporary Protection Directive has ensured
that all those fleeing into the EU receive its social and
protection benefits. I also want to say how strongly
my delegation agrees with the High Representative’s
comments about statements on both sides calling for an
end to the conflict in Ukraine. Statements claiming that
all sides bear a responsibility to end the fighting may be
diplomatically clever, but they are morally indefensible.
History will judge.
Finally, let me thank the EU for its continued
commitment to the European Union Force Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Operation Althea. It is especially critical
given the heightened political tensions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the continued efforts to undermine the
Dayton Agreement that we are seeing there. Operation
Althea is an essential factor for stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the surrounding region. Regional
organizations are an essential partner of the Security
Council in its efforts to promote international peace
and security, and that especially includes partners such
as the EU.
Let me conclude by saying that the United States
affirms unequivocally the EU’s role as a crucial partner
for the United States, the United Nations and especially
the Security Council in the maintenance of peace and
security around the world.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome Mr. Josep Borrell, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, to today’s meeting.
The international landscape is currently
experiencing extraordinarily profound and complex
changes, and factors contributing to instability and
22-38548

16/06/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.9065

uncertainty are increasing. China has always supported
the United Nations in developing its partnership with the
European Union (EU) with a view to working together
to overcome outstanding challenges in traditional
and non-traditional security areas. It is extremely
important to ensure that this cooperation adheres to the
following principles.

autonomy, actively play its role as a mediator and
encourage the parties concerned to engage in dialogue
in order to achieve a ceasefire and a cessation of
hostilities as soon as possible. China supports the EU in
strengthening its cooperation with various international
institutions and taking effective measures to deal with
the urgent humanitarian needs resulting from crisis.

First, with regard to practicing genuine
multilateralism, as an active advocate of multilateralism
the EU should take the lead in upholding the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
complying with international law and the universally
recognized fundamental norms of international
relations, earnestly respecting the sovereignty and
political independence of all countries and committing
to the principle of non-interference in the internal
affairs of other countries. We expect the EU to play
an active and constructive role in international affairs
by rejecting any revival of the idea of confrontation
between camps or blocs, and by encouraging all
countries to strengthen unity and achieve shared
progress under the banner of multilateralism.

As the situations in Kosovo and Bosnia and
Herzegovina continue to present complex challenges, we
welcome the EU’s efforts to maintain regional security
and stability and promote a negotiated settlement of the
differences among the parties concerned, in accordance
with the framework established by the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Secondly, with regard to the concept of common
security, humankind constitutes an indivisible security
community in which the security concerns of all
countries are equally important and interdependent.
We expect the EU to respect and take seriously the
legitimate security concerns of every country and make
greater efforts to promote the peaceful settlement of
disputes and build a balanced, effective and sustainable
global and regional security mechanism.
Thirdly, with regard to advancing efforts around
the three pillars of the United Nations in a balanced
manner, we are currently seeing global food, energy
and financial security risks continuing to increase,
while developing countries are facing unprecedented
difficulties. We expect the EU to pay greater attention
to the voices of developing countries and to maintain
and increase its own and its members’ assistance
to developing countries, along with the scale of its
contributions to United Nations humanitarian and
development agencies. It should take on the appropriate
moral responsibility for helping developing countries
overcome their challenges.
The prolongation and expansion of the conflict in
Ukraine can only result in greater security risks and
spillover effects. China hopes that as an important
stakeholder, the EU will strengthen its strategic

The resumption of negotiations on the
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action is at a critical moment. It is hoped that the EU
will continue to play its unique role in encouraging the
party concerned to make decisive political decisions
and positively respond to Iran’s legitimate concerns so
as to facilitate a smooth conclusion of the negotiations
and put the Plan of Action back on the right track as
soon as possible.
The stalled Middle East peace process is truly
worrying. We hope that the EU will position itself
fairly and encourage Israel to halt its illegal settlement
activities, lift the blockade on the Gaza Strip and abide
by its obligations under international humanitarian law.
We also expect the EU to play a greater role in mitigating
Palestine’s dire financial situation, strengthening
the Palestinian Authority’s capacity-building and
promoting the implementation of a two-State solution.
Africa is currently facing a growing number of
challenges to its peace and development. As a close
neighbour across the sea, the EU is expected to
continue to support the construction of the African
Union’s collective security mechanisms and provide
predictable and sustainable financial support for the
EU’s autonomous peacekeeping operations in African
countries in the Sahel and Somalia. It is imperative
to provide Africa with greater support and assistance
in such areas as debt relief, climate change response,
vaccine production and the management of refugees
and immigrants, as well as to enhance Africa’s efforts
to cope with risks and challenges.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate that China works
assiduously to develop its relations with the EU.
We attach importance to the EU’s important role in

22-385489/24

S/PV.9065

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

regional and global affairs. We consider the EU to be
an important force in multipolarity. China supports
the EU in making a greater contribution to addressing
various global challenges and encourages it to inject
more stability into the turbulent and changing world.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): At the outset, I would
like to thank the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy for his
comprehensive briefing to the Council.
We note with appreciation the deepening
cooperation between the European Union (EU) and the
United Nations in support of multilateralism and the
rules-based order, which is rooted in the recognition
that it takes more than one individual country to resolve
the challenges of the current era. We also welcome the
efforts being made to implement the common desire for
enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and
regional arrangements, as elaborated in Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations.
As Ghana has consistently reiterated, regional
organizations have a critical role to play in supporting
the primary responsibility of the Security Council
for maintaining international peace and security.
We therefore welcome today’s dialogue between the
United Nations and the European Union and support
all measures that could strengthen the relationship
and enhance coordination between our two bodies,
in furtherance of the common aspiration for peace
and security.
As a member State of the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States, we are
uniquely aware of the necessity for the complementarity
of regional and subregional arrangements in addressing
conflict situations, as well as in responding to emerging
transnational threats, such as terrorism and violent
extremism, maritime piracy and organized crime,
including drug trafficking, the illicit flow of small
arms and light weapons and money-laundering.
The roles that regional organizations play in
managing the multiplicity of crises in various parts of
the world can no longer therefore be marginalized and
must be deeply anchored in the work of the Council
and centred in the strategy and approach of the United
Nations with respect to how we stabilize our world. It is
in that context that we welcome the European Union’s
contribution to the Council’s work on promoting
international peace and security.
10/24

16/06/2022

We note in particular the supportive role that the
EU continues to play in the prevention of conflicts,
their resolution and the recovery of societies after
conflict has occurred. In that regard, we welcome
the EU’s new consensus on the role of development
cooperation, which has strengthened the nexus between
security, development and humanitarian aid in a way
that we hope will have a transformative impact on
fragile situations, such as those in the Horn of Africa
and the Sahel.
In proactively responding to conflict, it is necessary
that we address its root causes and underlying drivers.
In the area of peacekeeping, we are encouraged by the
strengthening of the partnership between the EU and
the United Nations. We note that. in addition to the 18
Common Security and Defence Policy missions and
operations currently run by the EU globally, its member
States continue to be, collectively, one of the major
contributors to the United Nations peacekeeping budget
and a significant contributor of uniformed personnel.
As the African Union focuses its policy interests on
activating its peace and security architecture towards a
robust and offensive response against the asymmetrical
threats that it currently confronts, it is my delegation’s
hope that we will find in the European Union a
partner not only for the establishment of mandates by
the Council but also, beyond the bilateral financing
assistance provided under the African Peace Facility of
the European Union, for the provision of support for the
sustainable and predictable funding of such operations
from the assessed contributions of the United Nations.
Regrettably, the Sahel has become a breeding
ground for terrorists and violent extremists, whose
networks extend to other parts of Africa and beyond. We
therefore welcome renewed commitment in support of
counter-terrorism efforts in the region and look forward
to the EU’s active engagement in the outcomes of the
joint strategic assessment of security and governance in
the Sahel. We also commend the EU for the funding it
provided to the African Union Mission in Somalia and
look forward to the continued support required for the
African Union Transition Mission in Somalia during
the period of the Somalia transition plan.
Indeed, the presence of the EU in Africa has
been marked by its multisectoral cooperation with
Governments and non-governmental agencies in
support of development and security objectives. We
22-38548

16/06/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.9065

appreciate the alignment of such actions with the values
and objectives of the United Nations.

The world’s resilience to future pandemics is necessary
to avoid instability in the global order.

We also acknowledge the many arrangements on
peace and security cooperation between the EU and
the United Nations, including in countries such as
Syria, Yemen and Myanmar, in which EU-supported
humanitarian operations and funding continue to be
critical for saving the lives and livelihoods of many.

We count on the full participation of all Member
States in the ongoing consultations to adopt a draft
resolution that calls for the convening of a one-day
high-level meeting of the General Assembly to consider
the adoption of a political declaration to help mobilize
political will for pandemic prevention, preparedness
and response.

We also note that the relative stability that has been
established in the Balkan region of Europe is partly
owing to the active engagement of the EU.
We further encourage the enhancement of the
partnership between the European Union and the
Middle East Quartet in pursuit of a negotiated solution
to the now burning question of Palestine, on the basis
of a two-State solution and in line with the decisions of
the Council.
Europe itself is in a delicate and unprecedented
state of instability following the Russian Federation’s
invasion of Ukraine. As has been said by many, the war
has created Europe’s worst security and humanitarian
crisis since the end of the Second World War. We
support the efforts to contain the security breach of
the internationally recognized borders of Ukraine and
encourage the EU to consider all possible means to
help end the war through a negotiated settlement of the
key interests of the parties, on the basis of established
and clear principles of international law, including the
Charter of the Organization.
The consequences of the war for the people of
Ukraine have been immense and needlessly painful.
However, the ramifications of the war for the rest of
the world have also been severe, as seen in new levels
of food insecurity for millions, the rising cost of
living across the world and widespread sociopolitical
instability in several countries. The war in Ukraine
must therefore stop. We urge further support for the EU
in exploring solutions to the disruptions of the supply
chains for food, energy and global financing that have
resulted from the current crisis.
In furtherance of multilateralism and international
cooperation, we recognize the EU’s contribution to
the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility and
encourage further efforts to reduce the developing
world’s reliance on vaccine imports and donations
through support for deconcentrated manufacturing and
storage capacities across various parts of the world.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the crucial
importance of regional and subregional bodies in
realizing the objectives of the United Nations and
the sustenance of the multilateral order. We therefore
encourage further engagement between the United
Nations and the EU in addressing current and future
peace and security challenges across our world,
including in Europe.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Josep Borrell Fontelles, for his briefing. I also
thank the delegation of Albania for convening today’s
timely and relevant meeting, as it enables us to review
and put into perspective the cooperation between the
United Nations and the European Union.
The threat to the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine has shaken the European geopolitical order,
which had prioritized defence and security issues
and created strong cohesion in the European Union.
However, the military escalations have not created the
conditions for reducing tensions or agreeing an eventual
ceasefire. We trust that, in the best European diplomatic
tradition, all the dialogue and mediation tools will be
used to move towards a negotiated solution.
Mexico has been unequivocal in its defence of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law
since the beginning of the conflict in a consistent and
cross-cutting manner. Those are principles that we
clearly share not only with the European Union, but
also with all States Members of the United Nations
because we have all subscribed to them, and they must
therefore be respected without exception.
It is also essential to jointly mitigate the multiple
consequences of the conflict in Ukraine because it is
not only Europe suffering them. They affect us all,
albeit not all equally.

22-3854811/24

S/PV.9065

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

As has been reiterated, the global increase in food
prices and the resulting food insecurity particularly
affect developing countries, which do not have the
necessary resources to cope with that situation.
Nineteen of the 69 economies that have been identified
as being at greater food risk due to the crisis are in
Latin America and the Caribbean.
We hope that routes for the exit of grain can soon
be agreed with the urgency that the matter deserves and
that, in that regard, when the time is right, the Council
can express itself with a united voice.
At a time when the European continent is undergoing
a transformation of the security order, the European
Union also finds itself in an ongoing adaptation
process. Mexico welcomes the fact that the recent
Strategic Compass action plan includes, as a priority,
the strengthening of its strategic partnership with
the United Nations through more structured political
dialogues and greater cooperation on joint operations.
We will closely follow progress on the
implementation of the new priorities for cooperation in
peace operations and crisis management for the 2022 to
2024 period. We acknowledge and support the priority
that the European Union gives to the women and peace
and security agenda and which we have resolutely
promoted from within the Council through the informal
group that we co-chair with Ireland.
Other European priorities, such as children in
armed conflict and combating the illicit proliferation
and diversion of small arms and light weapons, are also
priorities for my country.
As High Representative Borrell Fontelles pointed
out, there are clear convergences between the Security
Council and the European Union. However, this is
a time to further invest in prevention and support
regional peacebuilding efforts, as we saw yesterday
(see S/PV.9064) in this same Chamber. Putting those
priorities into practice in the many military and
civilian missions where we work together is essential
to preserving peace and stability, be it in the Balkans
through the European Union military operation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina or in Africa in regions as
complex as Mali and the Central African Republic.
We firmly believe that early-warning, mediation and
prevention mechanisms should be a priority.
Mexico believes that cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations also
12/24

16/06/2022

benefits from synergies between partners and regional
organizations. We are closely following the work of
the European Union and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, particularly in conflict
prevention and conflict management in the Balkans
and Central Asia. We also look forward to continued
close and coordinated work in the case of Afghanistan
to redouble the efforts of the United Nations and the
European Union given the serious human rights crisis
being experienced in that country.
We take note of the High Representative’s recent trip
to strengthen ties with my region through his meetings
with the Central American Integration System and the
Caribbean Community, and we hope that cooperation
between the European Union and the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States will be
strengthened through the many existing mechanisms.
However, the times call for orderly leadership to
reconfigure the multilateral order. We have established
mechanisms and tools to exchange views and to agree
or disagree in pursuit of solutions. But those are not
enough. We need greater will and more diplomacy. The
challenge for Europe and for all of us will be to rebuild
as soon as possible. But that also means re-establishing
dialogue in all multilateral forums, seeking common
causes, of which there are many, fostering cooperation on
the ground and, of course, refusing exclusion. Exclusion
in any forum only undermines multilateralism. Mexico
will continue to champion the peaceful settlement of
disputes in all regions of the world.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to
sincerely thank High Representative Borrell Fontelles
for his very welcome briefing this morning. Like the
High Representative, I deeply regret that he could not
be with us in the Chamber today, but we are delighted
to see him virtually on the screen.
Ireland is a proud member State of the European
Union (EU). We promote and defend European
principles and values every day, including at the
Security Council table. The transformative power of
European Union membership has helped to shape the
country that my country, Ireland, is today, and we are
very proud of that.
We believe that the EU’s own firm belief in
multilateralism and its strong, active commitment to
the United Nations are born of its own lived experience
of conflict. They underline our collective rejection of
the belief that military might makes right. That is, after
22-38548

16/06/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

all, the very reason that respect for the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations is written into the Treaty
on European Union.
As we just heard from the High Representative,
the United Nations and the EU work as natural
partners around the world to eradicate poverty, protect
human rights and preserve peace. The EU’s strategic
relationship with the United Nations is, quite literally, a
cornerstone of the EU’s policies and actions in support
of international peace and security. From Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the Middle East and throughout Africa,
EU missions are deployed alongside United Nations
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
Some of those missions are recognized as playing
a central role in responding to threats to peace, such as
combating piracy off the coast of Somalia or supporting
security sector reform, as in the Central African
Republic, where we work to complement the work
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
Irish experts are proud to work in EU missions
in Europe, the Caucasus, the Middle East and Africa,
while members of the Irish Defence Forces participate
in missions and operations in Mali, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Mediterranean.
Together with our EU partners, we have supported
mediation and peace processes in such diverse contexts
as Colombia, Georgia and Mozambique.
As EU Special Envoy for the Peace Process in
Colombia, our former Deputy Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister, Eamon Gilmore, has represented the
EU while bringing the lessons learned in our own peace
process to the table, sharing experiences and sharing
ideas on pathways to peace.
The EU has enhanced its capacity to prevent
conflict, preserve peace and strengthen international
stability and security, in support of the United Nations.
The EU works closely with many partners around this
table in support of international peace and security as a
member of the Middle East Quartet, a facilitator of the
Belgrade-Pristina dialogue and as Coordinator of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
I believe that the Council should continue to
encourage, build and welcome this cooperation and
use the EU’s support for the United Nations where
appropriate. We should all be ambitious in taking the
United Nations-EU strategic partnership on peace

S/PV.9065

operations and crisis management to the next level. We
surely need it.
A key priority for the United Nations-EU
relationship should continue to be on United Nations
mission and operation transitions so as to ensure
that any reconfiguration takes place in a responsible,
planned and gender-responsive manner — one that
supports peacebuilding objectives and is in line with
the security situation and needs on the ground. We
heard from the High Representative earlier about the
European Union’s support for the Peacebuilding Fund
in this broader context.
We also need to ensure that we are addressing
climate-related security risks where relevant in our
prevention and peacebuilding work across the EU and
the United Nations. Ireland puts a real premium on that
as an objective and sees it as urgent.
As the facts tell, the EU is the world’s leading
humanitarian and development assistance donor. As
such, the EU is a key partner to the United Nations
in crisis management. Today the EU and the United
Nations have truly a crucial role to play in ensuring that
the multilateral system can deliver a rapid and effective
response to the deepening global food security crisis
driven by Russia’s senseless war in Ukraine.
At this moment, there are around 20 million tons
of grain trapped in Ukraine. That grain is trapped by
the transformation of Ukraine and the Black Sea into a
war zone by Russia. It is important to stress here that
EU sanctions do not affect the trading of food between
Russia and third countries. We are working closely
with the United Nations Global Crisis Response Group
to ensure that our response supports that of the United
Nations. Through Solidarity Lanes, we are making
efforts to get as much Ukrainian grain to global markets
as possible and are supporting Ukrainian farmers to
sow and produce in the midst of this war.
In our global food security response, the EU and
its member States are making an overall contribution of
more than €5 billion in humanitarian and development
assistance for global food security, up until 2024. We
want to assist wherever we are needed, across the
globe. The European Union will continue its close
cooperation with the United Nations and will continue
to play our role as a responsive, responsible and reliable
global actor.

22-3854813/24

S/PV.9065

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Ms. Heimerback (Norway): The situation in
Europe has dramatically changed since the Security
Council met to discuss this issue a year ago (see
S/PV.8792). By waging war against its peaceful
neighbour, Ukraine, the Russian Federation has violated
the fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations — the principles that underpin the security
and serenity of every State. The war has caused death,
suffering, displacement and the largest humanitarian
crisis in Europe since the Second World War, and it
threatens global food security.
We therefore commend the European Union (EU)
for taking the lead in Europe’s concerted response to
the war and for defending fundamental global principles
and international law.
The EU has played a historically important role
in transforming Europe from a continent of war to a
continent of peace. Now, when peace is again broken in
Europe, we need a strong EU working together with the
United Nations and the Security Council to contribute
to advancing the causes of peace and prosperity.
Today’s meeting is therefore timely, and I warmly
thank High Representative Borrell Fontelles for his
briefing today.
Norway and the EU share a common vision
of a rules-based international order and a free and
democratic Europe. The EU has our full support as
a steadfast promoter of multilateralism and as an
implementer of Council-mandated tasks such as the
European Union-led peacekeeping force Operation
Althea, whose contribution to maintaining peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina is vital. Norway
will work towards the renewal of its mandate.

16/06/2022

The EU and the United Nations must continue to
join forces to respond to global challenges. Engagement
in peace and reconciliation efforts is a key part of
Norwegian foreign policy, a field in which we work
closely with the EU and the United Nations. In addition,
we support the EU’s leading role in the fight against
climate change and in addressing the security risks that
arise from it. Women’s full inclusion must also be a
priority in all our efforts, and we commend the EU’s
action plan on women and peace and security for its
focus on gender equality, human rights and peace and
security within and beyond its borders.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
will continue to be part of our common European
agenda. We will work together with the EU and
partners to mobilize resources for the recovery from
the pandemic globally.
Russia’s war on Ukraine has consequences
way beyond European soil. It hits the most
vulnerable — women and girls and those already strained
from instability, climate change and COVID-19 — the
hardest. Rapid global action is needed to increase food
security and to prevent the threat of a worldwide wave
of hunger.
Let me end, therefore, with our assurance that
Norway will continue to advocate these shared priorities
in cooperation with the EU, both inside and outside the
Security Council.

In Africa, the EU plays a key role in peacebuilding,
peacekeeping, conflict prevention, security assistance
and development. Norway recognizes the strong EU
commitment to the Peace and Security Architecture
of the African continent, including the African Union
Mission in Somalia, the African Union Transition
Mission in Somalia and the Group of Five for the Sahel.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Every year, the Security Council discusses
issues relating to cooperation between the United
Nations and the European Union (EU). We have always
welcomed that, being mindful of all the efforts that
the EU undertakes as a critical regional stakeholder.
However, with every passing year, serious questions
have accumulated about Brussels’ global policy,
which increasingly has been departing from the ideals
envisaged by its founding fathers for the post-war
European project.

The upcoming United Nations-African Union (AU)
joint strategic assessment on security in the Sahel
should be used to discuss the mutually reinforcing
contributions of the United Nations, EU, AU and
the Economic Community of West African States.
Combining our efforts in innovative ways is necessary
to meet the complex security challenges in the region.

Unfortunately, those trends have only worsened.
As for the EU-Russia relations, we used to say that they
were at their lowest point. But now, thanks to Brussels’
efforts, they have completely collapsed. We find this
greatly and sincerely regrettable. This was not our
choice; we are simply drawing obvious conclusions
from the actions of the EU.

14/24

22-38548

16/06/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Initially, the European project was based on noble
and attractive ideas — the peaceful merger of economic
and humanitarian potentials of participating States; the
benefits of a common market; the freedom of movement
of goods, people, capital and knowledge; the creation
of a shared European identity on the basis of shared
values. All of that created a picture of an ideal shared
European future.
It is completely natural that this picture attracted
many, and Russia was no exception. In 1994, we
signed a partnership and cooperation agreement with
the EU, which we sought to implement with the purest
of intentions. We took our partnership to have the
word’s primary meaning — that is, mutually beneficial
cooperation on an equal footing that would take into
account the interests of both parties. In 1999, Romano
Prodi, then President of the European Commission,
signed the Charter for European Security, which
enshrined the principle of indivisible security and the
obligation to refrain from strengthening one’s own
security at others’ expense. In 2005, the road maps
for four common spaces were formulated, establishing
that the cooperation between Russia and the EU
would contribute to the creation of a greater Europe
without dividing lines, promote international peace
and security and create conditions conducive to the
security and prosperity of both the Russian Federation
and the European Union. It was hoped that this would
forever put an end to geopolitical competition in the
European space and enable us to jointly forge a secure
and economically prosperous community.
Unfortunately, however, it soon became clear
that the ideals of the EU’s founding fathers had been
consigned to the past and that Brussels — not without
encouragement from across the pond — had formed
new goals. The European Union’s view of cooperation
with Russia was becoming one-sided, reduced to those
areas that it considered in its own interests, while it
simultaneously set a strategic course to push the Russian
Federation out of Europe. Despite our warnings, the
European Union went down the slippery NATO slope
and began to absorb the geopolitical space around it,
disrupting the balance of power, pitting East against
West and adopting a course to transform itself from an
economic bloc into a military and political one. The
old logic of accession to the EU, which made economic
and political maturity a prerequisite for membership,
was abandoned.

S/PV.9065

For geopolitical reasons, some countries were
accorded advance acceptance into the European Union
despite clearly failing to meet the Copenhagen criteria.
They brought an anti-Russian agenda with them into
the EU and have been actively advancing it based on
Washington’s instructions, often to the detriment of
the collective interests of EU member States. A clear
example of that was the Polish leadership’s recent call
for building a defence and peace and security system
in Europe that would be directed against Russia. We
know that there are voices of reason in the European
Union that understand the significance and potential
of relations with Russia, but today they are going
almost unheard.
Having expanded eastward in the mid-2000s, the
EU, contrary to its past promises, presented its new
neighbours with the choice of either being with the EU
or against it. That logic was at the heart of the Eastern
Partnership policy that replaced its Neighbourhood
Policy in 2009 as an entirely Euro-centric model,
designed not to establish equitable cooperation but to
completely reformat its participants’ political systems
in line with the EU template. Needless to say, it was
not a format the Russian Federation could accept.
One of the products of that flawed policy was a draft
association agreement between Ukraine and the EU,
which blew up security and the balance of power on
the European continent like a landmine. Contrary
to the road maps that we had signed, the agreement
effectively demanded that Ukraine sever its ties with
Russia and essentially become a mere supplier of raw
materials to Europe. When the legitimate leadership of
Ukraine took a closer look at the proposed conditions
and asked for a time-out in order to assess how they
corresponded to its national interests, the EU, together
with the United States, staged an anti-constitutional
coup triggering a bloody civil war in Ukraine that has
lasted for more than eight years. Ever since then, the
EU, contrary to the values it proclaims, has turned a
blind eye to the criminal actions of the Kyiv regime
in Donbas and its violations of the Minsk agreements,
encouraging nationalism and outright Nazism in
Ukraine. Without that, there would be no profound
security crisis in Europe today, and we have yet to find
the key with which to end it.
In the current situation around Ukraine, today’s
militarized, aggressive, Russophobic European Union
has shown its true colours. The extent to which a once
peaceful economic association, created to prevent new

22-3854815/24

S/PV.9065

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

wars in Europe, has deteriorated is best reflected in
the fact that the head of European diplomacy — our
briefer today, Mr. Borrell — gave up on that diplomacy
and called for winning this war on the battlefield.
And we are following his advice, especially given that
Kyiv, encouraged by its Western patrons, is refusing to
engage in any negotiations whatever.
This is not merely talk. Through the blasphemously
named European Peace Fund, Brussels has already
provided the Ukrainian armed forces and nationalists
with €2 billion worth of lethal weapons, not counting
the military equipment supplied through individual
EU member States. It continues to pump Ukraine
full of military equipment with total disregard for its
own export controls as outlined in the EU Council’s
Common Position defining the rules governing control
of exports of military technology and equipment. It has
reached the point where European weapons are now
killing civilians in Ukraine. During a recent bombing
of Donetsk that claimed the lives of six people,
including a child, cluster munitions with markings
from a number of European countries were used,
despite the fact that those countries had previously
declared to have completely destroyed those munitions.
Since the beginning of the armed conflict in Donbas in
2014, thousands of civilians have died, including more
than 150 children. Thanks to the so-called assistance of
European “civilized” countries, as they call themselves,
another 15 to 20 people are now added to those terrible
statistics every week.
The EU has willingly stood under the Atlantic
Russophobic banners and has once again unhesitatingly
trampled on its own values and political principles.
Now it is trying to deprive non-EU States of their
sovereign right to pursue an independent foreign policy,
demanding that they join the anti-Russian sanctions and
using European prospects to blackmail them directly.
In the global arena, too, today’s European Union is just
as ugly and aggressive, declaring entire regions and
even continents to be zones for its exclusive interests.
It is trying to use financial and economic blackmail to
influence developing countries in their foreign-policy
choices. It is circumventing the Security Council
by imposing illegitimate unilateral sanctions and
threatening to force States dependent on the EU market
to join the bloc. Macroeconomic mistakes, along with
Western countries’ ill-conceived energy and financial
policies, including a sharp increase in anti-crisis
financial bailouts that have fuelled inflation, an abrupt
16/24

16/06/2022

transition to green energy rather than a smooth and
gradual one, speculation in Western futures markets
and a collective Western policy on sanctions have all
helped to provoke the current food and energy crisis.
However, the EU is now trying to blame it all
on the Russian Federation, making unsubstantiated
accusations regarding the destruction of grain elevators
and blocking of grain exports. It hypocritically assert
that there are no other obstacles to them while remaining
silent about the prohibitive measures on insurance,
financing and shipping imposed by both the EU and the
United States, and turning a blind eye to the fact that it
is Kyiv that has mined the waters of the Black Sea.
The EU, following its American big brother, has
been arrogantly dividing States into democracies and
non-democracies, sometimes slipping into openly
colonial rhetoric, referring to the countries of Africa as
the backyard and the Balkans as the inner courtyard of
the European Union. EU missions in the Balkans and in
Africa are being redirected to confront Russia. All that
is done in the name of the concept of the rules-based
world order imposed by the West, under the leadership
of the United States.
It is regrettable that the European project, which
was previously perceived as a lofty ideal reflecting an
advanced stage in the evolution of international and
social relations, has dealt itself a devastating blow and
lost its historical significance. The EU never succeeded
in developing its own constructive ideology and has
not become an independent world Power or alternative
model of organization. It now essentially defines itself
based solely on its primitive Russophobia. That decay
is taking place before our eyes and has yet to reach
a conclusion.
Europe, which once declared its own vision of the
world order and aspired to play an independent role in
the concert of world Powers, has turned into an obedient
appendage of the United States and NATO. Citizens of
the EU’s member States are being led to believe that
makes them stronger. On the contrary, that policy is
laying fertile ground for a confrontation between the
two super-Powers, as was the case during the Cold War.
How does that benefit Europe or its citizens? Does it
strengthen their security?
In recent years, Russia has become accustomed to
being self-reliant. As both a European and an Asian
Power, we will develop relations with independentminded countries and organizations that are not afraid
22-38548

16/06/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

of protecting their own interests. Unfortunately, the EU
no longer can be counted among the latter.
However, the Russian Federation is not indifferent
to the future of the EU. The fact that the course
chosen by the current EU leadership is short-sighted
and dangerous has been repeatedly acknowledged by
prominent EU politicians, including former Presidents
of the European Commission. We can see that today’s
Europe is severing ties with Russia in the name of
Atlantic solidarity and voluntarily shooting itself in
the foot. We hope that development does not become
irreversible and spiral out of control.
Mr. Borrell Fontelles himself rightly said in a
recent interview that the Russian Federation and the
European Union will continue to remain neighbours
on their shared European continent. We do not want
to see problems worsen for our neighbours. But if the
EU continues on its current course of increasingly
becoming a tool of United States policy, those problems
will affect not only its people but Russian citizens
as well.
Of course, we have no interest in the development
of such a scenario. We hope that sooner or later the
anti-Russian frenzy will die down and that in the
meantime the European project will not be allowed to
completely collapse in the service of the interests of our
American and British colleagues, regardless of their
claims to the contrary.
Given the obvious hostility towards Russia of
the EU in its current state and its reliance upon, and
subservience to, the United States and NATO, we
have no choice but to reconsider our basic approach
to developing relations with that organization. We are
currently forced, at the very, least to adopt a cautious
approach to any project involving the EU, including
at the United Nations. That also applies to EU plans
for expansion. The inclusion of new States, including
Ukraine, in this alliance that is unfriendly to Russia no
longer reflects Russia’s interests.
We should also note that, over the past few years,
the EU has actually degenerated into the geopolitical
shadow of NATO, while having lost not only its own
vision of international processes but also all ability to
defend its place under the sun and protect its economic,
civilizational and cultural interests. That is not what its
founding fathers envisioned, and it is not the entity with
which we discussed plans for a strategic partnership.

S/PV.9065

In conclusion, a long time ago, when the leaders
of post-war Germany would not yet allow themselves
to be called “offended liverwurst”, Konrad Adenauer
presciently stated,
“Unless we act, events that we Europeans will
be unable to influence will overtake us. I believe
we Europeans feel far too safe. Europe’s political
and economic leadership in the world, which was
still unchallenged at the beginning of the century,
has long since ceased to exist. Will the dominant
cultural influence of Europe be maintained? I think
not, unless we defend it and adjust ourselves to new
conditions; history has shown that civilizations are
all too perishable.”
It is a pity that subsequent generations of leaders of
the European Union have failed to take those words of
warning seriously.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for taking the initiative to convene
this debate to enable us to reaffirm our firm conviction
that regional and subregional organizations are integral
to our ability to respond to international crises and
conflicts. The scope and relevance of Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations are reflected in the
importance of the regional narrative. I also thank the
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy for his briefing.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union is a recurring item on the agenda of the
Security Council. Over the years, cooperation between
the United Nations and the European Union has
continued to grow, encompassing a wide range of areas
such as conflict prevention, mediation, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding, disarmament, the fight against terrorism
and violent extremism, the protection of human rights,
the coordination of humanitarian assistance and the
promotion of economic and sociopolitical development.
The issue of cooperation and coordination between
the United Nations and European regional security
organizations is taking on new relevance today, owing
to the establishment and development of the European
Union’s capacity for civilian and military action, which
leads us to meaningfully reflect above all on the sharing
of tasks at the international level and their importance
with regard to crisis management.
The partnership between the United Nations and
the European Union is perfectly illustrated in Africa,

22-3854817/24

S/PV.9065

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

including in the Sahel, the Lake Chad region and the
Horn of Africa, where the two entities work side by
side to contribute to the development of a network of
multilateral organizations in several countries and
regions that work together for peace and sustainable
development in countries that are in precarious and
crisis situations.
On the African continent, repeated violations by
extremist groups, such as Boko Haram, the Allied
Democratic Forces and Al-Shabaab, which claim an
affiliation with Da’esh, give reason to fear a contagion
effect throughout the entire continent. Clearly, the
resulting security threat substantially erodes the
foundations of the shared values of freedom, dignity
and democracy on the continent by imperilling its
people, who continue to suffer from the impact of the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
The magnitude of those threats and challenges has
led the African Union to adopt its peace and development
strategy as set out in Agenda 2063 and underpinned
by the African Peace and Security Architecture, the
African Governance Architecture and the Silencing the
Guns initiative. Those bold initiatives combine robust
funding efforts with logistics and synergistic actions
that prioritize trilateral cooperation among the African
Union, the European Union and the United Nations,
based on their common respective interests.
We therefore support the need to call for
strengthening not only bilateral cooperation between
the United Nations and the European Union but also
between the European Union and the African Union, as
well as broader trilateral cooperation among the United
Nations, the European Union and the African Union,
with a view to increasing their coordination on crosscutting peace and security concerns.
We also call for strengthening dialogue between
the African Union Peace and Security Council and the
European Union Political and Security Committee.
Although we advocate an Africa capable of finding
African solutions to African challenges, we recognize
that, for our work to be more effective, the support of
our international partners is required.
That form of cooperation is all the more imperative
because, in a security environment characterized
by multidimensional crises and exacerbated by the
unprecedented pandemic, the scope of requests the
United Nations receives and the increasingly regional
nature of crises demand that the United Nations deal
18/24

16/06/2022

with the realities on the ground more effectively so that
its actions are more effective. It goes without saying
that the involvement of regional actors alongside
the United Nations makes stabilization processes
more effective and enables a better understanding of
persistent threats. While it is true that in recent years
the United Nations has worked hard to get involved
in regional and subregional partnerships, the myriad
of crises, including those that are emerging, as well
as their increasingly complex nature, compel us to
do more.
I would like to make some comments on developing
a more productive partnership between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
First, partnerships should be based on complementarity
and competitive advantage. Regional and subregional
organizations, above and beyond the advantage of an
in-depth knowledge of their regions, are able to mobilize
and deploy rapidly on the ground through regional
mechanisms. That requires stable and predictable
financial, logistical and technical support, along with
strengthened capacity-building.
Secondly, to be effective, cooperation must be
supported by the best possible systems of coordination
and communication. Terrorism, transnational crime,
humanitarian crises and natural disasters are all
complex and interdependent challenges that require the
involvement of several stakeholders and therefore the
regular and rapid exchange of information.
Thirdly, it is vital to establish coherent crisismanagement and conflict-resolution mechanisms,
and the tasks and responsibilities of the various
stakeholders must be clearly defined. That will enable
the United Nations and regional organizations to
develop policies that can provide an effective response
to crisis situations.
In conclusion, I would once again like to call for
strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
including interregional partnerships. One of the main
benefits to those partnerships is providing support to
the United Nations in one of its key missions, that of
maintaining international peace and security. Today
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations must create synergy in their actions,
which would be a decisive step towards delivering on
our international commitments and demonstrating our
shared desire to considerably improve our collective
22-38548

16/06/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

security, especially through conflict prevention and
peacebuilding and peacekeeping efforts.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by thanking
the High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, His Excellency
Mr. Josep Borrell, for his detailed briefing. The goals
of the United Nations and the European Union (EU)
have a common origin, with similar driving principles
and values. In today’s global context, the synergy in
actions between the two organizations is important to
addressing global peace and security challenges, as well
as advancing development efforts. Today’s briefing is
therefore very timely, and we welcome it.
The EU has repeatedly demonstrated that it can
play a leading role in dealing with global issues.
The development achievements of its members, its
enduring advocacy for democratic values and the rulesbased international order have made it a formidable
voice in the multilateral arena. Its significance is
also mirrored in the active cooperation between the
United Nations and the EU. In the Balkans, the EU
has been at the forefront in promoting reconciliation,
freedom, economic prosperity and peace. On a
number of occasions it has brought together important
stakeholders in situations of conflict through its strong
support for donor conferences, its formulation of peace
plans and support for them through a peacekeeping
presence. India supports all efforts, including those
of the EU, in promoting dialogue and compromise
in implementing the Dayton Agreement. We note
the importance of the EU as a member of the Middle
East Quartet peace process, and its role in the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. The EU’s role in Africa
has also grown, alongside those of the African Union
(AU) and the League of Arab States. Its complementary
efforts in conflict resolution and addressing security
challenges, including terrorism, have contributed
positively to United Nations efforts in Africa. The
EU also supports bilateral and regional initiatives. It
should continue to augment national efforts to address
security-related challenges in Africa, while the EU-AU
partnership should focus on finding African solutions
to African problems.
The world continues to be confronted with peace
and security challenges, which have been exacerbated
by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
the Ukraine crisis and its consequent food and energy
security challenges. This is having a disproportionate
impact on the Global South. We need to strengthen

S/PV.9065

partnerships and enhance linkages between the United
Nations and regional organizations, in line with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
We should pursue greater international cooperation
and solidarity in overcoming our common challenges.
Regional organizations, particularly the EU, have
a critical role to play in addressing challenges to the
security environment by promoting dialogue between
the parties and dissuading external influence. In
that context, my delegation would like to make the
following observations.
The EU has broken new ground in developing
effective tools for crisis management. We believe
that it has an important role to play in tackling global
challenges, with the United Nations at the core of
multilateral efforts. The multilateral mechanisms
should work with regional organizations to ensure that
equitable solutions can be speedily arrived at.
India has advocated for the importance of
reforming multilateralism. We have consistently called
for a meaningful and comprehensive reform of the
global multilateral architecture, including the Security
Council. Given the EU’s important role in a reformed,
United Nations-centred multilateral system, it is only
natural to expect the EU to support ongoing reform
efforts. It should do much more to take forward the
reform agenda.
The conflict in Ukraine has affected not just the
EU but the whole world. We support all diplomatic
efforts to end the conflict, including a resumption of
talks between Ukraine and the Russian Federation. The
conflict is having a destabilizing effect, with broader
regional and global implications. Increasing oil prices
and shortages of food grains and fertilizers are having
a disproportionate impact on the Global South. The EU
can and should play a leading role in alleviating the
adverse impact of the crisis in Ukraine on the day-today lives of people living in vulnerable countries.
The EU has an important role to play in our
continued fight against terrorism and other new
and emerging challenges. As Chair of the CounterTerrorism Committee and of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), India would like
the EU to step up its efforts to make our fight against
terrorism a collective fight that is fought with zero
tolerance, without double-speak of any kind. We
note the significant financial contribution of the EU
member States to the United Nations peacekeeping

22-3854819/24

S/PV.9065

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

budget and their voluntary contributions to United
Nations programmes. The contribution of the EU to
the progress of the global discourse on climate change
and the Sustainable Development Goals has been
noteworthy. We need to find a balanced approach to
continue to meet those challenges without burdening
developing countries.
The India-EU strategic partnership is guided by our
shared interests and values of democracy, pluralism,
freedom, respect for the rule of law and human rights.
We share a common perspective on many regional
and global issues, including a shared commitment to
promoting an international rules-based order based on a
reformed and effective multilateralism. India and the EU
have a common interest in ensuring security, prosperity
and sustainable development in a multipolar world.
India’s partnership with the EU is reflected in
cooperation aimed at tackling current global issues,
such as COVID-19, climate change and terrorism,
and at strengthening multilateral institutions. At the
bilateral level, it is manifested through a growing
political engagement. It is also reflected in the launch
of negotiations on trade and investment agreements
and a bilateral connectivity partnership. Our strategic
partnership has also witnessed an upswing recently,
including through the holding of our first-ever joint
naval exercises in June 2021, as well as our firstever security and defence consultations and closer
cooperation on maritime security. We also established
the India-EU Trade and Technology Council in April this
year to work on next-generation critical technologies
and developing standards for them.
India welcomes the EU’s recently announced
strategy for cooperation in the Indo-Pacific region. We
look forward to greater cooperation to ensure a free,
open, inclusive and rules-based Indo-Pacific region,
premised upon respect for international law and the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of all States. We
also launched a connectivity partnership to enhance
connectivity in conformity with international norms, the
rule of law and respect for international commitments.
In conclusion, let me reiterate India’s commitment
to a lasting, mutually beneficial partnership with
the EU.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Minister Xhaçka,
for your presence here today and for presiding
over this important meeting. I would also like to
20/24

16/06/2022

thank High Representative Borrell Fontelles for his
comprehensive briefing.
By promoting regional cooperation and integration,
the European Union (EU) has been instrumental in
bringing peace and stability to the European continent.
Over the years, the EU has grown from a regional
player to a global one, and today its initiatives across
the world often bolster the efforts of the United Nations
and the Security Council in maintaining international
peace and security.
Beyond its own borders, we recognize the
European Union’s contribution to peace and stability
in the wider European region. The EU’s efforts in
facilitating the Kosovo-Serbia dialogue, as well as its
role in the implementation of the Dayton Agreement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina through the European Union
military operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, are
examples of how the EU is helping to lower tensions in
the Western Balkans.
The EU continues to show its capacity to be a
major humanitarian actor, and we have once again seen
its response to the humanitarian crisis resulting from
the conflict in Ukraine. With more than a quarter of
Ukraine’s population displaced and nearly 5 million
Ukrainian refugees recorded across Europe, the
United Arab Emirates commends the EU’s work in
assisting countries hosting those fleeing their homes in
search of safety. In the meantime, the EU’s support to
humanitarian organizations in Ukraine and to civilians
in need with more than €373 million in assistance has
been a crucial lifeline for those civilians.
The EU also continues to make important
contributions in response to food insecurity and in
addressing global public health. That includes the
European Union’s support to the World Food Program
and its financial support for the WFP’s cash assistance
programme. That partnership is as important as ever
as developing countries face new pressures due to
increases in the price of basic foodstuffs, which
puts people already in vulnerable situations at even
greater risk.
In the context of the EU’s support in combating
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we
welcome its donation of more than 400 million doses
of COVID-19 vaccines through the COVID-19 Vaccine
Global Access Facility as part of EU and EU member
States’ deliveries of more than 1.4 billion doses
worldwide. While those are important contributions,
22-38548

16/06/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

we are continuously reminded that the COVID-19
pandemic is not over and that key donors, including the
EU, must redouble efforts to ensure that vaccine equity
is achieved across the globe.
Finally, in addition to the importance of enhancing
cooperation between regional organizations and the
United Nations, we take this opportunity to highlight
the value of enhancing cooperation among regional
organizations on issues of common interest. When
considering involvement in other regions, we stress
the importance of ensuring that regional actors take
an active and leading role in any efforts at multilateral
diplomacy. That is essential to finding sustainable
solutions to regional and international challenges.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates looks
forward to the continued cooperation between the
United Nations and the European Union, as well as
enhanced cooperation between the European Union
and other regional organizations in areas of mutual
interest, all with the aim of ensuring the maintenance
of regional and international peace and security.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank His Excellency Mr. Josep Borell Fontelles, High
Representative of the European Union (EU) for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, for his briefing on the
cooperation between the EU and the United Nations for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Brazil appreciates the commitment of the European
Union and its member States in working with the United
Nations, within the framework of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, in various instances to
assist in the promotion of stability, peace and security
in different regions of the world.
In total, the EU has launched 37 Common Security
and Defence Policy missions since 2003. There are
currently 11 ongoing civilian missions and seven
ongoing military missions/operations across Europe,
Africa and the Middle East.
An actor on the international stage in its own right,
the European Union has also played a particularly
relevant role in European country-specific agendas.
Those contributions should be recognized.
The EU`s commitment to the Western Balkans
is also noted, especially in facilitating the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. The Brussels Dialogue,
launched following the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 64/298, still seeks to achieve a comprehensive

S/PV.9065

normalization of the relations — an objective of
paramount importance to guarantee the stability of the
whole region. Furthermore, the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo, within the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999), also contributes to stability in
that territory.
In Bosnia-Herzegovina, the EU launched the
European Union military operation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina following the decision by NATO to hand
over its own peacekeeping mission in the country in
2004. Since then, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council decisions, the EU has deployed a
robust military force to ensure compliance with the
Dayton Agreement and to contribute to security in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. As we witnessed in previous
meetings of the Council, the mission deserves our
continued support, since its objectives are far from
being accomplished.
We would like to point out the EU Foreign Affairs
Council decision, adopted in March of last year, to
establish the European Peace Facility as a tool to
finance operational actions under the EU Common
Foreign and Security Policy.
We believe that the EU missions should always be
aligned with the mandates established by the Security
Council and should act in accordance with the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. In that
regard, we would urge the EU to consider in advance
the possible unintended consequences for the world,
particularly developing countries, of the adoption of
unilateral measures, such as unilateral sanctions. The
United Nations and the EU should develop synergies and
reinforce multilateralism. The world would continue to
benefit greatly from such cooperation.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): At the outset, I would like
to welcome and thank His Excellency Mr. Josep Borrell
Fontelles, European Union (EU) High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, for his briefing.
Regional organizations, as guided under Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, have
continued to play an increasingly critical role in the
global security architecture. The global challenges
that we face in international peace and security are
varied, multidimensional and connected and continue
to undermine political stability and socioeconomic
development, with catastrophic impacts on people’s
lives and livelihoods.

22-3854821/24

S/PV.9065

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Threats to international peace and security, in
particular those driven by transnational organized
crimes like terrorism, continue to be highly transnational
in nature and necessitate collaborative action in order
to yield the desired outcomes.
Regional and subregional organizations have
progressively become indispensable institutions,
playing a critical role in combating those contemporary
challenges by strengthening global governance and
stepping up the international community’s efforts to
maintain international peace and security.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
the European Union strengthens both organizations
and affords them an avenue for a more coordinated
approach to addressing key issues affecting Europe, its
neighbours and the global community. That was clearly
demonstrated during the informal meeting between the
members of the Security Council and the EU Political
and Security Committee, held on 4 May.
Kenya appreciates the EU’s strong investment in
multilateral partnerships for addressing contemporary
threats to international peace and security. Indeed, the
EU’s historical strong partnership with the African Union
and its subregional organizations has been invaluable
in supporting the development and implementation of
the African Peace and Security Architecture.
We welcome the outcomes of the sixth EUAfrican Union (AU) Summit, held in February, which
committed to a joint vision for a renewed partnership
to build a common future, as the closest of partners
and neighbours. These build on the commitments made
under the 2018 memorandum of understanding between
the AU and the EU on Peace, Security and Governance,
designed to combat instability, radicalization, violent
extremism and terrorism, tackle the root causes of
conflicts and address the entire conflict cycle through
an integrated approach.
In that regard, Kenya welcomes the growing and
expanding collaboration between the United Nations,
the AU and the EU in the search for sustained peace
and stability in conflict situations in Africa. We
appreciate the long-standing EU logistical, technical
and financial support of the African-led peace support
operations. That was clearly demonstrated during the
recent strategic review and the reconfiguration of the
African Union Mission in Somalia to the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia. Those collaborative
efforts have also been instrumental in facilitating
22/24

16/06/2022

various Intergovernmental Authority on Development
initiatives, including the South Sudan peace process.
Structured collaboration among the United
Nations, the AU and the EU is critical to enhancing
synergies and unity of purpose and reinforcing peace
and development efforts by the three organizations
on the continent. Those efforts should buttress the
actualization of the commitment of the AU and EU
to a renewed and enhanced cooperation for peace and
security in several ways.
The first way is through support for adequate
training, capacity-building and equipment in order to
strengthen and scale up autonomous peace operations
of African defence and security forces, including
through EU missions and assistance measures, as well
as support for law-enforcement capacity-building.
The second way is through continued support for
African-led peace support operations and ongoing
discussions on the use of United Nations-assessed
contributions for operations authorized by the
Security Council.
The third way is through a renewed focus on
prevention and peacebuilding through support for
measures to address the root causes of conflict,
including development and economic empowerment.
In conclusion, we reiterate that the United Nations
and the international community must make active use
of efforts by regional and subregional organizations and
support them to the maximum extent. The principle of
national ownership and priority for regional leadership
should, however, remain the guiding pillar in our
collective response in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I join others in thanking the High Representative for
his briefing and in wishing him a speedy recovery and
return to in-person meetings.
As many colleagues said, this has been one of the
most challenging years for Europe since the Second
World War, with Russia’s illegal and unprovoked
invasion of Ukraine causing death and devastation and
forcing millions of refugees into neighbouring States.
It has been a challenging year for the international
community, with Russia’s actions and other conflicts
exacerbating existing problems in a world ravaged by
the coronavirus disease pandemic and climate change.
22-38548

16/06/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.9065

And it has been a challenging year for the United
Nations, the multilateral system and the rules-based
international norms that we value.

The President: I now give the floor to High
Representative Borrell Fontelles to respond on
comments or questions raised.

We therefore welcome the positive role played by the
European Union (EU) and other regional organizations
in promoting diplomacy and multilateralism and
supporting the Security Council on international peace
and security.

Mr. Borrell Fontelles: I could not let the meeting
end without thanking many members of the Security
Council for their engagement and acknowledgement
of the contributions of the European Union to global
peace and security, as well as their support for the
further strengthening of the European Union-United
Nations partnership.

First, we welcome the incredible support to
Ukrainians and the assistance provided to Ukraine to
defend itself and in defence of the Charter of the United
Nations. The United Kingdom supports an outwardlooking EU and values our cooperation on responding
to this latest breach of Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. That includes coordinating on
measures to limit Russia’s ability to finance and wage
its war and on the Atrocity Crimes Advisory Group for
Ukraine to support Ukraine’s Prosecutor General.
We are also working closely together on addressing
issues of global food security. I would like to support,
in particular, the High-Representative’s words rebutting
disinformation on sanctions.
Secondly, we welcome the EU’s important
contribution to the Council’s work. That includes EU
efforts on restoring the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action, its renewed partnership with the African
Union and its contribution to United Nations peace
operations and peacebuilding, including, for example,
its contribution on Somalia.
In Europe, we strongly support the EU’s efforts
in the Western Balkans, where we are coordinating to
support the region in order to secure progress in the EUfacilitated Serbia-Kosovo dialogue and working towards
the renewal of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force Operation Althea mandate in November.
Finally, we welcome the EU’s work on global
systemic challenges. Seven months after the holding
of the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (COP26), the EU and the United
Kingdom are coordinating to pick up the pace on
delivering a net-zero, climate-resilient transition. At a
time of global instability, with growing challenges of
inflation, debt and food insecurity, we are united in our
determination to deliver on the Glasgow Climate Pact
and ensure the successful legacy of COP26.

I noted the remarks of many Ambassadors, in
particular those of Gabon, Ghana and Kenya, who spoke
about the important role of regional and subregional
organizations in addressing global challenges.
I agree with the Chinese Ambassador that we do
not want to see the world organized into opposing
blocs, which would lead only to greater insecurity.
We are sensitive to the security concerns of our
countries and are ready to engage in discussions and
negotiations to rebuild European security once Russia
abandons its invasion of Ukraine and re-establishes its
territorial integrity.
I also welcome the Indian Ambassador’s comments
on the European Union’s Indo-Pacific strategy, on the
basis of which we look forward to strengthening our
strategic partnership not only with India but also with
the entire region.
With regard to the main subject of discussion
today — the situation in Ukraine and the role of the
European Union — I was certainly not expecting to
agree with the Russian Ambassador. I thank him for
lecturing me on the interpretation of the historical role
of the European Union and how the founding fathers
conceived it. I think, however, that I have a better
interpretation of my own history.
I do not think we are diverging from the prospect
of peace, which is the essence of the European Union.
We continue to be a Union that wants to engage in
peace. We are not a military union, but we certainly
cannot remain indifferent to what is happening in our
neighbourhood — the aggression that one of our most
important partners, Ukraine, is suffering.
In my view, there is one important thing on which
we should focus our attention. We can discuss the
causes of the war endlessly, and certainly we will not
agree. But one thing is clear: there are Russian troops in

22-3854823/24

S/PV.9065

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Ukraine, yet there are no Ukrainian troops in Russia. It
is clear who the aggressor is.
We may not agree, but we should concentrate our
efforts and try to avoid the next stage of this tragedy,
which will be a huge wave of hunger across the world
if Russia continues blocking the export of wheat from
Ukraine. It is certainly not the European Union that is
blocking those exports. We are certainly not bombing
wheat storage facilities. I therefore take this opportunity
to call on everyone here, in particular private actors,
to do whatever they can in order to avoid the dramatic
situation that could cause millions of people to suffer
from a huge wave of hunger in the coming months.
From our side, we will do everything we can in
order to explain to economic actors that there is nothing
in our sanctions that prevents the export of wheat and
fertilizers from Russia. Any kind of overinterpretation
or market avoidance must be corrected, and we will

24/24

16/06/2022

do our best to dissipate any kind of misinterpretation.
It would be good for others to do the same and avoid
spreading disinformation on the matter.
It is the common responsibility of us all to avoid
a dramatic situation in the weeks to come, leading to
millions of people being deprived of basic foodstuffs,
which could very well happen. The United Nations
is working hard to avoid that situation, and we are
supporting the Organization to that end. I ask all
members of the Council to contribute to that effort.
Some can take action, while others can put pressure
on the relevant actors. We all share a responsibility
to avoid what may happen if things continue the way
they are going. I think that serves as a very important
warning that justifies the convening of this meeting.
The President: I thank High Representative Borrell
Fontelles for the clarifications he has provided.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

22-38548
