UNITED
NATIONS
Oistr.

Qonoral Asasmbly

geheral
À/RES/4S/54
19 December 1990

Forty-fifth eesaion
Agenda item 52

RESOLUTXOH ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Coimnittee (A/45/774)]

45/54.

ConcIwaiffB flg affective international arranaemente
to аааигаjon-nnclear-weaoon States against the
lUR-or threat of m e of nuclear weapons

The General Aeeembly.
ВеДгЛвд in jniafl the need to allay the legitimate concern of the States of the
vorld with regard to ensuring lasting security for their peoples,
CpaviaCffd that nuclear weapons pose the greatest threat to mankind and to the
survival of civilisation.
Deeply concerned at the arms race, in particular the nuclear-arms race, and
the possibility of the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
Also convlneed that nuclear disarmament and the complete elimination of
nuclear weapons are essential to remove the danger of nuclear war.
Welcoming the progress achieved in recent years in both nuclear and
eoavontlonal disarmament.
Taking into account the principle
enshrined in the Charter of the United

of the non-use of force orthreat of force
Nations,

Recognising that the independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of
non-nuclear-weapon States need to be safeguarded against the use or threat of use
of force. Including the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
Considering that, until nuclear disarmament Is achieved on a universal basis,
it is ia^erative for the international
communityto develop effective measures and

90-36460

2979Z (B)

/...

A/BES/45/54
Page 2

arrangements to ensure tbe security of non-nuclear-veapon States against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons from any quarter,
Reeocmising also that effective measures and arrangements to assure the
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons can
contribute positively to the prevention of the spread of nuclear weapons.
Bearing in mind paragraph 59 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 1/ the first special session devoted to
disarmament, in which it urged the nuclear-weapon States to pursue efforts to
conclude, as appropriate, effective arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon
States against the use or threat of use of nuclear %reapons, and desirous of
promoting the implementation of the relevant provisions of the Final Document,
Recalling the relevant parts of the special report of the Committee on
Disarmament 2/ submitted to the General Assembly at its twelfth special session, 2/
the second special session devoted to disarmament, and of the special report of the
Conference on Disarmament submitted to the Assembly at its fifteenth special
session, 1/ the third special session devoted to disarmament, as well as of the
annual report of the Conference on its 1990 session, £/
Recalling also paragraph 12 of the Declaration of the 1980s as the Second
Disarmament Decade, contained in the annex to its resolution 35/46 of
3 December 1980, which states, inter alia, that all efforts should be exerted by
the Committee on Disarmament urgently to negotiate with a view to reaching
agreement on effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon
States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Hotlng the in-depth negotiations undertaken in the Conference on Disarmament
and its Ad Hoc Committee on Effective International Arrangements to Assure
Non-Ruclear-Heapon States against the Use or Threat of Use of Huclear Weapons, with
a view to reaching agreement on this item.
Taking note of the proposals submitted under that item in the Conference on
Disarmament, including the drafts of an international convention.

1/

Resolution S-10/2.

2/
The Committee on Disarmament was redesignated the Conference on
Disarmament as from 7 February 1984.
2/
Official Records of the General Assembly. Twelfth Special Session.
Supplement Wo. 2 (A/S-12/2), sect. III.C.
1/

2 Ш * / Fifteenth Special Session, Supplement Ко. 2 (A/S-15/2),

sect. XXX.F.

i/

Ibid., Forty-fifth Session, Supplement Vo. 27 (A/45/27), sect. XXX.F.

X/RES/45/54

Page 3

Taking note alao of tbe decision of the Hinth Conference of Heads of State or
Goverxuaent of the Hovement of Mon-Xligned Countries, held at Belgrade from 4 to
7 September 1989, £/ as well as the relevant recommendations of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference reiterated in the Final Comnunigue of the Mineteenth Islamic
Conference of Foreign Ministers, held at Cairo from 31 July to 5 August 1990, X/
calling upon the Conference on Disarmament to reach an urgent agreement on an
international convention to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons.
Taking note further of the unilateral declarations on the security of
non-auclear>weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons made
by all nuclaar-weapon States,
Hotlng tbe support enpressed in the Conference on Disarmament and in the
General Assembly for the elaboration of an international convention to assure
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, as
well as the difficulties pointed out in evolving a common approach acceptable to
all,
Hotincr alao the greater willingness to overcome the difficulties encountered
in previous years.
Recalling its relevant resolutions adopted in previous years.
Desirous of promoting the implementation of its resolutions 44/110 and 44/111
of IS December 1989,
1.
Reaffirms the urgent need to reach an early agreement on effective
international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons;
2.
Rotes with satisfaction that in the Conference on Disarmament there is no
objection, in principle, to the idea of an international convention to assure
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
although the difficulties as regards evolving a common approach acceptable to all
have also been pointed out;
3.
Appeals to all States, especially the nuclear-weapon States, to
demonstrate the political will and flexibility necessary to reach agreement on a
common approach and, in particular, on a common formula that could be included in
an international instrument of a legally binding character;
4.
Recommends that further intensive efforts should be devoted to the search
for such a common approach or common formula and that the various alternative

fi/

See A/44/551-S/20870, annex.

2/

See A/45/421-S/21797, annex I, para. 44.

X/RSS/45/54
Page 4

approacbas, including, in particular, those considered in the Conference on
Oisarmanent, should be further explored in order to overcosie the difficulties;
5.
Reconanands also that the Conference on Disannament should actively
continue intensive negotiations with a view to reaching early agreement and
concluding effective international arrangements to assure aoa-nueloar-weapon States
against the uso or threat of use of nuclear weapons, taking into account the
widespread support for the conclusion of an international convention and giving
consideration to any other proposals designed to secure the same objective;
6.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-sixth session
the item entitled “Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons".

5 4 th plffiaaiTY w e g tin q

4 December 1990
