S/PV.6963

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6963rd meeting

Thursday, 9 May 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Menan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Togo)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Sharifov
Mr. Tian Lin
Mr. Briens
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Shearman
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau, including
efforts towards the restoration of constitutional order, and on the activities of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that country (S/2013/262)

13-32774 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1332774*

S/PV.6963

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments
in Guinea-Bissau, including efforts towards the
restoration of constitutional order, and on the
activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in that country (S/2013/262)
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau and
Mozambique to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. José Ramos-Horta, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ambassador Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil, to
participate in this meeting in her capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to
draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2013/262, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on developments in Guinea-Bissau, including
efforts towards the restoration of constitutional order,
and on the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ramos-Horta.
Mr. Ramos-Horta: This being the first time I am
privileged to address the Security Council since my
appointment as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Guinea-Bissau, I extend warm greetings
to all the members of the Council. Because of time
constraints and the fact that the full text of my speech
has been distributed, I will deliver an abbreviated
version of it now.
From the very first day after my arrival in
Guinea-Bissau in the early part of February, I
undertook regular, sustained consultations with

2

national stakeholders across the board, ranging from
the Transitional President to the members of the
Transitional Government, the National Assembly, the
military leadership, party leaders, members of civil
society, women’s organizations, youth movements and
religious and spiritual leaders. It is my humble view
that the problem of Guinea-Bissau should be squarely
placed at the feet of the political elite, who have failed
their people for almost four decades.
After the political elite, the military must also take
the blame. The intrusion by the armed forces into the
political arena is the result rather than the cause of bad
governance and underdevelopment in Guinea-Bissau.
Other consequences of the failure of the country’s
leadership include human rights violations, impunity,
organized crime and drug trafficking. Concerning the
latter, the operation launched by the United States Drug
Enforcement Agency that led to the arrest of the Navy’s
former Chief of Staff, Rear Admiral Bubo Na Tchuto,
and the announcement of the indictment of the Chief of
General Staff of Guinea-Bissau’s armed forces, General
Antonio Indjai, constitute a turning point in the fight
against drug trafficking in Guinea-Bissau. They send
a strong signal to the elite of Guinea-Bissau and those
using the country as a transit route for drugs that the
international community will not accept GuineaBissau’s being turned into a drug-trafficking platform.
The use of Guinea-Bissau as a transit point for drugs
is not in doubt. This is a regional and global social and
security problem with two clear poles — the regions of
production and the regions of consumption — feeding
that criminal activity. I would strongly advocate for a
strengthened international anti-narcotic presence in the
country. In order to address this challenge, therefore,
I urge that robust financial and human resources be
mobilized to support the deployment of adequate
expertise to assist the authorities in Guinea-Bissau and
the entire chain of drug-handling from source countries
through to consumption countries.
Against this background, the socioeconomic
situation in Guinea-Bissau remains precarious in a
context where the financial and budgetary support
the country’s partners are providing barely covers the
Government’s needs and commitments. Internal revenue
generation remains inadequate. As was predicted
during an International Monetary Fund monitoring
mission in February, economic and fiscal performance
for 2013 will improve only if the cashew harvest and
commercialization season, which started at the end of

13-32774

S/PV.6963

March, pick up. Food security will be compromised
if local and rural cashew farmers continue to face
difficulties in exchanging or bartering cashews for rice.

order no later than the end of this year, on the basis
of the decisions made by the ECOWAS Authority in
Yamoussoukro.

Compounding the socioeconomic situation is the
continuing spate of salary-related strikes by workers in
the public sector. In addition to difficulties in paying
public-sector salaries, the Government is unable to
provide basic water and electricity services. Public
health and sanitation challenges are also becoming
acute. The six-month rainy season will start in a week,
and help is needed to avert cholera and other related
epidemics.

I am pleased to report that in the days leading up
to this meeting, some positive developments have taken
place. On 25 and 26 April, the ad hoc Parliamentary
Commission reviewing the transitional pact signed in
May 2012 held a two-day retreat with the support of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) to finalize a draft
transitional regime pact. On 28 April, Transitional
President Serifo Nhamajo returned to Bissau following
an absence of more than a month, and announced that
an all-inclusive Government would be formed soon and
elections held before the end of the year. On 29 and
30 April, all political parties, along with military, civil
society and religious leaders, gathered in Parliament
for discussions on the draft transitional regime pact,
reaching agreement on three points.

Not everything about Guinea-Bissau is negative. On
the positive side, the people of Guinea-Bissau, despite
their disenchantment, are peaceful and friendly people
who have never turned to crime or ethnic violence, as
has been the case in many comparable situations. The
country has one of the lowest crime rates in Africa, if
not the world. It is safe to walk around Bissau without
the standard fears one may have in many capitals of
the world. If appropriate support were given to more
productive, preventive diplomacy programmes,
Guinea-Bissau could become a shining example of a
success story.
I have sought to work actively towards realizing the
directives emanating from the Council in order to ensure
that all international stakeholders speak with one voice
on the critical issues in Guinea-Bissau. In that context,
I have continued to engage key States members of the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the European Union and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, with
meetings at the highest levels in Addis Ababa, Abuja,
Banjul, Dakar, Praia, Maputo, Lisbon and Brussels. I
am particularly satisfied with the frank tête-à-têtes I
have had with the Heads of State and Foreign Ministers
of Nigeria, Senegal, the Gambia, Côte d’Ivoire,
Guinea, Angola, Cape Verde, Mozambique, Brazil and
Portugal, as well as with the President of the European
Commission, the Commissioner for International
Development and members of the European Parliament.
I am also delighted to announce that all international
partners are united on two immediate key objectives
of the transition, namely, the formation of a new, more
inclusive transitional Government, and the adoption
of a consensus road map, with a firm commitment to
holding elections before the end of the year. In addition,
all agree that there is a need to restore constitutional

The first of these was the confirmation of the
extension of the duration of the transition until
31 December 2013, with elections to be held in
November. The second was the formation of an allinclusive transitional Government; and the third was
the election of a President of the National Electoral
Commission upon reception of a proposal from the
Supreme Court’s Council of Judges. On 30 April,
the political parties signed an agreement on the
aforementioned three points.
Guinea-Bissau’s challenges must be addressed
through a two-phase transition. First, we must support
the return to constitutional order through elections.
Secondly, we must assist in the post-electoral
strengthening of State institutions through reforms
that are underpinned not only by financial support
but also the direct co-location of experts, as well as
mentoring efforts, to ensure sustainable stabilization
and development.
I have consistently advocated that all the people of
Guinea-Bissau absorb a new political culture in which
elections do not lead to the division of the country
or a winner-takes-all situation. Bearing in mind the
enormous challenges that the people of Guinea-Bissau
face, no single political group can alone manage the
transition out of the deep hole into which Guinea-Bissau
has sunk and towards lasting peace and prosperity. In
that regard, it will be important for all major political

13-327743

S/PV.6963

parties to unite into a Government of national unity,
following the next legislative elections.

a strong message of support to the people of GuineaBissau.

The support of the Security Council and States
Members of the United Nations for the elections that
will usher in a new, post-election phase is imperative.

The President (spoke in French):
Mr. Ramos-Horta for his briefing.

In the post-election phase, a broad coalition would
provide power-sharing governmental efforts to rebuild
the State that currently exists in name only. In that
connection, additional material support will be crucial.
The international community will be called upon to do
its part. I intend to actively engage the new authorities
and help them rebuild the institutions of the State,
including by the co-location of international experts
in key Government sectors for a period of up to five
years, in order to completely reform and modernize
the defence forces, the judicial system and public
administration.
The defence forces will need to undergo major
rethinking on the basis of a sober analysis of the security
needs of the country and adjusted to the financial
resources available. ECOWAS is taking the lead in that
process, but there are other willing partners outside the
region that are ready to contribute towards a new army
for Guinea-Bissau that is more professional, imbued
with a democratic culture, smaller and less costly yet
more effective.
The United Nations inter-agency technical
assessment mission that was dispatched to GuineaBissau in March suggested that the problems in the
country were not insurmountable. However, solving
them requires, first and foremost, strong political and
financial support from the international community. In
that regard, the call by the authorities of Guinea-Bissau
for the United Nations to take the leadership in the
electoral process so as to avoid any possible electionsrelated disputes or violence needs to be given serious
consideration.
In conclusion, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/262) before the Council includes the results
of the painstaking technical assessment mission that I
led to look into the mandate and resources needed to
realize the vision to which I referred earlier, to support
the efforts of the people of Guinea-Bissau and to
reconfigure UNIOGBIS to play a critical advisory role.
I would like to make a special plea to members of the
Council to positively consider the Secretary-General’s
recommendations and adopt a resolution that will send

4

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti.
Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for
inviting me to brief the Security Council in my capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I would also like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS),
Mr. José Ramos-Horta, for his briefing today, for his
leadership and commitment in facilitating a resolution
of the current situation in Guinea-Bissau and for his
inspirational work as Head of UNIOGBIS. I welcome
the Permanent Representative of Mozambique and
Chair of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries (CPLP), Ambassador António Gumende;
the Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire and
Chair of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), Ambassador Youssoufou Bamba;
and the Permanent Representative of Guinea-Bissau,
Ambassador João Soares Da Gama.
Since I last spoke in the Council (see S/PV.6915),
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission met on 1 March to hear briefings from
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury Fedotov, and the
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Gana Fofang. Mr. Fedotov
expressed deep concern about the continued increase
in drug trafficking, in particular in the aftermath of
the April 2012 coup d’état, which, in turn, was closely
linked to other forms of transnational organized crime.
He also urged Member States and the United Nations to
provide UNODC with additional resources as a matter
of urgency, to avoid a shutdown of its already minimal
presence in the country.
Despite that appeal and my ensuing plea to the
members of the configuration, funds could not be
identified, and, as the Secretary-General states in his
most recent report on the situation in Guinea-Bissau
(S/2013/262), UNODC had to end its presence there
last month. That development is not consistent with the
concerns we all share and with the need to continue
to address drug trafficking in Guinea-Bissau as a

13-32774

S/PV.6963

matter of priority. It is important that we translate our
expressions of concern into concrete actions.
The recent arrest of several nationals of GuineaBissau, including the former Navy Chief of Staff, Rear
Admiral Bubo Na Tchuto, on allegations of involvement
in drug trafficking, and the indictment by United States
authorities of the Chief of General Staff of the armed
forces of Guinea-Bissau, General Antonio Indjai, for,
among other charges, conspiring to import narcotics
into the United States, are clear indications of the
need for the international community to maintain
a permanent capacity on the ground to monitor the
situation and continue to provide capacity-building
support to national authorities.
Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Fofang, for his part, pleaded for a shift from
the usual quick-fix solution approach to a more longterm perspective in the case of Guinea-Bissau, in order
to halt the vicious winner-takes-all dynamics that have
poisoned the country since independence. He also
pleaded for continued United Nations engagement with
all the relevant national and international parties in
order to facilitate dialogue. I am glad to report that,
as a follow-up to that discussion, the PBC will meet
again tomorrow, with the participation of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ramos-Horta.
In the past few weeks, we have noticed some
promising developments in Guinea-Bissau. As
Mr. Ramos-Horta just stated, the draft of a new regime
pact to replace the current transitional arrangements
is being discussed in the National Assembly, with the
active participation of the main national stakeholders,
and an agreement on principles for the return to
constitutional normalcy was signed on 30 April.
Such efforts need to be supported. At the same
time, the international community needs to maintain
pressure on the transitional authorities and on political
and military leaders to achieve the swift adoption
and implementation of a more inclusive transitional
arrangement. The holding of free, fair and transparent
presidential and legislative elections by the end of
this year, thus enabling the full re-engagement of
international partners with Guinea-Bissau, is also
essential. A prolonged period of transition is in nobody’s
interest and raises questions about the political will of
the transitional authorities to find a sustainable solution
to the current crisis.

During the most recent meeting of the configuration,
several members supported re-engagement with
Guinea-Bissau, once key movements on the ground
took place towards the restoration of constitutional
order. There was general acknowledgment that when
the Commission re-engaged with Guinea-Bissau, it
should do so on the basis of a revised instrument that
would reflect the key peacebuilding priorities in the
current national context.
The PBC also believes that resumed Peacebuilding
Fund funding should be aligned with such priorities. In
that regard, both the report of the Secretary-General,
including the findings of the recently deployed
technical assessment mission, and the conclusions and
recommendations of the joint assessment mission by
the United Nations, the African Union, ECOWAS, the
CPLP and the European Union will be duly taken into
account.
As an intergovernmental body with an advisory role to
the Security Council, the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the PBC renews its determination to work with
the legitimate authorities representing the people of
Guinea-Bissau as a whole, in close coordination with
other national and international partners, especially
with Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ramos-Horta and his team at UNIOGBIS, to promote
the necessary reforms to consolidate peace, sustain
stability and promote development in Guinea-Bissau.
The President (spoke in French):
Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti for her briefing.

I

thank

I now give the floor to the representative of GuineaBissau.
Mr. Da Gama (Guinea-Bissau): Through you,
Mr. President, my delegation wants to thank all members
of the Security Council for keeping the situation in my
country, Guinea-Bissau, on its agenda.
(spoke in French)
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to wish you, Sir, every
success in your work.
I would like to thank Mr. José Ramos-Horta,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Guinea-Bissau, for the very informative and accurate
report (S/2013/262) he has just introduced, as well as to
express our complete confidence in him and, above all,

13-327745

S/PV.6963

our full readiness to cooperate with him as he carries
out his duties.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Ambassador
António Gumende and Ambassador Youssoufou Bamba
for their ongoing efforts in the peacebuilding process in
Guinea-Bissau.
I would also like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the commitment of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the West African
Economic and Monetary Union for the financial support
they have continued to provide to Guinea-Bissau during
this transitional period.
I am addressing the Security Council today with a
special feeling of optimism, for the one-year extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
recommended in the report of the Secretary-General is
a testament to the staunch commitment of the United
Nations to continue providing assistance to GuineaBissau as it seeks to build peace.
That optimism is all the greater given the fact that,
as contrasted with the period preceeding the coup d’état
of April 2012, today we are increasingly seeing greater
understanding among the various national actors and a
convergence of positions on the part of Guinea-Bissau’s
partner international organizations. The latter was
illustrated in December 2012 when, at the initiative
of the African Union, a joint assessment mission
composed of the United Nations, the African Union,
ECOWAS, the European Union and the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP) was deployed
to Guinea-Bissau. We consider its recommendations to
be important for their continued cooperation.
The presentation of this report comes at a time
when Guinea-Bissau is about to enter a new phase of
the transition, which is the result of the commitment
of national stakeholders and in accordance with the
requirements of the international community, to lead
the country back to constitutional order as quickly as
possible by holding free, fair and transparent elections.
In that regard, we are delighted to note that a political
agreement of principle was concluded on 30 April by
the various political parties, civil society and military
leaders. The agreement extends the transition period
until 31 December 2013, sets the holding of elections

6

for November of this year and calls for the formation
of a more inclusive Government and the appointment
of the President of the National Electoral Commission.
The efforts to make the transition inclusive are
further illustrated by the development of a new regime
pact, which is under consideration for approval by the
National Assembly. It should be underscored that, under
the pact, a forum for coordination among transition
stakeholders would be set up under the oversight of the
National Assembly.
For several days now, the Transitional President
has been carrying out intensive consultations with the
various political and social stakeholders and others
aimed at forming an inclusive Government. Everything
leads us to believe that a Government will be established
in the days or even hours to come.
We are pleased to note that the Secretary-General
recommends in his report that the peacebuilding process
in Guinea-Bissau be carried out in two phases. The first
phase would culminate in the holding of presidential
and legislative elections in a free, fair and transparent
manner. The second, post-electoral, phase would be
completed by the end of the mandate of the Government
to be elected. That phase would focus on strengthening
the political, social, economic and security environment
through reforms and the bolstering of State institutions.
Guinea-Bissau alone can hardly cope with the
challenges it will face during the two phases I have
described, given the lack of the necessary means and
resources required for such an undertaking and the
extreme fragility of State institutions. For those reasons,
therefore, we ask for the support of the international
community and we thank it for the assistance kindly
extended to our country throughout its history.
Despite the difficult situation that our country has
experienced throughout its 40 years as an independent
nation, Guinea-Bissau and its people still believe in
the viability of our country. We will spare no effort in
building the State dreamed of by our founding father,
Amilcar Cabral. We will do so by carrying out reforms
aimed at strengthening State institutions, in particular
in the defence, security and justice sectors so that they
work effectively to fight against impunity. We will do
so in order to ensure that justice in our country is within
the reach of every citizen and so that Guinea-Bissau is a
place of ​p eace and prosperity that is pleasant to live in.

13-32774

S/PV.6963

As I speak here, every public school is once again
on strike — triggered three days ago by the teachers’
union at the national level. That will curtail the school
year for at least one month.
The cashew harvest, which is Guinea-Bissau’s
main export product, is being seriously jeopardized by
the lack of market credit liquidity.
Our economy — largely dependent upon external
assitance — is practically in ruins following the cut-off
from our major partners that resulted from the April
2012 coup.
In conclusion, it is for all those reasons that it is
both necessary and urgent that humanitarian assistance
be exceptionally granted to our country in order to help
us overcome the current challenges.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to take the floor on behalf of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
ECOWAS welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau (S/2013/262).
Before I elaborate on this agenda item, allow me,
Sir, my dear friend and brother, to congratulate you
most warmly on the assumption by your country,
Togo, of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of May. I should like to take this opportunity
also to congratulate my friend, and brother, too,
Eugène-Richard Gasana of Rwanda for the outstanding
manner in which he guided the work of the Council last
month.
Allow me to most sincerely thank those who spoke
before me, in particular Ambassador Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti of Brazil, the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission;
Ambassador Da Gama of Guinea-Bissau, my brother;
and, in advance, Ambassador António Gumende,
who will be speaking on behalf of the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries, for their valuable
contributions to our debate.
I should like above all to thank Prime Minister
José Ramos-Horta, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, for his excellent
briefing on the situation in the country. I should like
here to pay heartfelt tribute to him, because Prime
Minister José Ramos-Horta is a true artisan of peace.

Indeed, he has in a short time been able to reinstate
the dialogue both among the political class in GuineaBissau and at the level of the international partners
involved in the process of resolving the crisis in the
country. The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral has shown himself to be truly worthy of the
Nobel Peace Prize awarded to him. He can count on the
full support of ECOWAS in his efforts to achieve peace
in Guinea-Bissau.
Allow me now to present the perspective of
ECOWAS on the situation in Guinea-Bissau. Since the
coup d’état of 12 April 2012, ECOWAS has worked
tirelessly to promote the restoration of full constitutional
order and guarantee a reasonable level of security for
the people. The ECOWAS member States have provided
the financial and technical resources necessary to
keep the State functioning. They have supported the
inclusive nature of the transition process and given
renewed confidence to the people by maintaining an
acceptable level of security through the deployment of
the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB).
There is no doubt, however, that the complementary
support of the international community remains crucial
to guaranteeing the success of the transition programme
and bolstering stability in the country.
Today, as has been widely noted, there are three
types of challenges facing Guinea-Bissau: political,
security-related, and social and economic.
On the political front, recent political developments
indicate that there is an ongoing struggle to achieve a
consensus among the main political parties regarding
the institutions that should undergird the transition, in
particular concerning the role of the People’s National
Assembly in coordinating the process.
There are also tensions between the Transitional
Government and the People’s National Assembly
concerning the conduct of State affairs, as well as a
low-key campaign by some political parties aimed at
prolonging the political transition beyond 31 December
2013, which is the date widely agreed to.
Along those lines, I would recall that the decision
on the transition date was taken by the Authority of
Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS at their
summit held in Yamoussoukro, Côte d’Ivoire, on 27 and
28 February 2013, following consultations with all
national stakeholders and a painstaking analysis of the
progress made in the implementation of the road map.

13-327747

S/PV.6963

At the summit, it was also decided that, should
there be an impasse in Parliament, the President of
the Transitional Government, His Excellency Serifo
Nhamadjo, would have to propose a new road map for
adoption by Parliament. Thus the Transitional President
was firm and unwavering with respect to the drawing
up of a revised transition road map.
For its part, the Electoral Commission is
determined to make rapid progress in its work, in
particular with respect to plans relating to biometric
voter registration, the demarcation of constituencies
and other pre-electoral activities.
In general, there seems to be a consensus on the
need in the short term to accord priority to the holding
of elections and not to begin any far-reaching reforms
until after the elections.
In spite of the uncertainty that prevails as to
whether Parliament will approve the political transition
pact, there is nevertheless hope that consensus will be
reached between the parties on the adoption of the road
map and the implementation of the various objectives
of the transition programme. That is why it is important
for the international community to recognize and
support the transition road map so as to induce local
stakeholders to ensure that the road map is adopted and
implemented fully.
The ECOWAS member States remain determined
to cooperate with local and international stakeholders
in creating conditions conducive to the holding of free,
fair and peaceful elections in December 2013.
In the area of security, Guinea-Bissau has seen
relative calm since the deployment of ECOMIB, in
2012, and concerns of possible resurgence of violence
within the army proved unfounded. However, I would
note two major incidents, which are also mentioned in
the report of the Secretary-General. First, there was
the arrest by the United States judicial system of the
former Navy Chief of Staff, Rear Admiral Bubo Na
Tchuto, for alleged drug trafficking. Secondly, there
was the indictment by the American authorities of the
current Chief of General Staff of the armed forces,
General Antonio Indjai, for alleged participation in
drug trafficking.
Those two events heightened tensions in the
country. The situation was further exacerbated given
the disagreement on the matter of promotions within the
army, amid rumors of conspiracy and destabilization,

8

which led to the military authorities taking stock of the
situation on 20 April 2013 and subsequently making a
commitment once again to cooperating in the combat
against drug trafficking. Here I would reiterate the
commitment of the States members of ECOWAS to
supporting the international community in the fight
against drug trafficking and to ensuring that the
perpetrators of such crimes are punished.
However, at the same time ECOWAS remains
committed to security-sector and defence reform, as
these are complementary to the transition process. We
support any effort aimed at addressing the root and
structural causes of the crisis, in particular lack of
discipline and impunity within the armed forces.
On the socio-economic front, while there have
been minor improvements in the social and economic
fabric of Guinea-Bissau since the consolidation of
the transitional authority in late 2012, the situation
nevertheless requires urgent action by the international
community, in particular to support economic sectors,
including fishing and cashew cultivation, as well as
social sectors, including education, health-care services
and infrastructure.
The economic and social crisis in Guinea-Bissau
has been exacerbated by the country’s isolation by the
international community. The sanctions inflicted the
greatest suffering on those who are poor and without
a voice. It is therefore important that the sanctions
be lifted and that the Security Council encourage
international development agencies to relaunch their
respective programmes in cooperation with GuineaBissau.
I would note also that in addition to their support
for the democratic transition and security in GuineaBissau, the ECOWAS member States will continue
to coordinate, along with the rest of the international
community, within existing frameworks, to support
the protection and upholding of the human rights of the
country’s citizens.
ECOWAS is also committed to maintaining its
support for close cooperation between the Transitional
Government and the People’s National Assembly with
a view to the adoption and implementation of the
transitional road map and to guaranteeing the provision
of financial and technical support for the National
Electoral Commission. ECOWAS therefore believes
that recent developments in Guinea-Bissau require
us more than ever to collectively forge international

13-32774

S/PV.6963

consensus and thereby demonstrate our shared desire
to tackle the situation by helping Guinea-Bissau work
with all relevant stakeholders to guarantee the holding
of free, fair and transparent elections by December, as
required by the international community.
In conclusion, in the light of the aforementioned
considerations, ECOWAS would propose the following
points as a basis for garnering consensus that guarantees
the inclusion of all stakeholders and ensures stability
and security in Guinea-Bissau.
First, as mentioned previously by Ambassador Da
Gama, the revised transitional road map should, we
hope, be adopted in the coming days. The road map
allows for the holding of legislative and presidential
elections before 31 December. It is understood that,
should no solution be put forward by the National
Assembly, ECOWAS reserves the right to explore all
other options available to ensure the holding of the
elections in the allotted time.
Secondly, the military must put an end to all
residual interference in the transition process and
commit to fully cooperating in the fight against drug
trafficking and impunity.
Thirdly, the international community should draft
an international plan of action for the medium and long
terms for the purpose of assisting Guinea-Bissau in
addressing the root causes of instability, as identified
in the findings of the joint assessment mission of
December 2012, including the full restructuring of
the defence, security and justice sectors, measures to
end impunity, and far-reaching reform of the political,
financial and economic sectors.
Fourthly, the partners must agree on arrangements
to make the transition process completely inclusive and
widely recognized.
Fifthly and finally, the international community
needs to agree on arrangements for extending
emergency aid to achieve the immediate objectives
of the transitional road map, including, naturally, the
holding of elections before the end of the year and,
primarily, assistance to further relieve the suffering of
the most vulnerable by means of improved targeted aid
and quick-impact projects to generate income.
ECOWAS stands ready, as always, to cooperate
with all partners in carrying out the aforementioned
objectives in order to transform Guinea-Bissau into a
responsible member of the international community. To

that end, ECOWAS calls on all interested stakeholders
to deal with the matter of Guinea-Bissau with
impartiality and openness, and invites them to put the
interests of the country above all political or individual
considerations so as garner true consensus with respect
to the way forward.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mozambique.
Mr. Gumende (Mozambique): Mr. President, I
would like to thank you for inviting me to participate
on behalf the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP) in today’s meeting on the situation
in Guinea-Bissau.
The Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/262) on the latest developments in GuineaBissau and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country (UNIOGBIS).
Those developments show that, with political will, it
is possible to overcome complex obstacles through
dialogue. The dialogue between local stakeholders
should continue to be encouraged and fully supported
by the entire international community.
The appointment of Mr. José Ramos-Horta as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Guinea-Bissau has generated new momentum
that we should all seize in order to move towards a
lasting solution to the crisis. The sober and objective
assessment he presented to the Security Council
encourages all of us to look to the future with a certain
degree of optimism about Guinea-Bissau’s prospects.
We welcome the recent positive developments,
including the emerging consensus among national
actors with regard to the imperative of holding general
elections this year, the implementation of a road map,
the formation of an inclusive transitional Government
and the election of the President of the National Electoral
Commission. Those positive trends, particularly the
elections later this year, are consistent with the CPLP’s
calls for the use of democratic means for the restoration
of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau.
We are of the view that any optimism relating
to Guinea-Bissau should be moderated due to the
complexity of the situation, political polarization and
a deteriorating economic, social and humanitarian
situation in the country, as well as the prevalence of drug
trafficking. The arrest of Rear Admiral José Américo

13-327749

S/PV.6963

Bubo Na Tchuto and the indictment of General Antonio
Indjai by the United States authorities may give us an
accurate picture of the involvement of certain military
leaders and others in drug trafficking in the country.
Combating that phenomenon, supporting the
political process and contributing to the implementation
of many urgent reforms in the country, particularly of
the security sector, will also require that the mandate
of the Integrated Office for Peacebuilding in GuineaBissau be reinvigorated. In addition, the establishment
of a panel of experts to fight drug trafficking networks
and facilitate the adoption of sanctions against
traffickers would constitute a concrete contribution
of the international community to overcoming the
problem of drug trafficking in Guinea-Bissau, and thus
contributing to the promotion of stability in the country.
Another threat that deserves particular attention is
that posed by the illegal fishing taking place in GuineaBissau’s territorial waters. Appropriate measures
should be taken to stop the pillaging of Guinea-Bissau’s
resources.
The evolution of the situation in the country requires
Guinea-Bissau’s international partners, particularly
the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the CPLP and the

10

European Union, to act in an increasingly concerted
and coordinated manner and to strengthen cooperation
to support a consensual, inclusive and nationally owned
transition process that would lead to the restoration
of the constitutional order, in line with the spirit of
resolution 2048 (2012).
The CPLP is not indifferent to the reports of human
rights violations, which the Community has persistently
condemned. We therefore welcome and would confirm
our support for the recommendation that the UNIOGBIS
mandate be reinforced in that regard.
Let me conclude by reaffirming that the CPLP
member States associate themselves with the efforts
of the United Nations and the wider international
community aimed at a credible, inclusive and durable
solution for the crisis in Guinea-Bissau. In that context,
we support the leadership and determination of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ramos-Horta
to achieve that goal.
The President (spoke in French): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4 p.m.

13-32774
