S/2017/111

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 February 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2267
(2016), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) until 28 February
2017 and requested me to report every six months on the situation in Guinea-Bissau
and on progress made in the implementation of the resolution and the mandate of
UNIOGBIS. The report also provides an update on key political, security, human
rights, socioeconomic and humanitarian developments in Guinea -Bissau since my
report of 2 August 2016 (S/2016/675).

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
2.
The political situation in Guinea-Bissau continued to be dominated by the
protracted political impasse in the country and by regional and international efforts
to find a sustainable solution. A high-level delegation from the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), led by the President of Guinea,
Alpha Condé, in his capacity as ECOWAS Mediator for Guinea-Bissau, visited
Bissau on 10 September. He was accompanied by the President of Sierra Leone,
Ernest Bai Koroma, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Liberia and Sierra Leone,
Marjon Vashti Kamara and Samura M.W. Kamara, and the President of the
ECOWAS Commission, Marcel de Souza. The delegation held consultations with
national political stakeholders, including the President, José Mário Vaz, the Speaker
of the National Assembly, Cipriano Cassamá, the Prime Minister, Baciro Dja,
representatives of the five parties with parliamentary seats and the group of
15 parliamentarians who had been expelled from the African Party for the
Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde (PAIGC).
3.
My Special Representative for Guinea-Bissau and Head of UNIOGBIS,
Modibo Ibrahim Touré, and the Special Representative and Head of the African
Union Liaison Office in Guinea-Bissau, Ovídio Pequeno, participated in the

17-00995 (E)

080217

*1700995*

S/2017/111

ECOWAS-led consultations as observers on behalf of the Guinea -Bissau-based
group of international partners composed of the African Union, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS, the European Union and the United
Nations.
4.
The ECOWAS consultations resulted in the signing, on 10 September, of a six point road map to end the political crisis. The signatories included the Speaker of
the National Assembly, the Prime Minister and the leaders of the two main parties
represented in the National Assembly, PAIGC and the Party for Social Renewal
(PRS). The six points outlined in the road map are the holding of an inclusive
national round-table dialogue; the formation of an inclusive Government to
implement key reforms before legislative elections in 2018; the establishment of an
ECOWAS monitoring and follow-up mechanism; the implementation of reforms in
the defence and security sectors; and the “progressive demobilization” of the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) within six months of the formation
of a national contingent to take over its mandate of protecting State institutions.
5.
In a resolution adopted by its Central Committee on 16 September, PAIGC
clarified that it accepted the notion of an inclusive Government, provided that its
“right to govern”, stemming from its victory in the legislative elections of 2014, was
acknowledged. On the same day, the National Political Commission of PRS also
announced its agreement to continue negotiations towards an inclusive political
dialogue under the auspices of ECOWAS and in line with the road map.
6.
From 10 to 14 October, the ECOWAS Mediator for Guinea-Bissau convened
consultations with national stakeholders in Conakry, focused specifically on the
implementation of the first two elements of the road map: the holding of an
inclusive national round-table dialogue and the formation of an inclusive
Government. Representatives of the Government, State institutions, political parties
represented in the National Assembly, the 15 parliamentarians expelled from PAIGC
and civil society participated. The President of the ECOWAS Commission, my
Special Representative and envoys from Angola, Senegal, Sierra Leone and the
African Union also attended. On 14 October, the political stakeholders signed the
Conakry Agreement, which provides for the appointment of a consensus Prime
Minister who would have “the confidence” of the Presid ent; the formation of an
inclusive Government to implement a programme of reforms stemming from a
national round-table dialogue, to be held within 30 days of the appointment of the
Prime Minister; the development and adoption of a stability pact; and the
unconditional reintegration of the 15 parliamentarians expelled from PAIGC into the
party, in accordance with the party’s rules.
7.
Following their return to Guinea-Bissau, differences emerged among political
stakeholders as to the agreement reached in Conakry with regard to the appointment
of the Prime Minister. On the one hand, PAIGC, the Democratic Convergence Party
(PCD) and the Union for Change (UM) claimed that agreement had been reached on
a name from the list of three candidates proposed by the Pres ident to the ECOWAS
Mediator before the consultations. On the other hand, PRS and the New Democracy
Party argued that, while the three names had been considered in Conakry, no
definitive agreement had been reached. From 24 to 27 October, the President
embarked on a fresh round of consultations with representatives of political parties,
civil society and religious organizations to obtain their views on who should be the

2/17

17-00995

S/2017/111

new Prime Minister. In parallel, he also briefed representatives of the African
Union, ECOWAS, the European Union and the United Nations on the outcome of
the consultations.
8.
On 5 November, the President of Liberia, Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, in her
capacity as Chairperson of the Authority of Heads of State and Government of
ECOWAS, visited Guinea-Bissau to consult the President, the Speaker and the
Prime Minister, representatives of PAIGC and PRS and the 15 parliamentarians
expelled from PAIGC. All stakeholders reaffirmed their commitment to the Conakry
Agreement. In a final communiqué issued following her visit, co-signed by the
Presidents of Liberia and Guinea-Bissau and the President of the ECOWAS
Commission, it was agreed that the reintegration of the expelled parliamentarians
into PAIGC should be accelerated and that the President of Guinea -Bissau should
appoint, without further delay, a consensual Prime Minister who would “have his
confidence”.
9.
On 15 November, following further consultations with all political parties
represented in the National Assembly, the President dismissed the Gove rnment on
the basis that it had been unable to obtain the approval of the Assembly for its
programme of work and the national budget. On 18 November, he appointed Umaro
Sissoco Embaló, one of the three names that he had proposed to the ECOWAS
Mediator before the talks in Conakry, as Prime Minister. In the appointment decree,
he referred to the Conakry Agreement and noted that the nomination had followed
all constitutional formalities. The reactions of national stakeholders to the
appointment were in accordance with the positions that they had taken following the
signing of the Agreement. On 18 and 19 November, respectively, PAIGC contended
that the President had repudiated the Agreement through the appointment, while UM
denounced the appointment as a violation of the Agreement. On 19 November, PRS
announced that it agreed with the appointment and would consider participating in
the future Government if invited to do so.
10. Upon assuming office, the Prime Minister initiated consultations with all
signatories to the Conakry Agreement with a view to forming an inclusive
Government. In addition to national stakeholders, he held meetings with the
President of Senegal, Macky Sall, in Dakar on 19 November, the President of
Liberia in Monrovia on 28 November and international partner organizations in
Bissau on 29 November. On 26 November, PAIGC reiterated its determination not
to allow its members to participate in the new Government and announced the
withdrawal of its confidence in the President. In a statement issue d on
27 November, the 15 expelled parliamentarians condemned the stance of PAIGC,
expressed full confidence in the new Prime Minister and urged him to expedite the
formation of an inclusive Government. On 12 December, the President appointed by
decree the members of the Government. Of the five parties represented in the
National Assembly, PRS alone joined the new Government, which was inaugurated
on the following day.
11. On 17 December, in a final communiqué issued following its fiftieth ordinary
session, the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government reaffirmed its
deep concern over the protracted political and institutional crisis in Guinea -Bissau
and that the Conakry Agreement remained the only framework for its peaceful
resolution. The Authority urged the President, who attended the meeting, to comply

17-00995

3/17

S/2017/111

with the provisions of the Agreement and called upon all parties to strictly respect
and comply with the tenets of the Agreement. The Authority also directed the
ECOWAS Commission to withdraw ECOMIB by the end of its current mandate on
30 June 2017, beginning in the first quarter of 2017. It made no reference to the
preconditions on which the withdrawal would be contingent as outlined in the
ECOWAS road map of 10 September.
12. On 28 December, the leader of the United People’s Assembly-Democratic
Party of Guinea-Bissau, Nuno Nabiam, publicly alleged that the President was
planning to change the Bureau of the National Assembly and depose the current
Speaker in order to “force” the Assembly to adopt the new Government’s
programme of work. On 30 December, the Permanent Commission of the National
Assembly met, at the request of PAIGC and without the participation of PRS
representatives, to discuss, among other things, the allegations. Following the
meeting, the Commission urged the President to revoke the decrees appointing the
Prime Minister and his Government and to appoint Augusto Olivais as the new
consensus Prime Minister on the basis of his selection from the list of three
candidates provided to the political parties in Conakry. They also called for the
appointment of an inclusive and consensual Government, stating that those steps
would facilitate the implementation of the remaining provisions of the Conakry
Agreement, especially the holding of a round-table dialogue for the development of
the Government’s programme of work.
13. In a televised address to the nation on 31 December, the President
acknowledged that 2016 had been a difficult year for Guinea -Bissau and called upon
all citizens to unite around building the nation and reforming the Administration. He
also expressed the need for the country to focus efforts on tackling youth
unemployment, halting corruption and increasing rice production.

B.

Security situation
14. The overall security situation remained calm, the tense political climate
notwithstanding, with no major incidents reported. On 16 November, Armed Forces
Day, the Chief of General Staff, General Biaguê Na N’Tan, reaffirmed the
subordination of the military to the political authorities and the Constitution, noting
that there would be zero tolerance of any political interference by military
personnel.

C.

Human rights situation
15. No gross human rights violations were reported, but limited capacities and
financial constraints continued to impede the ability of the State authorities to
discharge their functions in the area of human rights effectively.
16. On 14 November, following a protest march organized by civil society
organizations, the Minister of Territorial Administration issued an order to prohibit,
for an unspecified period, public demonstrations and rallies throughout the country,
with the exception of those authorized by him.

4/17

17-00995

S/2017/111

17. The reopening of the sector court in Canchungo, Cacheu region,
notwithstanding, access to justice nationwide remained poor, in particular for
vulnerable groups and women. Corrections facilities also continued to suffer from
overcrowding, insecurity and poor living conditions. On 16 October, as a result of
overcrowding and inadequate perimeter security, 24 detainees escaped from the
Judiciary Police detention centre in Bissau. Fourteen remain at large.
18. Limited progress was made in tackling serious human rights violations from
the past through the existing formal justice system. The establishment of an
international commission of inquiry, as recommended at the National Conference on
Impunity, Justice and Human Rights held in July 2013, remains pending. Owing to
the political situation, no progress was made in establishing transitional justice
mechanisms or in convening the proposed national conference on reconciliation.

D.

Social, economic and humanitarian situation
19. On 2 December, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) agreed to resume the
disbursement of $7 million in budgetary support to Guinea -Bissau given the
progress made by the Government in reversing the contentious bank bailout of 2015
and taking measures to improve fiscal performance.
20. The political and institutional instability notwithstanding, Guinea -Bissau
registered strong economic growth thanks to a record harvest and the sale of cashew
nuts. In 2016, agricultural production grew by an estimated 8.3 per cent, with more
than 190,000 tons of raw cashew being exported. Consequently, gross domestic
product growth in 2016 was expected to surpass the 4.8 per cent forecast by IMF in
2015. Nevertheless, 30.6 per cent of the rural population remains food insecure,
according to a survey carried out in September by the Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Development with the support of the World Food Programme and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. The figure represents an
increase of 10.5 per cent compared with 2015.
21. There were several public sector strikes over salary arrears, primarily by
employees of the ministries responsible for education, economic affairs and finance.
Teaching unions also went on strike from 26 September to 21 November, affecting
primary and secondary schools and hampering the distribution of 1.17 million
textbooks by the United Nations Children’s Fund. The Government has since made
payments towards the arrears. Overall access to basic social services remained
limited, disproportionately affecting vulnerable groups, including women, children
and persons with disabilities.

III. Status of implementation of the mandate of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
A.

Inclusive political dialogue and national reconciliation process
22. UNIOGBIS continued to encourage national stakeholders to seek solutions to
the political crisis through dialogue. In this regard, my Special Representative
regularly engaged with national stakeholders, including the President, the Speak er,

17-00995

5/17

S/2017/111

the Prime Minister, the President of the Supreme Court, the Chief of General Staff
and political leaders. He also engaged with representatives of political parties, the
15 parliamentarians expelled from PAIGC, civil society, including youth and
women’s organizations, and traditional and religious leaders.
23. In support of the ECOWAS mediation efforts, my Special Representative
visited the subregion, including Abidjan, Abuja, Conakry, Dakar, Freetown and
Monrovia, and worked closely with the President of the ECOWAS Commission.
24. In coordination with the international partners of Guinea -Bissau, my Special
Representative continued to provide leadership in forging a common understanding
of the situation in the country and options for a political resolut ion of the crisis. In
that regard, on 28 October, he convened a meeting of the international partner
organizations represented in Bissau, including the African Union, ECOWAS, the
European Union and the United Nations, and representatives of the six parties that
constitute the Forum of Democratic Parties for Political Consultation, including
PAIGC, PCD and UM.
25. UNIOGBIS also continued to support the organizing commission for the
national conference towards the consolidation of peace and development in Gu ineaBissau, in particular with technical expertise and financial support through the
Peacebuilding Fund. The commission is preparing its report outlining
recommendations on how the national conference could move forward in
establishing permanent or semi-permanent conflict resolution and dialogue
mechanisms to help to address the root causes of instability. From 11 to 20 August
and from 18 to 24 September, members of the commission undertook study trips to
Timor-Leste and Côte d’Ivoire, respectively, to learn from national dialogue and
reconciliation processes in other contexts, with the technical and financial support
of UNIOGBIS through the Fund. Between 9 September and 9 October, the
commission organized a series of meetings in Bissau with focus groups, i ncluding
young people, women, the military and security forces, the media and the judiciary,
with the technical assistance of UNIOGBIS and the financial support of the Fund.

B.

National security sector reform and rule of law strategies
26. UNIOGBIS, in cooperation with the African Union, ECOWAS and the
European Union, assisted national stakeholders in reviewing the country’s strategy
for security sector reform, originally published in 2006.
27. As part of efforts to strengthen the justice sector, UNIOGBIS supported the
Ministry of Justice in organizing the sixth high-level National Justice Forum, held
from 6 to 8 December in Bissau. Some 70 representatives, including 10 women, of
judicial institutions, law enforcement agencies and civil soci ety developed
recommendations concerning military justice, penitentiary reform and countering
violent extremism and organized crime.
28. From 8 to 15 November, UNIOGBIS supported the organization of five
seminars to strengthen the capacity and enhance the coordination of 189 members of
the Quinara regional and sectoral consultative council, which was established in
2015 with the support of UNIOGBIS. Representatives of civil society, including
30 women, working in the fields of peacebuilding, rule of law, crime prevention,

6/17

17-00995

S/2017/111

environmental crimes and security governance also participated. The national
authorities are considering the replication of the council in other regions.
29. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) continued to provide
technical and financial support to the National Centre for Judicial Training. The
Centre provided refresher training for magistrates, lawyers and police officers,
including on environmental law, cross-border crime and trafficking in persons and
drugs. Between 30 November and 8 December, with the financial support of the
Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs of the United States
of America and the technical support of the Centre, six judges and six prosecutors
serving in criminal courts in border areas participated in joint training sessions in
Brazil and Senegal with magistrates of countries facing similar challenges.
30. With the support of UNIOGBIS, the National Defence Institute organized a
conference on maritime security, held from 23 to 25 November in Bissau and
attended by participants from the navy, the air force and national maritime
stakeholders. From 17 to 21 December, UNIOGBIS facilitated an inter -agency
maritime assessment mission for the development of a national maritime strategy.
On 15 December, also with the support of UNIOGBIS, the Institute held a
conference on key issues and challenges in countering violent extremism and
terrorism for 40 participants, including 6 women.
31. UNDP continued to support the Ministry of Justice in the provision of free
legal assistance and mediation of minor conflicts through the centres for access to
justice in the Bafatá, Bissau, Cacheu and Oio regions. The centres’ legal staff
continued to visit prisons and to assist the police in reviewing cases, i ncluding those
of illegally detained prisoners, which led to several people being released. An
additional centre was launched in the Quinara region on 5 December.

C.

Mobilization, harmonization and coordination of
international assistance
32. In its efforts to support national stakeholders in overcoming the political
stalemate in Guinea-Bissau, UNIOGBIS held regular consultations with the African
Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS and the
European Union, as well as with members of the Security Council and bilateral
partners represented in Bissau.
33. In close collaboration with international partners, the United Nations system
provided technical and logistical support to the ECOWAS -led mediation efforts in
September and October. With the support of the Peacebuilding Fund and with
extrabudgetary funds from the Department of Political Affairs, UNIOGBIS provided
technical, logistical and financial support to delegations dispatched by ECOWAS to
Guinea-Bissau from 5 to 8 September, on 10 September and on 5 November, as well
as for the organization of the round-table consultations facilitated by the ECOWAS
Mediator in Conakry from 10 to 14 October. My Special Representative participated
as an observer in those consultations.
34. In addition, the United Nations in Guinea-Bissau worked closely with key
partners, including the African Development Bank, the European Union, the West

17-00995

7/17

S/2017/111

African Economic and Monetary Union and the World Bank, to ensure more
coherent support for continuity of services and to tackle development challenges.

D.

Strengthening democratic institutions and enhancing the capacity
of State organs
35. The United Nations supported initiatives aimed at fostering open dialogue and
promoting understanding of the state of democracy in Guinea-Bissau. In September
and October, three conferences were organized by the National Institute of Studies
and Research, with the support of UNIOGBIS, focusing on models of national
political systems, national reconciliation processes in p ost-conflict contexts and the
reform of political parties. Some 255 people, including 40 women, attended the
conferences. On 23 September, UNIOGBIS assisted the National Assembly in the
organization of a conference on the role of young people in building d emocracy.
36. On 10 November, UNIOGBIS launched an outreach campaign to promote the
participation of citizens in democratic processes and in building a culture of
democracy. As part of the campaign, four conferences, on political accountability, a
stability pact, human rights and gender equality, were held at universities in Bissau
between 10 November and 15 December and were broadcast on national television
and radio. The conferences brought together 544 students, including 271 women.
Public outreach meetings on constitutional rights were also held in all regions,
except Bolama, between 5 and 21 December, by partner civil society organizations,
with the support of UNIOGBIS regional offices.
37. UNIOGBIS continued to support initiatives that promoted the pa rticipation of
women and young people in political dialogue. On 10 and 11 November and 29 and
30 December, UNIOGBIS supported the holding of regional meetings in Catió,
Tombali region, and Bissau, with 67 representatives, including 38 women, of civil
society organizations and authorities from the Quinara and Tombali regions, and the
Biombo region and Bissau, respectively. Participants discussed dialogue between
parliamentarians and communities, democratic culture among citizens and
preparations for the national conference towards the consolidation of peace and
development.
38. UNDP continued to provide support to specialized commissions of the
National Assembly. From 3 to 6 November, it supported a visit by the Commission
on Economic Affairs to State revenue collection institutions in the Quinara region to
assess challenges in implementing their mandates. Between 16 and 23 November, it
assisted the Commission for Women and Children to hold two workshops and a
seminar in the Cacheu and Oio regions to disseminate the law against domestic
violence. In partnership with the women’s parliamentary caucus, the Commission
for Women and Children held six debates in Bissau, on 23 and 24 November, with
80 women from civil society organizations to discuss the role of wome n in
economic, social, political and cultural development.
39. From 22 to 26 November, as part of efforts to strengthen the capacity of public
financial management oversight, the Court of Audit, supported by UNDP, organized
a seminar for 53 finance and administration officials on accounting procedures and
standards. The website of the Court, an important outreach tool to improve

8/17

17-00995

S/2017/111

accountability and transparency in public finance management, was launched during
the seminar.

E.

Law enforcement, criminal justice and penitentiary systems
40. UNIOGBIS continued to provide strategic and technical support to national
law enforcement agencies to enhance their capacity. It developed a basic training
programme for the country’s police institutions and supported the creation of a
career development centre to mitigate the effects of the absence of a police academy
in Guinea-Bissau since 1992. UNIOGBIS also provided technical support to law
enforcement agencies to develop internal security strategies and workplans.
41. To enhance coordination between police and internal security agencies,
UNIOGBIS supported law enforcement agencies in replicating a national -level
mechanism for strategic coordination, the Higher Council for Policing and Internal
Security Coordination, at the regional level. On 23 October, the first regional -level
mechanism held its inaugural meeting in Bafatá.
42. From 19 to 23 September, UNIOGBIS held a training workshop in Buba,
Quinara region, for 16 officers from the Public Order Police and the National Guard
to improve report-writing, coordination mechanisms and data and case management
between police officers, prosecutors and courts.
43. From 30 October to 2 November, in collaboration with the Judiciary Police,
UNIOGBIS held a training workshop on skills for organized crime investigations in
its regional office in Bafatá for 15 officers, including 1 woman, from the Public
Order Police and the National Guard. From 7 to 14 November, UNIOGBIS held a
training workshop in Bissau on interviewing and interrogation techniques in
complex investigations. In attendance were 24 officers, including 5 women, from
the Public Order Police, the National Guard, the Judiciary Police, the Security
Information Service and the Office of the Prosecutor General. From 28 November to
9 December in Bissau, UNIOGBIS also hosted a training -of-trainers course on
conduct and discipline for 10 law enforcement officers, including 3 women, from
the Public Order Police, the National Guard, the Judiciary Police, the Security
Information Service and the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL).
44. Between 28 November and 2 December, UNIOGBIS provided technical
support to a working group comprising 10 officers, including 5 women, from the
Public Order Police, the National Guard, the Judiciary Police, INTERPOL and the
Office of the Prosecutor General to develop standard operating procedures for the
collection of evidence and the effective documentation of the chain of custody.

F.

Promotion and protection of human rights
45. UNIOGBIS continued to monitor trials and preliminary hearings at the
regional courts in Bafatá, Bissau, Buba and Gabú. While due process is generally
being respected, access to counsel remains limited. UNIOGBIS also continued to
monitor prisons, detention centres and police cells in Bissau and the regions and to
draw the attention of the authorities to the poor living conditions of prisoners and

17-00995

9/17

S/2017/111

delays in investigations. It also continued to raise awareness of and provide
technical advice on human rights.
46. UNIOGBIS further undertook advocacy, reporting, capacity-building,
awareness-raising and outreach activities for State institutions and civil society
organizations, including traditional leaders, women and youth organizations and
academic institutions.
47. To enhance the capacity of non-governmental organizations in terms of
planning, project design and fundraising, UNIOGBIS facilitated training sessions
for human rights advocates in Bafatá from 20 to 23 September, Bissau from 27 to
30 December, Cacheu from 27 to 30 September and Quinara from 29 November to
2 December. To date, the training has benefited 105 representatives, including
33 women, from national non-governmental organizations nationwide.
48. During a workshop organized by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, with the
support of UNIOGBIS, from 14 to 17 November, national stakeholders agreed on
the terms of reference of an interministerial committee on human rights to follow up
on State obligations resulting from the ratification of international and regional
human rights instruments. The Minister of Justice agreed to submit to the Cabinet a
revised statute of the National Human Rights Commission, which would make it
compliant with the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principl es).
49. On 16 November, Armed Forces Day, the Minister of Defence launched a
human rights guide for the military at a ceremony in Bissau attended by the
Secretary of State for Former Combatants, members of the National Assembly and
all branches of the armed forces, as well as by representatives of the international
community and civil society. The guide was produced by UNIOGBIS based on
issues and best practices identified during training sessions held since 2011.
50. The United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women) assisted the Government in the organization of 16 days of
activism against gender-based violence, as part of the larger campaign, through a
series of public events. The activities included an official ceremo ny held in Tombali,
one of the most remote regions, to celebrate the abandonment of the practice of
female genital mutilation and early marriage in 10 local communities.
51. To support the Ministry of Justice in promoting a better understanding of
human rights, UNIOGBIS produced a guide for civil society organizations to
support them in dealing with human rights violations and enhancing awareness and
knowledge of international, regional and national human rights protection
mechanisms. A practical human rights guide to disseminate national, regional and
international legal standards for persons deprived of their liberty was also produced
by UNIOGBIS for the Ministry.
52. As part of the celebration of Human Rights Day, UNIOGBIS supported the
holding of two public debates, on 6 and 8 December, in Bafatá and in Buba, Quinara
region, to enhance dialogue between the local authorities and the public.
Discussions during the debate held in Bafatá, attended by 50 participants, focused
on female genital mutilation, discrimination, domestic violence, child exploitation,
rape and other sexual abuse, impunity and high fees requested by the courts and the

10/17

17-00995

S/2017/111

police. The debate in Buba, which brought together some 300 participants, including
public servants, traditional leaders and the Governor of Quinara, focused on lack of
access to justice, gender-based violence, early and forced marriage, school dropout
rates, access to health care, environmental conservation and the management of
biodiversity and protected areas.

G.

Combating drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
53. National institutions, with the support of UNIOGBIS and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), continued their efforts to detect and report
on drug trafficking and to seize illicit drugs. Investigations and joint operations
conducted by the Judiciary Police and the Transnational Crime Unit indicate that
trafficking continues to affect Guinea-Bissau as a transit country. Between August
and December, the Judiciary Police and the Transnational Crime Unit arrested five
individuals carrying drugs at the international airport, seizing 8.5 kg of cocaine.
54. UNIOGBIS and UNODC continued to provide technical, logistical and
financial support to the Airport Communication Project, funded by the European
Union and the United States, which helps in the strengthening of air borders and the
interception of illicit flows of people and goods. In Guinea -Bissau, it is also
supporting the operationalization, through mentoring and training, of an
anti-trafficking unit at the international airport.
55. UNIOGBIS and UNODC provided technical, logistical and financial support
to a capacity-building project implemented by Brazilian prosecutors. The project,
funded by the Brazilian Cooperation Agency, is focused on training public
prosecutors in Guinea-Bissau on the handling of cases involving trafficking in drugs
and persons, corruption, money-laundering, terrorism and environmental protection.
The initiative consists of four sessions, each lasting three weeks, for groups of up to
30 trainees each. The first two sessions, held between 22 August and 25 November,
benefited 54 prosecutors, including 13 women. The two remaining sessions are
scheduled for the first semester of 2017.
56. Joint regional and international operations continue to be critical in tackling
drug trafficking and organized crime in Guinea-Bissau and the subregion. Partnering
with the German-funded capacity-building project to foster stability in West Africa,
UNODC and UNIOGBIS provided planning and financial support to Operation
Adwenpa II, implemented at select land borders and airports in participating countries
from 14 to 21 November. The joint operation, which involved INTERPOL, the
Transnational Crime Unit, the Judiciary Police, the Directorate-General for Migration
and Borders, the Security Information Service and the Fiscal Brigade, enabled
participants to use skills acquired during training conducted by UNODC and
INTERPOL on joint operations.

H.

Incorporating a gender perspective into peacebuilding
57. The United Nations continued to work with national stakeholders to enhance
the overall participation of women in national affairs, conflict mediation and the
strengthening of protection mechanisms. UN-Women, in collaboration with the

17-00995

11/17

S/2017/111

United Nations Population Fund, assisted the Ministry of Women, the Family and
Social Cohesion and the Institute for Women and Children in reviewing the national
gender policy and formulating an action plan for its implementation. UN -Women
also supported the Ministry in the formulation of a national family policy to reduce
gender-based inequalities in households.
58. From 27 to 29 September, UNIOGBIS organized a training -of-trainers
workshop aimed at enhancing the capacity of 15 National Guard officers , including
6 women, to respond to sexual and gender-based violence. It also partnered with the
United Nations Volunteers programme to facilitate training for 16 Volunteers and
nine representatives of youth organizations aimed at enhancing gender
mainstreaming skills and gender-focused programme management.
59. On 4 November, with the financial support of UN -Women, three government
officials and three representatives of UN-Women undertook a study visit to
Ziguinchor, Senegal, to learn from the experience of a neighbourhood association
that implemented a community-based project to prevent and eradicate gender-based
violence. This exercise envisages a future, partner -supported replication of a centre
with similar functions in Guinea-Bissau.
60. On 5 December, the Government, with the support of UNIOGBIS, launched a
women’s mediation network as part of efforts to promote the participation of women
in conflict prevention and resolution. UNIOGBIS had previously supported the
preparations for the launch through training and capacity-building for 145 mediators
(121 women and 24 men) and through monitoring and assistance.

I.

Work with the Peacebuilding Commission
61. The Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission remained
actively engaged in following the situation in Guinea-Bissau. On 19 September, it
issued a communiqué in which it welcomed the ECOWAS-brokered six-point road
map and reiterated its support for the efforts by ECOWAS to implement it.
62. In recognition of the need to address the gap in bottom-up peacebuilding
initiatives, the Peacebuilding Fund facilitated the development of a project aimed at
empowering women and young people to participate more effectively in political
life. This, coupled with the overall implementation of the Peacebuilding Priority
Plan for 2015-2017, was supported by the Fund secretariat based in Guinea -Bissau.

IV. Cross-cutting issues
A.

Integration of the United Nations system
63. Under the leadership of my Special Representative, UNIOGBIS and the United
Nations country team have continued to work with the national authorities to make
the Guinea-Bissau-United Nations Partnership Framework operational in line with
national priorities. To ensure coherent system-wide support for national priorities in
the rule of law area, UNIOGBIS, UNDP, UNODC, the United Nations Children’s
Fund and UN-Women made progress towards the finalization of a joint programme

12/17

17-00995

S/2017/111

on police, corrections and justice reform under the umbrella of the Global Focal
Point for Police, Justice and Corrections Areas in the Rule of Law in Post -Conflict
and Other Crisis Situations.
64. On 18 and 19 October, a two-day retreat of the Senior Policy Group of the
United Nations in Guinea-Bissau brought together senior leaders from UNIOGBIS
and the United Nations country team to review the Organization’s strategies and
priorities in the country. The review was undertaken in the light of the political
crisis and the pending implementation of the ECOWAS road map and the Conakry
Agreement. The outcomes will be used to ensure that the United Nations system is
leveraged to contribute to peacebuilding and stabilization efforts, including
supporting the continuity of access to basic services.

B.

Public information
65. UNIOGBIS continued to monitor the national and international press and to
disseminate information, in English and Portuguese, on the good offices of my
Special Representative, the implementation of the Partnership Framework and the
mandated activities of the United Nations in Guinea-Bissau. This included the
dissemination of more than 160 press releases, articles and posts on social media
and the website of UNIOGBIS, in addition to the distribution of 2,000 copies of a
magazine on the activities of the United Nations system. UNIOGBIS also produced
22 radio programmes broadcast by private radio stations with national coverage and
27 community radio stations throughout the country. In line with mandated
activities, programmatic themes included democracy, citizenship, the political
participation of young people and women, models of government and political
systems, political dialogue, reconciliation, the mediation agreements reached in
Bissau and Conakry, the Sustainable Development Goals and violence against
women.
66. Between 12 and 14 October, UNIOGBIS organized a media forum attended by
103 media executives and senior journalists to discuss the management of media
companies and journalistic ethics and to assist the Ministry of Social
Communication in the design of a national media policy. Similarly, UNIOGBIS and
the National Council for Social Communication co -organized, on 21 and
22 December, a workshop with 50 journalists, including 10 women, to draft an
ethics code for journalists, as provided for in the relevant media legislation.

C.

Staff safety and security
67. No major security incidents affecting United Nations personnel were reported,
notwithstanding an increase in violent crime, which included cases of assault and
armed robbery in Bissau and in the regions of Bafatá and Gabú.

17-00995

13/17

S/2017/111

V. Findings and recommendations of the strategic
review mission
68. In response to a request by my Special Representative to determine whether
UNIOGBIS was fit for purpose, a mission led by the Department of Political Affairs
was deployed to Guinea-Bissau from 4 to 14 December to conduct a strategic
review of the key priorities of UNIOGBIS, make recommendations on its
operational posture and identify possible elements for an exit strategy. The mission
was also composed of representatives of the Department of Field Support, the
Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Peacebuilding Support Office, UNDP and the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel.
69. The strategic review mission met the national authorities, including the
President, the Speaker, the Prime Minister, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the
Minister of Defence. Meetings were also held with representatives of political
parties and civil society and with international partners represented in GuineaBissau. The mission visited the UNIOGBIS regional office in Buba to assess
engagement outside Bissau. It also held in-depth consultations with relevant
components within UNIOGBIS and with the United Nations country team.
70. The strategic review mission noted that many national and international
stakeholders expected the United Nations, jointly with ECOWAS, to increase
pressure on the key political actors to ensure the swift implementation of the
ECOWAS road map and the Conakry Agreement. Meetings with the various
national stakeholders confirmed the continued relevance of the road map as the
most pragmatic way of overcoming the political impasse and taking key reforms
forward. The mission noted the potential for relapse into instability and the
continued validity of the drivers identified in the strategic assessment mission of
November 2014 (see S/2015/37), dispatched pursuant to Security Council resolution
2157 (2014).
71. The strategic review mission found that UNIOGBIS should sequence its
engagement and, in the immediate term, focus on the issues spelled out in the
ECOWAS road map. As a priority, attention should be given to maximizing i ts good
offices, political facilitation and coordinating the efforts of international partners. In
the immediate to short term, independent of whether a consensual Government was
formed, the Mission should focus its political efforts on supporting a timely
electoral process for legislative and presidential elections in 2018 and 2019. It
should further explore ways to support crucial reform projects in the lead -up to the
elections, in particular constitutional review and reform, security sector reform and
reforms of the Electoral Code and the legislation on political parties.
72. The strategic review mission also underscored the need for UNIOGBIS to
support the implementation of reforms to promote the rule of law and human rights.
Such support should be geared towards building the foundations of State institutions
and democratic governance, given that viable and functioning State institutions are
considered to be of paramount importance for the promotion and protection of
human rights. A national reconciliation process to address impunity for past human

14/17

17-00995

S/2017/111

rights violations and the sustainable enhancement of State capacities must also
remain key areas of United Nations support.
73. To achieve progress in meeting these priorities and corresponding benchmarks,
the strategic review mission recommended that UNIOGBIS should enhance its
operational posture. In particular, it should strengthen its political capacities so as to
provide my Special Representative with enhanced analytical and operational
support, including in the areas of good offices, mediation and constitutional,
electoral and security sector reform. Moreover, the UNIOGBIS human rights and
public information units should be fully leveraged in direct support of the political
mandate. Strategic sequencing, in particular of programmatic activities that are not
sustainable in the current situation, should free up resources to support a stronger
presence of UNIOGBIS in the regions, including for enhanced monitoring, early
warning, decentralized capacity-building and community outreach.
74. The strategic review mission suggested that UNIOGBIS priorities should
further be supported by a streamlined management structure, whereby the political
office would be strengthened and report directly to my Special Representati ve,
while the heart of the programmatic work, in particular on the rule of law and
security institutions, would be led by a single deputy special representative for rule
of law and deputy head of mission, who would also serve as United Nations
Resident Coordinator. Such an arrangement would also serve to foster greater
integration between UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country team and prepare
for the eventual exit of UNIOGBIS.
75. The strategic review mission proposed possible benchmarks for the exit of
UNIOGBIS. The overarching benchmark for the coming three years should be to
accompany the public in reaching agreement on and implementing key reforms
towards successful elections and a stabilized post-electoral period. The mission
recommended that, if, by the end of the current legislative and presidential terms, no
significant progress had been made in achieving key short-term priorities for
UNIOGBIS, the Security Council should reconsider options for the future role of
UNIOGBIS.

VI. Observations
76. I am deeply concerned by the protracted political crisis in Guinea -Bissau and
its negative impact on the country’s stability and socioeconomic development. The
lack of progress in identifying and implementing a sustainable solution is having a
detrimental effect on national efforts to tackle long-standing and emerging
challenges to peace, security, development and human rights and to move forward
with a viable peacebuilding agenda.
77. Political stakeholders in Guinea-Bissau must move away from their
intransigent positions that serve only to perpetuate divisions. I urge all political
actors to put the interests of the people above all other considerations. I call upon
them to engage in genuine dialogue and find common ground to urgently resolve the
political crisis.
78. The Government has benefited from the unwavering support and goodwill of
its regional and international partners. The six-point road map of 10 September and

17-00995

15/17

S/2017/111

the Conakry Agreement of 14 October, brokered by ECOWAS and supported by the
United Nations and other international partners, offer a historic opportunity for the
national authorities and political leaders, together with civil society, to jointly
ensure political stability and build sustainable peace.
79. The United Nations remains determined to support Guinea-Bissau in achieving
progress on key reforms, as outlined in the Conakry Agreement, aimed at creating a
conducive environment for the holding of legislative and presidential elections in
2018 and 2019, the reform of the Electoral Code and the promulgation of a new law
on political parties that would enhance the parties’ autonomy and internal
democracy. These reforms would be the first step towards the creation of an
enabling environment for further national reconciliation.
80. I am encouraged by the commitment demonstrated by the ECOWAS Authority
of Heads of State and Government at its fiftieth ordinary session, on 17 December,
to supporting the implementation of the ECOWAS road map and the Conakry
Agreement. I join ECOWAS in urging the President and all the signatories to the
agreements to commit themselves to fully implementing them.
81. I commend the Chairperson of the ECOWAS Authority and President of
Liberia, Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, the ECOWAS Mediator for Guinea-Bissau and
President of Guinea, Alpha Condé, and the President of Sierra Leone, Ernest Bai
Koroma, for their efforts in support of Guinea-Bissau. I take note of the decision of
the Authority to withdraw ECOMIB by 30 June 2017. UNIOGBIS will work with
all national, regional and international partners to ensure that the withdrawal does
not create a vacuum that could lead to instability.
82. I welcome the sustained engagement of all international partners present in the
country, in particular the African Union, the Community o f Portuguese-speaking
Countries, ECOWAS and the European Union. I encourage them to continue to
support the country’s national strategic and operational plan for the period 2015 2020 and to make good on the commitments made during the round -table dialogue
held in Brussels in March 2015. I welcome the resumption of the IMF programme
of disbursements and encourage international partners to support their development
programmes where they remain feasible and sustainable, in particular with a view to
supporting the provision of basic public services to the population, creating greater
economic opportunities, including for young people, and building the capacity of
civil society organizations and local authorities.
83. The challenges posed by transnational organized crime and other emerging
threats, including the risk of other complex security challenges in West Africa
spilling over, continue to present genuine threats to stability. I call upon national,
regional and international partners to coordinate action to p revent and put an end to
the corrosive and destabilizing effects of transnational crime.
84. I am encouraged that, throughout the political crisis, the armed forces and
security institutions have refrained from interfering in the political arena. The
formation of a fully functioning Government that conforms to the letter and spirit of
the Conakry Agreement, supported by the National Assembly, is indispensable to
making sustainable progress in the modernization of the armed forces and the
effective implementation of national security sector reform plans with the support of
international partners.

16/17

17-00995

S/2017/111

85. I strongly encourage donors to support the joint programme on police, justice
and corrections, developed by UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country team on
the basis of national priority plans. International donors could also leverage the joint
programme as a platform for coordinating their assistance.
86. I welcome the progress made towards the establishment of an interministerial
committee on human rights to follow up on State obligations resulting from the
ratification of human rights instruments. I commend the Ministry of Education on
its decision to formally introduce human rights into the curricula, produce a manual
for teachers and train teachers on human rights. I also welcome the launch of a
human rights guide for the armed forces and encourage the military leaders to fully
comply with its principles.
87. Building on this progress, I urge the national authorities to finalize the
ratification of pending international human rights instruments and reiterate my calls
for the implementation of the recommendations of human rights mechanisms,
including those of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review in 2015,
the Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights in 2014 and the
Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers in 2015.
88. The mandate of UNIOGBIS expires on 28 February 2017. As Guinea -Bissau
continues to seek a pathway towards sustainable peace, the urgent need for t he
United Nations to make a political difference is evident. In this regard, I endorse the
recommendations of the strategic review mission outlined above. The United
Nations needs the operational flexibility to respond effectively to the challenges of
the political stalemate, while also focusing on its primary mandate of preventing
conflict and sustaining long-term peace. In this regard, UNIOGBIS will need to
strengthen its political capacities and strategically sequence its mandated activities
to focus on creating the political space needed for sustainable peacebuilding. A
streamlined management structure will also help in enhancing integration within the
United Nations system in Guinea-Bissau. Furthermore, I recommend that the
mandate of UNIOGBIS be extended for another year, until 28 February 2018.
89. I express my appreciation to the staff of UNIOGBIS and the United Nations
country team under the leadership of my Special Representative, Modibo Ibrahim
Touré, for their commitment, endurance and hard work, as well as to bilateral,
regional and international partners for their continuing contributions to
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau.

17-00995

17/17
