VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
organize its work on the draft convention on the rights
of the child at its thirty-fifth session so that the draft
of the Convention may be ready for adoption if possible during the International Year of the Child;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session the question of a convention on the rights of the child.

90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/167.

Regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/127 of 16 December
1977,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 24 (XXXIV) of 8 March 1978 82 on regional
arrangements for the promotion and protection of
human rights,
Noting with serious concern the report of the Secretary-General83 on the implementation of the abovementioned resolutions, in which he reported that owing
to financial difficulties he was unable to organize any
seminar for the purpose of discussing the usefulness
and advisability of the establishment of regional commissions for the promotion and protection of human
rights in regions where no regional commission on
human rights exists,
Stressing the importance of the speedy and effective
implementation of the resolutions of the General Assembly on this question,
1. Reiterates its appeal to States in areas where
regional arrangements in the field of human rights
do not yet exist to consider agreements with a view
to the establishment within their respective regions of
suitable regional machinery for the promotion and
protection of human rights;

2. Requests once again that the Secretary-General,
under the programme of advisory services in the field
of human rights, give priority to the consideration,
in regions where no regional commission on human
rights exists, of seminars for the purpose of discussing
the usefulness and advisability of the establishment
of regional commissions for the promotion and protection of human rights and that at least one such
seminar should be organized during 1979;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the present resolution
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session
and also to include in his report to the Commission
on Human Rights, in accordance with paragraph 4
of Commission resolution 24 (XXXIV), such information as he may already possess on the implementation of this resolution.

90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
82 See Official Records of

the Economic and Social Council, 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34 ), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
83 A/33/219.

33/168.

155

Narcotic drugs

The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961,84 of that Convention
as amended by the 1972 Protocol Amending the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961,85 and
of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances, 1971,86
which form the main basis of all efforts in international
drug control,
Bearing in mind the numerous resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the World Health Organization on the
subject in recent years as well as the relevant recommendations of the Fifth United Nations Congress on
the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, 87
A ware of the comprehensive and valuable work of
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the International Narcotics Control Board as the main technical
and treaty organs entrusted with specific functions in
order to ensure and supervise the proper implementation of the Conventions and Protocol and to foster
the most efficient international drug control,
Preoccupied by the persistence of serious health,
social and economic problems of drug abuse for individuals, young and old, and for societies as a whole,
Noting with great concern the detrimental effects of
the continued international drug traffic,
Reaffirming the responsibility of Governments as
well as the collective responsibility of the international
community to regulate and limit the cultivation, production, manufacture and use of drugs to quantities
required for medical and scientific purposes, in accordance with the above-mentioned treaties,
Convinced that measures to reduce illicit demand
for narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, including prevention through proper information and education, treatment and rehabilitation, must be taken
concurrently with measures of adequate control to
reduce illicit drug supply and traffic,
Also convinced that co-ordinated efforts by all competent agencies and organizations concerned with the
fight against illicit drug traffic should be intensified
to bring about even better results in the interception
of illicit drug traffic,
Considering the response to paragraph 5 of General
Assembly resolution 32/124 of 16 December 1977
given by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs concerning the launching of a meaningful programme of
international drug abuse control strategy and policies
to be considered by the Commission at its twentyeighth session in February 1979,
l. Reiterates its appeal to all States not yet parties
to the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, the
1972 Protocol Amending the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs, 1961, 88 and the Convention on Psycho84 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 520, No. 7515, p. 151.
85 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.77.XI.3, p. 13.
86 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.XI.3, p.

7.

87 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.2 and cor-

rigendum, para. 28.
88 See Official Records of the United Nations Conference to
consider amendments to the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1961, vol. I (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.73.XI.7), part three.

156

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

tropic Substances, 1971, to take steps to accede to
these instruments in order to achieve their universal
application and requests the Secretary-General to
transmit this appeal to all Governments concerned;
2. Invites Governments to co-operate fully with the
International Narcotics Control Board and to supply
such information as may be necessary to enable it to
make meaningful long-range studies and projections
designed to promote the maintenance of a world-wide
balance between the supply of narcotic raw materials
and the legitimate demand for medical and scientific
purposes;
3. Supports the Board's appeal to States to improve
their reporting machinery, with the assistance of the
Board, so that they may provide full and prompt information to the Board, thereby enabling it to perform
effectively its functions under the relevant treaties;
4. Urges Governments to support the work of the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs, to provide complete
data and information to the Secretary-General in
their annual reports and individual seizure reports as
required under the relevant treaties and in response to
the Secretary-General's request, and to inform him also
without specific requests of any new developments,
trends and measures discernible in the drug field which
could be of importance or relevance to improved international drug control;
5. Invites Governments, in co-operation with competent bodies of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies, to increase their joint efforts to eradicate
illicit or uncontrolled cultivation of narcotic plants
and illicit or uncontrolled manufacture of psychotropic
substances in order to ensure a continuing equilibrium
between licit supply and licit demand, and to avoid
unforeseen imbalances caused by sales of seized and
confiscated drugs;
6. Calls for more extensive and effective efforts
of Governments, in co-operation with competent bodies
of the United Nations and the specialized agencies in
order to facilitate appropriate designing and implementation of programmes aimed at eradicating illicit
demand for and illicit marketing of drugs and at
furthering exchange of experience and information
among scientists and experts from various nations who
are actively engaged in this field;
7. Reiterates its appeal to Governments for increased and sustained contributions to the United
Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control and to all international and multilateral organizations and institutions
to co-operate with and to support financially the United
Nations efforts undertaken through drug control programmes;
8. Requests the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to
undertake at its twenty-eighth session the finalization
and implementation of the comprehensive programme
of international drug abuse control strategy and policies
and requests the Secretary-General to assist the Commission in the implementation of this programme, the
progress of which should be monitored by the Commission to ensure that, if necessary, appropriate adjustments in the programme can be made to enable it
to meet new requirements of international drug control
which might arise out of new developments concerning
various aspects of the drug problem;

9. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
give at its first regular session of 1979 due consideration to these questions.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
33/169.

Protection of the human ri~hts of arrested or detained trade union m·tivii.ts

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/ 121 of 16 December
I 977 regarding the protection of the human rights of
persons who are detained in respect of offences which
they have committed, or are suspected of having committed, by reason of their political opinions or
convictions,
Noting that one important category of prisoners
falling within the ambit of resolution 32/ 121 is that
of those who have been arrested or detained in connexion with their trade union activities,
Also recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/21 of 5 May 1978 regarding infringements
of trade union rights in South Africa,
Having regard, in this context, not only to articles
5, 10 and 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights 89 but also to article 20 of the Declaration, which
provides that everyone has the right to freedom of
peaceful assembly and association,
Having regard also to article 8 of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 110
and to article 22 of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights 90 which provide that everyone
shall have the right to freedom of association with
others, including the right to form and join trade unions
for the protection of his interests,
Further having regard to International Labour Organi~ation Convention No. 87 of 9 July 1948 concernmg the freedom of association and protection of
the right to organize. 91
Recognizing the important work done by the International . Labour Organisation in order to promote
trade umon rights and to take appropriate action in
concrete cases of persons arrested, detained or exiled
by reason of their trade union activities,
Lending its support to the efforts of the International
Labour Organisation in this regard,
1. Reaffirms the importance of protecting the right
to freedom of association as an essential prerequisite
for the conduct of any trade union activities;
2. Recommends that special attention should be
paid to the violations of the right to freedom of
association consisting of the arrest, detention or exile
of persons who have engaged in trade union activities consistent with the principles of freedom of
association;
3. Requests Member States:
(a)
To release any persons who, within their
jurisdiction and contrary to the provisions of the
s9 Resolution 217 A (III).
90 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
91 See International Labour Organisation. Conventions a11d
Recommendations adopted by the International Labour Conference, 1919-1966 (Geneva. International Labour Office, 1966).
