S/PRST/2013/21

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 December 2013
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7083rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 December 2013, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Libya”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Libya.
The Council expresses its grave concern at the worsening security situation
and political divisions, which threaten to undermine the transition to
democracy that meets the aspirations of the Libyan people.

“The Security Council reiterates its support to the people of Libya, and
encourages their continued and firm commitment to the consolidation of
democracy and the establishment of a stable and prosperous state based on
national reconciliation, justice, respect for human rights and rule of law.
“The Security Council welcomes the efforts of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and Special Representative of the
Secretary General Tarek Mitri to facilitate a meaningful Libyan-led national
dialogue in Libya and strongly encourages further steps forward in this regard.
The Council underlines the importance of a single, inclusive national dialogue
that can forge consensus on the priorities for securing a transition to
democracy and help ensure that all views in Libya are properly taken into
account.
“The Security Council reiterates its support to the elected political
institutions in Libya. The Council notes that the adoption of a constitution will
be crucial in providing the framework for Libya’s secure and prosperous future
and emphasizes the urgency and importance of further progress in the
constitutional process.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the killing of unarmed
protestors in Tripoli on 15 November and emphasizes that all parties must
reject violence against civilians and respect the right of all Libyans to peaceful
assembly. The Council, while taking note of the withdrawal of some armed
groups from Tripoli as a positive development, calls for urgent progress
towards an inclusive national approach to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration into civilian life or integration into state military and security
institutions. The Council encourages UNSMIL to continue to provide technical
advice and assistance to Libya’s efforts on demobilization and reintegration.
13-62207 (E) 171213

*1362207*

S/PRST/2013/21

“The Security Council stresses the urgent need to strengthen military and
police institutions in Libya. In line with the needs and wishes of the Libyan
people, the Council supports the efforts of Libyan state forces to restore public
security across Libya and counter violence by extremist groups, in particular in
Benghazi and Derna. The Council expresses its concern at the use of force by
armed groups against state institutions, including the illegal seizure of energy
facilities and smuggling of natural resources, urges the transfer of control of
all facilities back to the proper authorities, and welcomes and encourages
further efforts by the Libyan government to resolve peacefully the disruptions
of Libya’s energy exports.
“The Security Council expresses its concern at the threat posed by
unsecured arms and ammunition in Libya and their proliferation, which poses
a risk to stability, including through transfer to terrorist and extremist groups,
and calls on the Libyan government to take concrete measures to control arms
and ammunition stockpiles in Libya by ensuring proper management, safe
storage and, where appropriate, effective disposal of arms and related materiel
and through strengthening border security, and in this regard urges
neighbouring states to cooperate with the Libyan authorities’ efforts to secure
their borders. The Council supports greater international efforts and increased
coordination from the UN to provide assistance to the Libyan government in
this regard.
“The Security Council condemns cases of torture and mistreatment, and
deaths by torture, in illegal detention centres in Libya. The Council
emphasizes that practices of torture and extrajudicial killing should not be
tolerated in Libya. The Council expresses its grave concern about the
continued arbitrary detention, without access to due process, of thousands of
persons held outside the authority of the state and reiterates its calls for their
immediate release or transfer to detention centres under state authority. In this
regard, the Council welcomes the recent transitional justice law promulgated
by Libya’s General National Congress and encourages its full implementation.
Expressing its concern about all human rights violations and abuses, the
Council calls upon the Libyan authorities to investigate and bring to justice the
perpetrators of all such acts, including those committed against children.
“The Security Council calls on all parties in Libya to support the
democratic transition in Libya, including agreement on its immediate next
steps, and to engage in political dialogue and refrain from violence and actions
that challenge the stability of the state.”

2/2

13-62207
