S/PRST/2014/19

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 September 2014
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7270th meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 September 2014, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms the importance of maintaining the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic. The Security Council stresses that, despite the latest security
challenges and United Nations Disengagement Observer Force’s (UNDOF)
temporary relocation of the majority of its personnel across the Alpha line,
both parties must remain committed to the terms of the disengagement
agreement and scrupulously observe the ceasefire and the separation of forces.
The Security Council also urges both parties to continue to offer support to
UNDOF during this period of heightened security threats, and to offer UNDOF
and UN Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO)-Observer Group Golan safe
passage and resupply when requested.
“The Security Council also reaffirms its unconditional support for
UNDOF and the importance of maintaining UNDOF as a vital contributor to
peace and security in the Middle East. The Security Council notes with
concern the deteriorating security situation in UNDOF’s area of operation due
to the ongoing Syrian conflict and the activities of several non -state armed
actors, including Al-Nusra Front, and the risk it poses to the disengagement
agreement and to UN peacekeepers serving there. In this connection, the
Security Council recognizes the necessity of efforts to flexibly adjust
UNDOF’s posture to minimize risk to UN personnel as UNDOF continues to
implement its mandate, while emphasizing that the ultimate goal is for the
peacekeepers to return to their positions in UNDOF’s area of operation as soon
as practicable.
“The Security Council condemns recent hostile acts against UN
peacekeepers in UNDOF’s area of operation by UNSC-designated terrorist
groups and non-state armed actors and stresses that there can never be any
justification for these attacks on and detention of UN peacekeepers. The
Security Council is deeply concerned that firing in close proximity to UN
positions and camps also significantly increases risk to UN personnel. To this
end, the Security Council demands that all groups other than UNDOF must
abandon all UNDOF positions and the Quneitra crossing point, and return the
peacekeepers’ vehicles, weapons, and other equipment. The Security Council
14-61328 (E)

190914

*1461328*

S/PRST/2014/19

reiterates that UNDOF’s mandate, impartiality, operations, safety, and security
must be respected. The Security Council calls upon all parties to allow
UNDOF to operate freely and to ensure full security of its personnel and full
implementation of the 1974 agreement.
“The Security Council commends UNDOF and UNTSO-Observer Group
Golan peacekeepers for their bravery in facing the threats and challenges in
their area of operation, and extends its appreciation to the troop con tributing
countries. The Security Council notes the importance of maintaining UNDOF’s
force strength and self-defense resources to the level necessary to carry out its
important mandate, and to retain its quick reaction and counter-IED
capabilities, which have proved indispensable in the face of a changing
security environment.
“The Security Council urges Member States with influence to convey
strongly to non-state armed actors in this area the need to halt immediately all
activities that endanger UN peacekeepers on the ground and impede them in
the implementation of their duties as mandated by the Security Council. The
Security Council recalls the obligation of all Member States to ensure that any
person who participates in the financing, planning, prepa ration or perpetration
of terrorist acts or in supporting terrorist acts is brought to justice and notes
the importance of this obligation with respect to terrorist acts directed against
UN peacekeepers.
“The Security Council requests that the Secretary-General provide an
update within 30 days on steps necessary to maintain UNDOF’s ability to carry
out its mandate, including options for monitoring the ceasefire and the
separation of forces even under circumstances when security conditions
constrain UNDOF from fully operating in the Area of Separation and the Area
of Limitation on the Bravo side, and to keep the Security Council updated on
ways it can support the continuation of this vital mission.”

2/2

14-61328
