S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9421st meeting

Wednesday, 20 September 2023, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rama/Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Sénéchal de Goffredo Junior
Mr. Niu Xiaoqiang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. Olmedo
Ms. Betoe Ndojombouet
Mr. Nyarku
Mr. Hamamoto
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Irachande Gouveia
Ms. Zabolotskaya
Mrs. Chanda
Mr. Sharaf
Mr. Eckersley
Ms. Millard

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Upholding the purposes and principles of the UN Charter through effective
multilateralism: maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
Letter dated 6 September 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Albania
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2023/653)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-27319 (E)
*2327319*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was resumed at 3.35 p.m.
The President: I would like to warmly welcome
all the Presidents, Ministers and other high-level
representatives who are here in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject under discussion.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphones will
prompt speakers to bring their remarks to a close after
four minutes.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Alan
Karis, President of the Republic of Estonia.
President Karis: I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s debate, which is important not
only for Ukraine but for all of us who respect the
Charter of the United Nations. We cannot remain
silent when multilateralism and international law,
with the Charter at their core, are under unparalleled
pressure. Russia’s aggression against Ukraine violates
all the values we believe in. It violates the fundamental
principles enshrined in the Charter while exposing the
structural deficiencies of the United Nations and its
Security Council.
A permanent member of the Council responsible
for upholding international peace and security has
launched a full-scale, unlawful and unjustified war on
its sovereign neighbour, using its veto power to shield
itself from accountability and shamelessly undermining
the credibility of the Council and the authority of
the United Nations. I call on all responsible Council
members and all States Members of the United Nations
to urgently reflect on how we can work together to
fix that brutal ignorance of our Organization’s core
principles. I am convinced that those responsible for
aggression and conflict — even those with the right to
veto in the Security Council — have to face justice,
because a crime is a crime, regardless of who the
perpetrators are or the power they hold.
Since the Russian Federation’s large-scale armed
attack on sovereign Ukraine began, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
has recorded 27,149 civilian casualties in the country,
including 9,614 people killed, 500 of them children.
Those numbers are not bare statistics — they are
people’s lives, broken destinies and lost dreams. For
2/30

20/09/2023

those who endure, there are no safe places, as homes,
hospitals, food storage facilities and schools have been
destroyed. Tens of thousands of children have lost their
families or have been forcibly deported to Russia and
Belarus, only to suffer abuse in re-education camps
or be stripped of their Ukrainian roots and identity in
Russian families. That disgraceful practice has been
used by our neighbour in the past, in my country and in
many other places.
The human toll of the war extends far beyond
Ukraine. By unilaterally leaving the United Nationsmediated Black Sea Grain Initiative and obstructing
Ukraine’s grain export, Russia is using food scarcity
as a tool to manipulate the world’s most vulnerable
populations. Let me repeat loud and clear that we have
never imposed sanctions on Russian exports of food to
third countries. Russia and Russia alone is responsible
for the war and for the millions of lives of people who
face starvation, as Russia is destroying Ukrainian grain
facilities, stealing grain from occupied territories and
bombarding Ukrainian ports. Russia’s actions reveal its
intention to manipulate the market and destabilize the
international political climate by increasing the price of
grain and forcing countries to become reliant on Russian
assistance. The United Nations cannot allow aggression
to become a form of politics. Ukraine has presented
its peace formula — the only comprehensive plan to
overcome Russia’s aggression and all its consequences.
The points of the peace formula reiterate all the basic
principles of the Charter. An overwhelming majority
of United Nations Member States voted for a just peace
for Ukraine and protecting the Charter. However, the
Security Council remains hostage of the aggression.
It has become an unfortunate reality that the
Security Council is unable to act decisively and fulfil
its mandate. In order to ensure that the Security
Council can carry out the tasks set out in the Charter,
there is no other alternative than to adjust the structure
and working methods of the Council, while further
reinforcing the power of the General Assembly. The
veto initiative adopted last spring (General Assembly
resolution 76/262) was a laudable significant first step,
but more has to be done. There should be no right of the
veto if there is a suspicion that the country casting it may
have acted against international law. Estonia supports
the French-Mexican initiative on veto restraint and the
code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency Group on not voting against resolutions
aimed at ending mass atrocities, including the crime
of aggression.
23-27319

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

The President: I thank President Karis for his
statement.

Zelenskyy’s effort, as put forward in his peace formula.
Only Ukraine can set the terms of any peace solution.

I thank I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Petr Pavel, President of the Czech Republic.

As we all know, my country had its own painful
experience with what at the time was called Russian
international assistance. They came without being
asked to assist us, against us. Today we call it by it
by its proper names: imperialism and expansionism.
We have been there. Czechia therefore feels a strong
sense of solidarity with Ukraine and its people. I am
truly thankful that our Government and society have
been supporting Ukraine so wholeheartedly. We are
determined to stay side by side with Ukraine and
support it as long as it takes, until peace and the rule of
law are restored.

President Pavel: It is an honour to address the
Security Council today, and I would like to thank the
Albanian presidency for this opportunity.
We teach our children to play by the rules, to
develop friendly and respectful relations and to prevent
conflicts. We, the Member States of the United Nations
family, have reflected that globally shared notion within
the international rules-based order to secure a peaceful
and prosperous life for our societies. And yet Russia,
a permanent member of the Security Council, has
launched a full-fledged invasion and is waging a brutal
and unprovoked war of aggression against its neighbour
in blatant violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
It is an outrageous insult to the rules-based order and
thus to the entire international community. Time and
again, we have been bitterly retaught the lesson that the
aggressor ̕ s voracity only grows while he devours his
prey. This is not only about Russia and Ukraine — this
concerns us all.
The ultimate victory of Ukraine means a victory for
the rule of law and respect for others, while its defeat
would allow lawless brutality to prevail. That is why I
believe that no country may be genuinely neutral in this
conflict. Russia must completely and unconditionally
withdraw all of its troops and military equipment from
the entire territory of Ukraine. The Kremlin leadership
must face consequences and be brought to justice. Due
to Russia’s aggression, people are dying once again in
Europe. But the impacts of the war go far beyond the
region. By violating the fundamental rights of Ukraine
to its independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity,
Russia is putting peace and security at risk globally,
inspiring possible followers. Furthermore, we cannot
but condemn Russia’s cynical decision to terminate
the Black Sea Grain Initiative. It has led to massive
increases in food prices, and it bluntly demonstrates
how little Russia cares about the day-to-day struggle of
the most vulnerable.
The international community, and almost every
member of the Security Council, have already expressed
their desire for peace in Ukraine. But clearly, no one
wants peace more than the Ukrainians themselves — a
just and lasting peace and a peace that does not reward
the aggressor. That is why we support President

The President: I thank President Pavel for his
statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Marcelo
Rebelo de Sousa, President of the Portuguese Republic.
President Rebelo de Sousa (spoke in Portuguese;
English interpretation provided by the delegation): How
do we measure human suffering? How do we measure
the pain of an orphaned child, of parents who have lost
children, of the mutilated and of victims of torture?
How does one resist and survive all that and continue
fighting for one’s family, home and country? I was in
Ukraine a few weeks ago, and it is impossible to remain
indifferent to the unspeakable devastation in Bucha and
Moschun, which are tragic examples of inhumanity and
suffering. But it is also impossible not to admire the
inspiring vitality and moral strength embodied in the
resistance and resilience of the Ukrainian people, who
are admirably defending themselves against an illegal,
unjust and immoral invasion. I therefore welcome the
Albanian presidency’s initiative to convene this crucial
open debate.
Portugal’s position is clear. We are, and will always
be, on the side of international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and any General Assembly resolution
condemning the aggression against Ukraine and
demanding the withdrawal of Russian troops. We are,
and will always be, in solidarity with the efforts for the
legitimate of defence of Ukraine, its formula for peace
and its struggle to restore sovereignty, while supporting
its contribution to global food security. We are, and will
always be, in solidarity with the victims, the refugees,
whom we have always welcomed, the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to create humanitarian corridors and
conditions for the return of thousands of children taken

23-273193/30

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

20/09/2023

from their families and illegally deported. We are, and
will always be, committed to a just road map for peace
that restores and gives credibility to international law
and reaffirms Ukraine’s legitimate aspiration to full
integration in organizations that it sovereignly wishes
to join.

bloodshed and experienced the impact of the war in
the Balkans — again, a region in Hungary’s immediate
neighbourhood. Nor should we forget that even now the
stability of the western Balkans is a goal that we still
have to work for, among other things by speeding up
the region’s integration into the European Union.

We are, and will always, be ready to contribute to
achieving a just and sustainable peace that enables an
immediate and lasting ceasefire, with the withdrawal
of the Russian Federation’s troops from the territory
of Ukraine and the guarantee of nuclear safety and
the safety of nuclear facilities, under the monitoring
of the International Atomic Energy Agency; a just and
sustainable peace that ensures the monitored release of
prisoners and deportees, with special urgent attention
to the situation of children and that ensures the
credibility of international justice through a thorough
investigation and accountability for all war crimes and
crimes against humanity and their perpetrators. Those
steps and the political courage they require could lead,
in time, to the signing of a peace and security treaty
between the Russian Federation and Ukraine. Let us
live up to the moment. Our people and humankind
demand it.

Today a nuclear Power is invading a European
country that for some of us is also a neighbour. And
it is also posing a realistic threat of nuclear escalation,
a scenario that none of us want to experience. We
Hungarians have been hit by the war in Ukraine in
three dimensions. As a direct neighbour, we feel
threatened. Ethnic Hungarian citizens of Ukraine
are fighting and dying on the battlefield. The war in
Ukraine directly threatens the security architecture
of Europe. And since the war is being fought close to
NATO’s eastern border, the emergence of a new cold
war is a disturbing possibility.

President Novák: I would like to thank you
personally, Mr. President, for making the effort
to initiate this open debate. Open debates give us,
countries that are not members of the Security Council,
an opportunity to express our views on issues affecting
our world. Our position is clear. The Russian Federation
crossed the Rubicon with its invasion of an independent
and sovereign State, a member of the international
community and a member of the family of the United
Nations. Our goal is a lasting, just peace in Ukraine.

The war in Ukraine is having a serious impact not
only on the European continent but on the rest of the
world as well. Inflation and rising energy prices remind
us that in our interconnected world, local conflicts can
easily become regional and then global. We all need
to work together to promote peace and security in
Ukraine. Hungary supports and is open to taking part
in any peace initiative that creates an environment
conducive to a lasting ceasefire and yields a road map
for a sustainable and just peace. We need organizations,
countries and personalities that can invite the warring
parties to peace negotiations. Where organizations are
concerned, we acknowledge the United Nations and
the Security Council as essential actors in that process.
Since representatives of both the parties involved are
at the table, there is room and a chance for talks and
action. And we also need countries. We need strong
nations — the United States, China and Türkiye, for
example — that are already capable of setting the table
for a possible solution and talking with both sides, and
that have the potential to further influence the situation.

When the 2022 Global Conflict Tracker of the
Council on Foreign Relations was released, it listed 27
armed conflicts around the world. Since the Russian
Federation’s invasion of Ukraine, that number has
significantly increased. We are seeing new armed and
military conflicts emerging as we speak. For a year
and a half we have been witnessing a major war the
likes of which had not been seen since the Second
World War — at least not by us Europeans. War itself
is not unknown to us. In the early 1990s we saw the

We also need personalities. History has many
examples that show that a small group of people or
even a single person can affect or change the course of
history. I believe firmly that Pope Francis is someone
who can facilitate peace in Ukraine. And let us not
underestimate the power of women. Women leaders
who join forces to contribute to peacemaking can
make a substantial contribution to this process. That
leads me to congratulate President Nataša Pirc Musar
of Slovenia on her country’s forthcoming membership

The President: I thank President Rebelo de Sousa
for his statement.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Katalin
Novák, President of Hungary.

4/30

23-27319

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the Security Council. Her role here is vital. The
personal presence at this gathering of President
Volodymyr Zelenskyy of Ukraine is also an indication
that the moment has come to be serious about peace. I
would like to take this moment to reiterate that Hungary
welcomes the Ukrainian peace initiative and is open to
joining the process. I also count on President Zelenskyy
to take action to facilitate the restoration of the rights
of ethnic Hungarians in Ukraine, which he personally
promised me during our last meeting in Kyiv and also
yesterday here in New York.
With regard to the future of Ukraine, Hungary
is interested in a stable, democratic and prosperous
Ukraine. In the spirit of good-neighbourly relations,
Hungary will keep providing political, economic and
humanitarian assistance to Ukraine, as we have done
ever since the war began. The support that Hungary has
provided to the 2.7 million refugees who have crossed
our border is a token of our unwavering support to the
cause of peace in Ukraine.
The President: I thank President Novák for her
statement.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Nataša
Pirc Musar, President of the Republic of Slovenia.
President Musar: Slovenia has condemned the
Russian Federation’s aggression against Ukraine. We
have joined others the General Assembly in demanding
that the Russian Federation end its invasion and withdraw
all its military forces from Ukraine unconditionally. In
that spirit, I would like to contribute three points to this
debate. The first addresses the impact of Russia’s war
on Ukraine on multilateralism and beyond. The second
touches on the importance of Security Council reform
in the context of the crisis of multilateralism. And the
third sends a message to all who still believe that they
can commit crimes against humanity with impunity.
The impact of the Russian Federation’s aggression
against Ukraine is manifold. It has fallen primarily
on the people of Ukraine, who have felt it on a daily
basis for almost 19 long months. Furthermore, it has
affected inter-ethnic and inter-State relations in the
region and globally as well. It has also had an additional
humanitarian impact, further endangering food security
as grain supplies and their export have become part of
war tactics. It is especially heartbreaking to hear the
stories of women and children, many of whom are at
risk of falling victim to human trafficking, exploitation

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

or conflict-related sexual violence. That is not
multilateralism. It is violent anarchy, and it must stop.
It must stop, but not only in Ukraine. When we are
speaking at United Nations Headquarters, the home
of 193 Member States, it is important to put the war
in Ukraine in a wider context. Fatalities caused by
organized violence across the world increased by 97 per
cent in 2022. It was the deadliest in almost 30 years. The
Russian Federation’s war against Ukraine contributed
significantly to that spike, but it was not the only
conflict. In fact, the aggression against Ukraine was
only one of the 55 active State-based armed conflicts
recorded in 2022, the great majority of them taking
place outside Europe. All of those conflicts, including
the aggression against Ukraine, are very worrisome
and demand our full attention.
The Charter of the United Nations and international
law-based multilateralism are increasingly under attack.
In order to make global governance work, we need an
inclusive, transparent, responsive and accountable
multilateral system built on trust, respect, solidarity
and international law, with the United Nations and the
Security Council at its core. I made it clear in my address
to the General Assembly yesterday (see A/78/PV.4) that
the need for Council reform is long overdue.
What I am about to say may sound a bit naive, but it
needs to be said time and again so that it will be taken
seriously tomorrow. If the major Powers with special
status and privileges want to live in peace and to make
the United Nations a truly inclusive and fair global
institution, they need to act responsibly. Not only
do they need to make and keep peace, but they must
also refrain from violating it. That is the point from
which any meaningful reform of the Security Council
should begin. Slovenia will support and participate in
such endeavours.
Finally, a lasting peace can be achieved only if
justice is served. Slovenia is a staunch supporter of the
fight against impunity. All those responsible for crimes
and atrocities must be held accountable. Earlier this year
Slovenia hosted a diplomatic conference that resulted
in the adoption of an important international treaty,
the Ljubljana-The Hague Convention on International
Cooperation in the Investigation and Prosecution of the
Crime of Genocide, Crimes against Humanity and War
Crimes and Other International Crimes. We call on all
countries to become parties to that convention.

23-273195/30

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

To summarize, if we want a better and fairer world,
we need a better and more fair organization of the
United Nations and the Security Council. Just to remind
Council members, do we know where innocent people
are being killed, where houses are being destroyed? Is
that in Russia? Council members know the answer.
The President: I thank President Musar for her
statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Edgars
Rinkēvičs, President of the Republic of Latvia.
President Rinkēvičs: I would like to thank Albania,
as President of the Security Council, for convening
this debate.
One and a half years ago, the Russian Federation,
a permanent member of the Security Council, started
its brutal invasion against Ukraine. Russia’s war
of aggression against Ukraine threatens the rulesbased order and undermines the Charter of the United
Nations. Latvia condemns in the strongest possible
terms Russia’s unprovoked, large-scale aggression
against Ukraine, enabled by Belarus.
The international community must not allow Russia
to get away with that land grab. We cannot afford the
international system to backslide to the pre-Second
World War era.
Russia bears the sole responsibility for the war it
started. Russia alone must end it immediately.
Every sovereign country has a right to choose its
own foreign policy course. That applies to Ukraine, as
well as to any other country.
Ukraine has a right to defend itself against foreign
aggression. Ukraine is fighting for its survival and its
right to exist. We must all continue to support Ukraine
for as long as necessary.
Latvia supports Ukraine’s peace formula. Only
Ukraine can decide when to start peace negotiations.
Sustainable peace must be based on Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We are witnessing a clear pattern of Russia’s
deliberate steps aimed at causing maximum suffering to
Ukraine’s civilian population and targeting Ukraine’s
civilian infrastructure. Children in particular are
suffering in this war. They are being deported to Russia
or Belarus. There, they are forcefully re-educated and
militarily trained. They are turned into Russian citizens
or legally adopted. Those crimes must stop.
6/30

20/09/2023

Russian leadership and military personnel must
be held accountable for each and every international
crime committed in and against Ukraine. By ensuring
accountability, we will bring justice to the victims and
prevent the return of such crimes in the future.
Latvia reiterates the need to establish a special
international tribunal to prosecute the crime of
aggression. Latvia invites more countries to join the
register of damage created by the Council of Europe.
It is an important first practical step towards a future
international compensation mechanism.
Russia’s war against Ukraine is causing serious
geopolitical, economic and humanitarian consequences
far beyond Europe’s borders. It is Russia’s war against
Ukraine that has aggravated the shortage of food
supplies, not the sanctions. Russia considers food a
weapon of war, rather than an essential humanitarian
good to prevent hunger around the globe. Russia alone is
responsible for stopping the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
That initiative allowed the export of millions of tons of
foodstuffs to global markets and for those in need. It
is key to continue international efforts to mitigate the
effects of global food insecurity.
In conclusion, I hope the day on which Russia
ceases its brutal war of aggression comes soon. Our
thoughts are with the brave heroes of Ukraine who
defend freedom.
The President: I thank President Rinkēvičs for his
statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Alejandro
Giammattei Falla, President of the Republic
of Guatemala.
President Giammattei Falla (spoke in Spanish):
I am pleased to deliver this statement on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Accountability following the
aggression against Ukraine, consisting of 49 member
States and the European Union.
Today it has been 574 days since Russia’s full-scale
invasion of Ukraine. Russia’s illegal war of aggression
is a clear violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity and constitutes a blatant violation
of international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations, as has been clearly and repeatedly condemned
in resolutions adopted by the General Assembly.
The Group of Friends will support all meaningful
efforts to bring perpetrators of these massacres to
justice. That includes justice for crimes involving
23-27319

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

children, such as the forcible transfer of Ukrainian
children to Russia, as well as restoring a sense of
justice for the manifold victims of the war. The journey
towards justice is often long and costly, but we will be
there to sustain the process.
The Group of Friends stands ready to support
Ukraine’s initiative for a just peace and all other
initiatives seeking to advance peace in line with
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations and relevant General Assembly resolutions.
We must all stand together around the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
We must remain committed in condemning the
continued Russian aggression that goes against the very
purpose and spirit of the Charter. The maintenance of
international peace and security can be ensured only
through a just peace in Ukraine.
Today we underscore the importance of pursuing
perpetrators of international crimes because, by doing so,
we defend the very rules our international system depends
on. And we hope to deter anyone from committing such
violations in the future. Without accountability, crimes
will continue, and impunity will persist, undermining
the prospects for future peace and reconciliation. Our
resolve is unwavering for as long as it takes.
In my national capacity, I would like to reiterate that
the Republic of Guatemala is a peaceful country. We
promote peace and respect the values of the founding
Charter of the United Nations. We call for democracy,
a negotiated and civilized resolution of the conflict
arising from the illegal, unjustified and unprovoked
invasion of the sovereign territory of Ukraine by the
Russian Federation.
In my visit to Ukraine, as the first Latin American
president to go to that fraternal country, I witnessed
the horrors of that incursion. I saw the unspeakable
destruction and testimonies of women and girls who
had been raped by Russian soldiers. I was horrified
when I arrived at Saint Andrew’s Orthodox Church,
in whose garden more than 400 civilian corpses were
discovered, many of them children, in mass graves.
Their hands were tied behind their backs, and they wore
blindfolds. They had been shot in the back of the head.
After witnessing that barbarism, I will never forget that
Dantesque scene. How many more terrible events must
happen and how many more deaths must we expect
for the Council to act? How is it possible that in the
United Nations due process is not respected when there

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

is a right of veto and that one of the persons accused
is judge and jury? That is a legal aberration that must
cease at the United Nations.
I take this opportunity to express my absolute
respect to the Government of Ukraine and its armed
forces, which after several months are still fighting and
resisting with patriotism and honour. The world, the
vast majority of nations of the world, are crying out
for peace and an end to the aggression suffered by one
of its members at the hands of its powerful neighbour,
and they are calling for the immediate pacification
of the region, a longing that should not be postponed
any longer.
In conclusion, I can say that, after witnessing the
attacks on unarmed and defenceless civilians and the
actions committed by the invading forces, I cannot stop
feeling ashamed to be a human being.
The President: I thank President Giammattei Falla
for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Gitanas
Nausėda, President of the Republic of Lithuania.
President Nausėda: Five hundred seventy-four
days ago, a permanent member of the Security Council
started an unprovoked military invasion against the
independent sovereign State of Ukraine. It would be
dangerous to forget this was not the start of the war
or the opening act of a crime of aggression. We must
remember that the war began nine years and seven
months prior, or exactly 3,500 days ago. And it was
precisely the weak response of the international
community that allowed violence to fester and grow,
leading us all to the largest military conflict in Europe
since the end of the Second World War. Those old
mistakes must not be repeated.
Our collective responsibility today is to challenge
Russia’s calculated manipulation of international norms,
which must be stopped from eroding the authority
of the Security Council and threatening the Charter
of the United Nations. Our duty today is to uphold
multilateralism and defend the rules based international
order from Russia’s relentless war of destruction.
If Ukraine is able to achieve victory and regain
control of its internationally recognized borders, it
would mean victory for us all and would serve as
a precondition for a fair and enduring peace and,
ultimately, stabilize the whole international order.

23-273197/30

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

In any future negotiations, we must follow a set of
clear principles.
First, we must hold Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity to be of fundamental importance.
The Ukrainian peace formula, backed by the General
Assembly, should not be in any way simplified or
diluted. Ultimately, the final decision regarding peace
on Ukrainian soil must rest with Ukraine itself. The
Ukrainian peace summit, organized by President
Volodymyr Zelenskyy, provides us with an ideal
opportunity in that regard.
Secondly, it is imperative that Russia put an end to its
aggressive actions and withdraw its troops and military
equipment from Ukrainian territory. That withdrawal
should be immediate, complete and unconditional.
Thirdly, we must recognize that Russia bears sole
responsibility for inflicting immense suffering upon
the Ukrainian population, while also threatening the
livelihood of other people in need around the globe.
Russia’s decision to terminate the Black Sea Grain
Initiative and to attack Ukrainian ports and stockpiles
has contributed to the worldwide food crisis and
benefited only Russia.
Fourthly, Russia must be held accountable for
numerous war crimes, including the crime of aggression.
Finally, Russia must pay for the destruction it
has inflicted. Ukrainians should not be forced to bear
the burden of rebuilding their country. At this crucial
moment, I call on every member of the international
community and the Security Council to join forces.
Let us all implement the fundamental responsibilities
entrusted to the United Nations and its Member States.
The President: I thank President Nausėda for his
statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Stevo Pendarovski, President of the Republic of
North Macedonia.
President Pendarovski: The aggression of the
Russian Federation against Ukraine dealt a strong blow
to international peace and security, to the fundamental
principles of international law and to the international
order. This war challenged multilateralism as the basis
of the international order, on an unprecedented level.
And as we all know, the international peace and security
architecture, the most important expression of which is
the United Nations, is centred on multilateralism.
8/30

20/09/2023

The current situation is the result of ignoring the
obligations enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations since 1945. Without respect for the sovereign
equality and territorial integrity of each Member State,
we cannot talk about effective multilateralism. So far we
have seen several attempts to redefine the foundations
of international order, but none have received such
wide support as the principles that the civilized world
established after the horrors of the Second World War.
In that sense, the current deadlock in the Security
Council, the main organ of the United Nations entrusted
to preserve and promote international peace and security,
was instigated precisely through non-compliance and, I
would even say, the conscious bypassing of the basic
principles of the international order. It is clear that
this impasse diminishes the credibility and confidence
of the people that the United Nations can effectively
achieve the key goal for which it was established almost
eight decades ago. Without a credible alternative on the
horizon to the current international order that could
garner the majority support of the nations, the people’s
growing frustration with the Organization’s inactivity
is understandable.
It is clear that the modern world is vastly different
from the world in 1945 and that the Security Council
should face and reflect that new reality. Within the
ongoing debates about the eventual reform of the prime
United Nations organ, the question of the veto of the
permanent members has to be thoroughly assessed,
especially when one of them is involved in a conflict.
The Council’s most urgent task is to be proactively
engaged in putting an end to the war in Ukraine. The
only way to achieve that goal is through diplomacy and
negotiations based on respecting the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. To that end, the first step should be
an immediate and unconditional truce in order to create
an environment conducive to the start of negotiations.
Throughout the process, the United Nations should
establish a peacekeeping mission with the main task
of monitoring the truce and humanitarian assistance
to civilians. A key component of any future peace
agreement should be, first fully respecting the territorial
integrity of Ukraine, meaning the full withdrawal of all
Russian forces, ensuring that all refugees and internally
displaced persons are returned to their homes, massive
support for the post-conflict reconstruction of a
devastated country and international guarantees for the
23-27319

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

rights of all ethnic and religious communities that have
been living in Ukraine for centuries.
As I said, the war in Ukraine has seriously
undermined the credibility of the world Organization,
but it also offers an extraordinary opportunity for the
Security Council to act in line with the principles of the
United Nations Charter and help restore the people’s
confidence in the United Nations as an indispensable
global organization.
The President: I thank President Pendarovski for
his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Andrzej
Duda, President of the Republic of Poland.
President Duda: From the perspective of my
region, 24 February 2022 is the day when the world,
as we knew, it changed permanently. Russia’s fullscale invasion of invasion of Ukraine was a defining
moment in geopolitics, transforming Europe’s security
landscape and tearing down the core pillar of our
international system. This strategic change is not
temporary. We are living in a new era of uncertainty.
The multilateral system established nearly 80 years
ago, with its principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, asserted the superiority of the rule of
law over force in international relations. It gave nations
a place to turn to when faced with regional or global
challenges, often as a last resort. The Charter embodies
a code of international ethics by which every State
should abide.
When Russia replaced the Soviet Union as a
permanent member of the Security Council, it took
upon itself even greater responsibility than other
nations to preserve international peace and security.
Yet its leadership made a deliberate decision to violate
our basic principles, the key norms of international
law, and it continues to do so repeatedly — from air
attacks on critical infrastructure to setting off a global
food crisis, from causing the ecological catastrophe
at Nova Kakhovka to bombing cultural heritage sites
in Ukrainian cities. Those hideous actions, together
with a continuous negation of the international order,
including the United Nations Charter, prove that an
imperialistic Russia is discrediting itself as a member
of the international community.
Russia is abusing its veto power to prevent the
Council from addressing the flagrant violations of
international law that Russia itself has committed.
In this situation, the nations of the world cannot

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

remain passive. The prohibition of aggression and the
elimination of genocide and crimes against humanity
are jus cogens norms that are accepted and recognized
by the international community. These are the norms
from which no deviation is permitted. That means
that Russia’s continued neocolonial aggression against
Ukraine is not a bilateral or a regional issue; it concerns
us all. If we do not act in solidarity today to defend the
fundamental values of international law, tomorrow it
may be too late.
That is why Poland has been making efforts to hold
Russia and individual Russian citizens accountable for
their flagrant violations of international law and the
United Nations Charter. We support the work of the
existing jurisdictions, such as the International Court
of Justice, the International Criminal Court and the
European Court of Human Rights. Because the Russian
aggression as such cannot be a subject of assessment
by the International Criminal Court, we support the
creation of a special ad hoc international tribunal.
Moreover, Poland is striving to create an international
mechanism to repair the damage and compensate
for the losses caused by Russia. The perpetrators of
international crimes must not go unpunished. They
should be tried before competent courts. It should be
our imperative to ensure a lasting peace in the future.
The war in Ukraine has permanently changed the
global security architecture. Regardless of its final
result, we will have to face a new political, military
and economic reality that will last until a new security
system is formed — a system with no place for
aggression, imperialism or neocolonialism.
The President: I thank President Duda for his
statement.
I now give the floor to the President of the
European Council.
Mr. Michel: Ukraine is a crime scene, and the
perpetrator is sitting in this very Chamber. They
know who they are. The Kremlin dreams of restoring
the old Russian empire. After Ukraine, who would be
next? Who would be next to satisfy Putin’s fantasy
of the past? And, if Russia succeeds in Ukraine,
what other countries would be tempted to copy its
actions? At this crime scene, we also have the victim,
the attacked — Ukraine and all Ukrainians fighting
a battle they did not start, defending their country
against a war they did not want and protecting their
children from suffering nobody deserves. Ukrainians

23-273199/30

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

are fighting to save their children from another horror
of this war — forced abduction to Russia, so-called
adoption. In reality, these are deportations of children.
I ask all here, including the Russian representatives,
could they bear having their child stolen and deported?
Could they bear having their child forced to forget their
family, their language and their land? The so-called
re-education is in fact an attempt at cultural genocide.
By defending their children, Ukrainians are defending
what is most precious — their family, their future and
their freedom. And that is why we, the European Union,
stand firmly with Ukraine in its defence of itself. As
long as the innocent are attacked, we will help them to
defend themselves, and we will stand by their side for
as long as it takes.
At this crime scene, we also have the witnesses — all
of us around the world. I ask all of us sitting right here,
the witnesses in the Security Council: what have we
done about this crime? What have we done about this
aggression? What have we done as one of the permanent
members attacks its neighbour? What have we done as
it wields its veto power against each of us, against the
Charter of the United Nations and its core principles?
Do we not sit together in this Chamber for one reason
and for one reason only — to protect peace and security
for all people no matter their country or continent?
Powerful and responsible nations simply cannot
turn a blind eye to these crimes, because we all share
a responsibility to end war, a responsibility to work for
a just peace that respects the United Nations Charters
and its core principles and the territorial integrity of
each sovereign nation. Such a peace will never last if
crimes go unpunished, and that is why I would like
to speak directly to each member around this table.
As responsible nations, we all have a role to play in
building global peace and stability. I would like to speak
in particular to the Chinese representative who has
warned Russia against the use of nuclear weapons. We
welcome this. We now ask the Chinese representative
to go further. Let us join forces to persuade Russia to
end this criminal war that is hurting so many. Let us
join forces to convince Russia to respect the principles
of the United Nations Charter.
The consequences of this crime extend across the
globe, and the Kremlin’s latest cynical actions are
only making things worse. That includes, for instance,
pulling out of the Black Sea Grain Initiative. When
you shoot missiles at grain silos in Odesa, they also
strike Africa and kill the most vulnerable, destroying
10/30

20/09/2023

the lives of millions. A tragic crime is unfolding
before our very eyes, and we are the witnesses — all
of us. We must stand strong by the side of the attacked,
especially right here in the Security Council. That is
why this Council was born. That is why we are here
today — to say no to aggression and to protect peace,
security and cooperation between people and between
all our nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the Prime
Minister of Montenegro.
Mr. Abazović (Montenegro): The idea behind the
United Nations came after the biggest social disaster
in our history. We should not wait for another big
disaster to take steps to change our reality and reform
the United Nations, including the Security Council, and
to be more productive and more effective in protecting
international law.
The situation that has resulted in Ukraine due to
the aggression by the Russian Federation is totally
unacceptable. Any kind of violence, including in
order to achieve political goals, is unacceptable in the
twenty-first century. Montenegro firmly supports the
Ukrainian people, who today are defending not only
their own citizens but also the right to choose. They are
defending universal values and freedom in all its forms.
If we are truly willing to protect democratic values
and to promote peace and stability, we must speak the
truth and lend our full support to that cause, because
while it may be Ukraine today, it could be any other
country tomorrow. In that context, I want to underline
that while Montenegro is a very small country, it
is still doing its part to contribute to international
peace and security. I want the Council to know that
compared to its population size, Montenegro is hosting
more refugees from Ukraine than any other country.
Ukrainian refugees currently constitute 5 per cent
of our population. The best thing to come out of this
disaster is the fact that all those refugees feel safe and
secure in our country.
First and foremost, I call on all the parties to the
conflict to cease their hostilities and return to the
negotiating table. Next, I would like to commend
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting.
I think the idea behind the United Nations is to be
united, not divided. If we wanted to crush that idea,
that would be another story. I think that most of the
States participating in the General Assembly want to
see a more united world, with greater unity, greater
solidarity and greater protection for human rights.
23-27319

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

This is not only about Ukraine. There are many places
around the world where we are facing various kinds of
problems. We therefore need to be ready to start the
process of reform and take concrete action, and not to be
afraid of taking risks. Big decisions require risk-taking.
I hope that the larger and more powerful countries
in particular will take those risks for the good of the
international community and with a view to fostering
a more cosmopolitan spirit, with greater protection for
human rights and international law.
The idea is to be united and to take concrete action.
It is not just to come to New York once or twice to
give a speech and then at the end of the day for the
situation to remain the same. In that connection, I hope
the situation will change and that ultimately, all of our
small contributions will amount to a large contribution
to making big changes and promoting peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Denmark.
Mr. Rasmussen (Denmark): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the five Nordic countries — Finland,
Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own country, Denmark.
First, on behalf of all the Nordic countries, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for bringing leaders
from across the world together in the Chamber today
so that we can discuss the most immediate threat to
international peace and security of our time, which is
Russia’s unlawful and unjustified aggression against
Ukraine. We also want to take this opportunity to
present a vision for peace.
The maintenance of international peace and
security is the responsibility vested in the Council. The
Charter of the United Nations entrusted five Member
States with a special responsibility — the power of the
veto. But the veto power was never intended to be carte
blanche for invading other States with a view to taking
their territory, breaching the Charter or conducting
brutal warfare in blatant disregard of international
law. That cannot and should not be tolerated. It is our
shared responsibility to uphold the Charter, which has
been the foundation of international cooperation for
78 years. Rebuilding trust in its institutions will not
be an easy process. It will require time and effort, and
a renewed commitment to the Charter’s purposes and
principles. Today the Nordic countries would like to
share three messages.
First, Russia is violating the most basic rules and
principles of international law with its war of aggression.

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

A permanent member of the Council is blatantly
disregarding the Charter — the very cornerstone of
this organ — and the territorial integrity and political
independence of all States. We should remember that
the situation is very simple. If Russia stops fighting,
there will be no war. If Ukraine stops fighting, there will
be no Ukraine. An overwhelming majority of Member
States have condemned Russia’s invasion of Ukraine
and are defending the United Nations Charter. It is the
first line of defence in a world order in which might
does not make right. The Nordic countries will continue
to seek full accountability for Russia’s unlawful war
of aggression against Ukraine. That includes holding
those responsible for crimes under international law to
account. It also includes the provision of reparations.
Ensuring that Russia and its representatives are held to
account is a shared responsibility that falls to all of us
as States Members of the United Nations.
Secondly, the consequences of Russia’s war are
causing suffering across the globe. Food stocks have
been reduced, prices have gone up and the energy crisis
is getting worse. Time after time, Russia has shown its
complete disregard for human life, not only in Ukraine
but globally. It has continued to weaponize food and
intensify the global food security crisis. We need to
rebuild trust and double down on our efforts to find
common solutions to the shared problems confronting
us. Instead, Russia is creating new ones. We need strong
cross-regional support to stop Russia’s irresponsible
actions and ensure a collective defence of the Charter.
When we unite in defence of the Charter, it will also
offer a pathway to peace.
That brings me to my third and final point. Russia
must immediately end its war of aggression and
withdraw from the entire territory of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders. What is needed
is a just and sustainable peace based on international
law, including the United Nations Charter. We support
all meaningful efforts in that regard, and we firmly
support President Zelenskyy’s peace formula, which
lays a foundation for those efforts. We encourage all
Member States to do the same. The Nordic countries’
support for the Charter and Ukraine is unwavering.
The President: I now give the floor to the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Republic of Italy
Mr. Tajani (Italy): The position of the Government
of Italy, led by Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni, on
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine is clear and very

23-2731911/30

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

well known. We stand with Ukraine, an invaded people
fighting to defend their freedom and sovereignty. We
are all suffering the domino-effect consequences of
the war that have affected our societies: energy crises,
rising commodity prices, inflation and refugees. The
increasing migration pressure from Africa, particularly
on Italy, has been exacerbated by the food crisis
caused by Russia’s grain blockade. The international
community has not surrendered to those difficulties,
despite the fatigue expressed via public opinion in our
countries. We of course want a just peace for Ukraine.
Just peace means freedom for Ukraine. President
Zelenskyy and the Ukrainian people know that Italy is
with them, and will be with them and for them, as well
as for Italy itself.
We must protect two essential principles of the
Charter of the United Nations — sovereignty and
territorial integrity — as also reflected in the position
of the Group of Seven and in the recent final declaration
of the Group of 20 leaders in New Delhi. We must
admit that something has not worked. We thought
that international peace and security could be taken
for granted. The Security Council has been blocked
for decades. The position of the Italian Government is
very clear. We need a Security Council that is fairer
and more representative and inclusive. For us, “more
representative” means that we must give more chances
to sit on the Council to Africa, Asia, Latin America
and insular States, without, however, creating new
hierarchies or privileges.
(spoke in Spanish)
We wholeheartedly support President Zelenskyy’s
10-point peace formula. In particular, I would like to
highlight three priorities of the Italian Government.
First, we are very extremely concerned about the
safety situation at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
We must continue to support the efforts of DirectorGeneral Grossi of the International Atomic Energy
Agency. The risk we face is another Chernobyl — in
fact, a more dangerous risk than Chernobyl.
(spoke in French)
Secondly, Italy strongly condemns Russia’s decision
to terminate the Black Sea Grain Initiative, which is
endangering the lives of millions of people in Africa,
increasing food insecurity and forcing hundreds of
thousands of people to leave their home countries, as
they become prey to the merchants of death who trade
in their lives on the desperate journey towards the
12/30

20/09/2023

Mediterranean. Italy, which hosted the Food Systems
Summit in July, welcomes the efforts of President
Erdoğan and Secretary-General Guterres to relaunch the
Black Sea Grain Initiative. They have our full support.
Thirdly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
we support the Vatican’s initiative aimed at a prisoner
exchange and reuniting young Ukrainian children with
their families.
(spoke in English)
The reconstruction of Ukraine will be one of the
top priorities of the Italian presidency of the Group of
Seven next year. Russia’s aggression against Ukraine
has included attacks on religious sites. According to
UNESCO, more than 100 religious sites have been
damaged. After the bombing of the cathedral in Odesa,
we launched an Italian project aimed at its reconstruction.
Odesa was designed by Italian architects. Italy will be at
the forefront of its reconstruction, which is a project of
social and spiritual renaissance. Everyone can count on
Italy. Italy will always fight for peace and stands ready
to do its part everywhere. Just yesterday, we proposed
to meet with the Foreign Ministers of Azerbaijan and
Armenia to discuss the situation in Nagorno-Karabakh.
Council members can count on Italy. Council
members can count on the Italian Government.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): I would first like
to thank Albania for convening this meeting, and the
Secretary-General for his insightful briefing.
More than a year has passed since Russia’s invasion
of Ukraine. We are gravely concerned about the
escalating human toll and the global ramifications of
that invasion, especially in regions already grappling
with humanitarian challenges and food insecurity. We
extend our sympathies to the grieving families. The
act of aggression is a clear violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and of international law. It also
erodes the pillars of trust, cooperation and global
solidarity that the international community has built
over decades. From the standpoint of the Republic of
Korea, a nation which is all too familiar with the pains
of conflict and division, the trials and tribulations of
the Ukrainian people profoundly resonate with us. It
is such empathy that strengthens our determination to
champion meaningful efforts to end the war and restore
peace in Ukraine.
23-27319

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

The recent visit to Ukraine by President Yoon Suk
Yeol in July serves as a testament to that commitment.
During his visit, he unveiled the Ukraine peace and
solidarity initiative, a concrete expression of support
for the Ukrainian people. In line with the initiative,
the Republic of Korea will contribute $150 million
in humanitarian assistance this year, which builds
on our contributions from the previous year, when
we delivered $100 million, including mine-clearing
equipment and emergency medical vehicles. We will
also support Ukraine’s reconstruction efforts with a
commitment of $300 million next year and a mid-tolong-term support package of more than $2 billion. At
the same time, we will be an active voice in the global
discourse addressing challenges to global food and
energy security, which have been exacerbated by the
conflict in Ukraine.
The media reports emerging from the recent summit
between Russia and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea with respect to potential military cooperation
are most unsettling. Any deal that enhances North
Korea’s military capabilities is an unequivocal violation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions. Such
developments endanger not just Ukraine but also the
security of the Republic of Korea. It is regrettable that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues
on its trajectory of provocations, consistently breaching
Security Council resolutions and international law. Its
continued pursuit of nuclear and missile programmes
poses an existential threat to the Republic of Korea, the
broader international community and the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons regime. Given
Russia’s obligatory role in shaping the international
non-proliferation regime and safeguarding world peace
as a permanent member of the Security Council, we call
on Russia to fully implement the Council resolutions
for whose adoption it voted in favour.
The Republic of Korea is preparing to serve on the
Council beginning next year. Council members may
rest assured of our unwavering dedication to fulfil the
Council’s fundamental mandate, which is to maintain
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe.
Mr. Osmani: At the outset, let me thank the
Albanian presidency for the invitation to address the
Security Council.

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

Our combined presence today is a strong sign
of commitment and responsibility for two Balkan
States. It is quite remarkable that, as we mark 30
years of cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), two neighbouring countries and
partners — Albania and North Macedonia — stand at
the helm of two key multilateral formats, which is our
contribution to global peace based on our principled
commitment to multilateralism. Those principles
include dialogue, cooperation and solidarity. They are
enshrined in our founding documents and, moreover, in
our humanity.
Earlier this month, I visited Calcutta and paid tribute
to Gonxhe Bojaxhiu, better known globally as Mother
Teresa, a native of Skopje, our capital, a citizen of the
world and the embodiment of peace, compassion and
solidarity. Allow me to convey her simple yet prophetic
wisdom as a compass and an answer to our challenges:
“I can do things you cannot; you can do things I
cannot; together, we can do great things”.
Indeed, the joint pursuit of peace depends on our
collective engagement. With the world facing many
serious trials, the Russian Federation’s war of aggression
against Ukraine is the most pressing challenge we
must address. It constitutes the greatest breach of, and
challenge to, international rules and commitments
that were written and undersigned by the same Russia
that now scornfully tramples on them. This war is
destroying not just lives and livelihoods in Ukraine,
people’s homes and hopes, but beyond that, it has an
impact on the lives of people far beyond. Tectonic shifts
are felt across the OSCE region and beyond.
Within the OSCE, a regional organization under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
which I chair at this pivotal moment in its history, we
feel the impact of this war on the people of our region, on
the politics between the regions and on the institutions
created as platforms for dialogue and vehicles of peace.
The impact and the loss of trust and dialogue will last
beyond the war in Ukraine and its ongoing human
suffering. Multilateralism itself is at risk of becoming a
victim of this aggression, international forums like this
being replaced by battlegrounds, arguments replaced
by brute force. Is there anyone who can explain who
is gaining from this war? There are no gains with this
war, only losses.

23-2731913/30

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Ukraine and its people are of paramount concern
to the OSCE, as the world’s largest regional security
organization. A new support programme for Ukraine
has been designed as a vehicle of support in various
fields. Those include humanitarian demining, the
promotion of the rule of law and the mitigation of the
consequential environmental and economic impacts.
My Special Representatives and a team of OSCE
professionals are already on the ground translating
words into concrete actions while exploring avenues for
further engagement.
The OSCE can do a lot in times of war, and
even more in times of peace. Its past engagement in
Ukraine is solid proof of that. As an organization, we
are committed to mitigating the fallout from this war
and giving a helping hand to the people on the ground.
Members of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine — people who serve the cause of truth and
trust — are still detained. I would like to once again call
for their immediate and unconditional release. After my
initial visit to Ukraine in January, I am now planning
a second trip as Chairman-in-Office to engage directly
with people on site and hear their needs, hopes and
fears. Our motto is, “It is about people”, and it is for the
people of Ukraine and others in need around the globe
that we must work together, do more and do better.
Returning to where I started, there are valuable
lessons and tools that the OSCE has and knows, and
there are experiences and expertise that the United
Nations possesses. The OSCE’s comprehensive concept
of security and our tools and the United Nations
global outreach and recognized capacity are mutually
reinforcing. Building on our values and competitive
advantages, working together, we must do our utmost
to end the war against Ukraine and pursue our common
endeavour for peace, stability and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Bulgaria.
Mrs. Gabriel (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): It
is an honour and a privilege to participate in this
discussion. Today we are facing a security challenge,
possibly the greatest challenge our Organization has
faced since its establishment. It is encouraging to see
so many high-level participants representing Member
States from across the world. That is crucial, as it
clearly demonstrates that the Russian Federation’s
war of aggression in Ukraine is not a regional conflict
but rather a criminal act with wide-ranging security,
14/30

20/09/2023

economic and social implications at the global level,
striking at the very heart of the multilateral order
that the United Nations is called upon to preserve for
succeeding generations.
First of all, I would like to congratulate His
Excellency Mr. Edi Rama, who is presiding over this
debate. The active and clear stance of Albania on the
Russian aggression is an example of the impact that
a so-called small country — though I do not like that
expression, as the measure of a country is determined
by the size of its actions, not that of its territory — like
Albania, motivated by its commitment to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, can
have on international politics.
Compliance with those purposes and principles
is an obligation that all the States Members of the
United Nations must fulfil. For that reason, we cannot
remain silent when the Charter of the United Nations is
brutally violated by a war of aggression, the occupation
of territory and rhetoric that rekindle humankind’s
darkest fears. Being a permanent member of the
Security Council brings with it not only privileges but
obligations. More than any other State, Russia should
respect the principles of sovereignty and territorial
integrity enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and international law. Sustained international
support for Ukraine is therefore vitally important for
international peace and security.
We are deeply alarmed by the Russian Federation’s
decision to withdraw from the Black Sea Grain
Initiative. Russia is openly using food as a weapon, and
its irresponsible actions are driving inflation on food
prices and exacerbating global food insecurity. Russia’s
bombing of Ukrainian ports and grain facilities must
be condemned firmly, given that that bombing is
causing not only devastation and human losses but
also aggravating grain shortages in the countries of
the global South. We welcome the invaluable efforts
made by the United Nations to conclude the agreement
a year ago.
Bulgaria is actively seeking alternative solutions to
unblock Black Sea trade routes, but it is also through
regional and international cooperation that such
solutions could be found. Russia’s war against Ukraine
imperils not only the historical development of the
international community over the past 78 years, but
also mutual trust and multilateralism as a key concept
upon which the architecture of the modern international
system is built.
23-27319

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

It is also crucial that we do not forget those
responsible for grave international crimes committed
in Ukraine. The General Assembly has adopted several
resolutions condemning the violation of the Charter
of the United Nations, which embodies the global
understanding of our key objectives and priorities as
an international community and the importance of
preserving multilateralism, even in times of great
difficulty. Moreover, Bulgaria supports united,
coordinated action on all efforts aimed at looking
into the growing evidence of atrocities committed
in Ukraine, including the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine and the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine.
We support Ukraine in its initiative to promote a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace. We believe that
the peace process should be led by Ukraine. The peace
formula proposed by President Zelenskyy includes
the necessary foundations; we actively encourage all
countries to support that formula, which also addresses
the greater ramifications of the war on food security,
energy security, the environment and nuclear security.
Bulgaria will continue to support Ukraine and the
Ukrainian people in their fight for freedom. To support
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine is
to defend the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. The return to a rules-based order
and the rebuilding of trust will be made possible only
through the immediate and unconditional withdrawal
of Russian military forces from the internationally
recognized territory of Ukraine and by bringing to
justice the perpetrators of international crimes.

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

children. An immediate cessation of hostilities is
therefore urgent. Pending that, priority must be given
to the protection of civilians, unhindered humanitarian
access and respect for international law, including
international humanitarian law and refugee law, in
line with General Assembly resolution ES-11/2, on the
humanitarian consequences of the aggression against
Ukraine, sponsored by Mexico and France.
I take this opportunity to recognize the
ongoing committed work of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and humanitarian
organizations on the ground, as well as the willingness
and generosity of the countries that have welcomed
those seeking refuge.
Let there be no doubt: all States have an obligation
to respect and ensure respect for international
humanitarian law. Therefore, Mexico condemns the
use of explosive weapons in populated areas, as well
as any use, by any actor and in any place, of cluster
munitions and anti-personnel mines, which, because
of their excessively harmful nature and indiscriminate
effects, have been banned by international law.

Ms. Bárcena Ibarra (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico agrees with the premise of this debate, namely,
that of upholding the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations through effective
multilateralism in order to maintain peace and security
in Ukraine. I will focus my presentation on three
dimensions of the situation in Ukraine: the humanitarian
imperative, the importance of multilateral action and
the path to peace.

Mexico is deeply concerned about the nuclear
rhetoric that has emerged in the context of this war.
We unequivocally condemn any threat to use nuclear
weapons — explicit or veiled — by any actor and under
any circumstances, as contrary to international law
and the Charter of the United Nations. We reiterate our
concern about the serious radiological risk of military
action in the vicinity of nuclear power plants. Mexico
recognizes and supports the work in Ukraine of the
International Atomic Energy Agency and its Director
General, Rafael Grossi, at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant. Mexico reaffirms the importance of
respecting the seven pillars of technical and physical
nuclear safety and security and the five principles
for the protection of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant, as established by the Agency. The proliferation
of weapons not only exacerbates the conflict, but their
wide availability, when the war comes to an end, could
fuel myriad of criminal activities and, if other weapons
get into the hands of non-State actors, it could lead to
other violations of international law.

The international community cannot accept the
humanitarian consequences of the war in Ukraine, both
for its people and for those in neighbouring countries
and beyond. The war in Ukraine has already claimed
hundreds of thousands of victims, combatants and
civilians, disproportionately affecting women and

With regard to multilateral action in resolving the
conflict in Ukraine, a lasting peace will be achieved
only if there is an end to the use of force and there is
respect for the territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders. That is an absolute
requirement. Various proposals for peace involving both

The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the United Mexican States.

23-2731915/30

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

parties have been put forward, including an initiative
by Mexico, but so far there has not been the political
will to engage in peace talks that take into account the
absolute requirement I have mentioned. But we must
continue to make efforts and create the conditions to
promote trust.
In that regard, the Black Sea Grain Initiative and
the memorandum of understanding signed with the
Russian Federation on food and fertilizers played a
crucial role in restoring trust and in stabilizing food
markets and ensuring food security in many countries.
Therefore, Mexico regrets the suspension of the Black
Sea Grain Initiative, which will affect food security
in particular in less developed countries. We welcome
the mediation efforts of Türkiye and the steadfast
determination expressed yesterday by SecretaryGeneral António Guterres (see A/78/PV.4) to continue
to seek a resumption of exports of grain and fertilizers
from Ukraine and the Russian Federation.
From the outset, Mexico, both in the Security
Council and in the General Assembly, has unequivocally
expressed its position and categorically condemned
Russia’s military invasion of Ukraine, which runs
counter to the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. However, we are also convinced that
international law and diplomacy offer the means to
achieve a peaceful solution to the conflict.
We are fully aware of that there will be hurdles
along the way, and that a just and sustainable peace is
not built on good intentions alone. However, it would be
inconsistent not to try, as the United Nations, to draw
up a road map for peace that is underpinned by the
principles of international law.
The immediate future will require openness,
dialogue and a sense of genuine commitment, both
from the parties involved and from the international
community, to put an end to this war. Mexico reiterates
its readiness to support that effort to achieve peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the Prime
Minister of Canada.
Mr. Trudeau (Canada): I want to begin by
thanking Albania for using its presidency to convene
this meeting. I also want to thank President Volodymyr
Zelenskyy for his words earlier today.
As leaders, protecting the sovereignty of our
nations is one of our most sacrosanct duties. Any
violation is unacceptable. It violates the very Charter of
16/30

20/09/2023

this institution. It violates international law. It violates
the peace and security of people.
The United Nations was established to save people
from the scourge of war. That fundamental principle
has guided this institution since it was founded. So, we
need to be 100 per cent clear about what is happening
right now. A permanent member of the Security
Council, Russia, has launched and continues to wage
an illegal war.
(spoke in French)
Vladimir Putin has violated the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine and seeks to deny
the rights of the Ukrainian people to determine their
own future. At the same time, the Russian Federation
has been flagrantly using its veto right within this
Organization to facilitate the war and the violations of
the principles of the United Nations.
(spoke in English)
We must all stand up to that affront to the United
Nations. We must take action to stop the tragic deaths
and violence, including sexual violence, caused by
that unjustifiable invasion. We must not let the world
return to a place where might makes right. We must
make sure that borders mean something, even when a
neighbour has a bigger army. Respect for the rule of
law and accountability to it should be fundamental and
non-negotiable.
This body was born out of the ashes of the deadliest
war humankind had ever seen. Tens of millions of
people died in Europe, Africa and Asia during the
Second World War. Watching bloody conflict return to
Europe has shaken the conscience of the world, and it
threatens the peace that for three quarters of a century
led to unprecedented prosperity around the world. We
cannot let that happen. Because it is not just Ukraine
or even just Europe that suffers if we do not uphold
our values. All of us will suffer, including all of the
international community in the global South.
And it is not just about the far-reaching and longterm impacts, it is about the suffering that is happening
right now. Russia is weaponizing energy and food,
leading millions to face shortages, hunger and even
starvation. Canada is dedicated to mitigating the
impacts on the most vulnerable. We do not believe
we have to choose between supporting Ukraine and
supporting the Sustainable Development Goals and
global development. In fact, the only responsible choice
23-27319

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

is to do both, which we are doing with solidarity and
financial commitment.
(spoke in French)
The fight of Ukraine is also our fight. It is also our
common struggle, and there can be no doubt about that.
Canada calls on Russia to immediately and completely
withdraw its troops without conditions.
(spoke in English)
Canada supports the key principles of the
Ukrainian peace formula because it must be a peace
that respects the Charter of the United Nations, is based
on international law and preserves Ukraine’s territorial
integrity. A peace that upholds our common humanity
and common values, not a peace that turns a blind eye.
It must be a peace that is built on respect for the facts
and respect for the rules. That is what Canada will
always stand for everywhere.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign and European Affairs of the Republic
of Croatia.
Mr. Grlić-Radman (Croatia): Croatia aligns
itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the
European Union.
I would like to add some remarks in my
national capacity.
Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified war of
aggression against Ukraine is the greatest challenge
to global peace and security in decades. Surely, most
of the significant tragedies caused by this Russian
invasion are mired in human fatalities — war crimes and
crimes against humanity that displaced and otherwise
harmed human lives. But Russia’s war has also caused
unprecedented economic, social and humanitarian
tragedies whose effects are felt globally.
By deciding to terminate the Black Sea Grain
Initiative and increasing military attacks on Ukrainian
ports and agricultural infrastructure, Russia continued
to weaponize food and further aggravate global food
insecurity. The energy insecurity, also created by
the Russian invasion, has harmed not only the global
economy, but whole societies, peoples and regions
around the world. The fact that these actions come from
a permanent member of the Security Council, and a
nuclear-weapon State no less, makes the threat to global
peace only greater.

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

By denying the principles of sovereignty and
territorial integrity, the pillars of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, Russia attacked
the very idea of multilateralism and the United
Nations itself.
Ukraine, one of the founding Member States of
the United Nations, has an inherent and undeniable
right to defend itself and to fight for its independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity within its
internationally recognized borders. Recognition of
those unalienable rights is the foundation on which the
United Nations were built upon. In that sense, we are
all Ukraine.
The Security Council will remain a casualty for as
long as the war rages in Ukraine. The General Assembly
responded responsibly and without hesitation by holding
a special session and offering a clear platform for the
world’s condemnation of the war against Ukraine. That
global call continues to provide immense value and
support to multilateralism. However, in order for the
multilateral system to be efficient, the world needs fully
functional United Nations organs, dedicated to their
respective mandates, and their mutual cooperation.
Regrettably, we lack that today.
Multilateralism can be effective only if it is founded
on justice, but justice cannot be maintained if there is no
accountability. For that same reason, accountability for
crimes committed in Ukraine must be upheld. That is
not only because the victims of Bucha, Irpin or Kharkiv
deserve justice. More than anything, there needs to be
accountability so that we can prevent such atrocities
from recurring and, thus, safeguard the multilateral
system and the role of the United Nations.
With that in mind, Croatia supports efforts to
promote accountability for international crimes
committed in and against Ukraine in all relevant
multilateral forums, including the United Nations, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Council of Europe. In doing so, we should also
keep in mind that the pursuit of accountability is not
an event, but part of a long and complex process. The
post-conflict transition will also be very challenging.
Croatia is determined to stand by Ukraine.
The President: I now give the floor to the Federal
Minister for European and International Affairs of the
Republic of Austria.
Mr. Schallenberg (Austria): Almost 19 months
ago, Russia broke peace in Europe with its brutal

23-2731917/30

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

invasion of Ukraine, an independent and sovereign
neighbour. This war of aggression has been causing
unimaginable destruction and despair. It has been 19
months of targeted attacks on civilians, of barbaric war
crimes, of irresponsible nuclear threats and the cynical
use of hunger and energy as a weapon, affecting the
most vulnerable people.
It is time to stop. Russia must withdraw its forces
from the territory of Ukraine, including Crimea and
the city of Sevastopol. The people of Ukraine deserve
a just and lasting peace. Austria will support any
initiative leading towards that goal, including President
Zelenskyy’s peace plan.
Let me be very clear. Yes, this is a war in Europe, but
it is by no means a European war. It is an assault against
the rules-based international order. It is a flagrant and
deliberate breach of the founding Charter of the United
Nations. Through the Charter, every single State in this
Chamber has committed to settle international disputes
by peaceful means and to refrain from the threat of use
of force.
And what is worse is that this breach has been
committed not by just any State, but by a permanent
member of the Security Council, of this very organ.
That is why my country, Austria, is taking such a
clear stance. Yes, we are militarily neutral. But we
are never indifferent or neutral when it comes to
violations of international law, because it is our shield,
our protective cloak against the unilateral use of force,
against an international system where might makes
right and where the rule of law is replaced by the law
of the jungle.
Let us not beat around the bush — Russia’s
unprovoked invasion of Ukraine has once again shown
the inability of the Security Council to act. It is high
time that we address the obvious structural problem
by making the Council more representative, including
through adding African countries, and by finally having
an honest discussion about the end of the veto power.
The time when five States had the power to decide for
all of us is long gone. The time to reform is now.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Education and Sport of the
Principality of Liechtenstein.
Ms. Hasler (Liechtenstein): The aggression against
Ukraine has been a fundamental challenge to the
international order for 18 long months now. I wish to
pay tribute to the bravery of the people of Ukraine. We
18/30

20/09/2023

are heartbroken by the suffering of all the victims of
Russia’s war of aggression.
For billions of people around the globe, the United
Nations is primarily a guarantor of peace and security.
That requires our collective respect for international
law and the will to enforce it, together. When we
joined the Organization, we did so out of the belief in
the international order reflected in the Charter of the
United Nations. That includes the guarantee that the
illegal use of force, the violation of sovereignty and
territorial integrity and, certainly, acts of aggression
will be met by a strong collective response from the
United Nations membership.
The Council has not been able to play its leadership
role. As we all know, that is due to the repeated use of
the veto by the Russian Federation. We are therefore
determined to continue our work to enhance the role of
the General Assembly on matters of peace and security.
The veto initiative (General Assembly resolution
76/262) was just a first step in that respect.
The General Assembly has proven its ability to
take up the Council’s role. With respect to Ukraine,
it has done so with overwhelming support from
Member States. Together, we have taken decisions of
fundamental importance that set the parameters for the
peace that we are all looking for — the full withdrawal
of all Russian troops from all of Ukraine and the
need to ensure accountability for the most serious
international crimes.
In the context of Ukraine, accountability is the key
to securing a peaceful future for Ukraine and for our
region. But accountability is also key far beyond Europe
as a safeguard of the international order we have given
ourselves, founded on the prohibition of the illegal use
of force. The aggression against Ukraine is the most
blatant challenge to that order since the creation of
this Organization.
Making it clear that the very launching of that war
of aggression is a criminal act is therefore the only way
to protect not just Ukraine, but indeed all members of
the United Nations — and of course small States in
particular — as we move forward together. Ukraine’s
efforts to ensure meaningful accountability for the
crime of aggression, in line with international law,
therefore have our full support. It is indispensable to
guarantee, in the interest of all of us, a United Nations
with a functional Security Council, not a blocked one,
and an international order governed by law, not by war.
23-27319

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Romania.
Mrs. Odobescu (Romania): I commend the
Albanian presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this significant high-level open debate on
the maintenance of peace and security in Ukraine.
As a neighbouring country of Ukraine, I would like
to share some perspectives more than a year and a half
after the Russian Federation’s unprovoked, unjustified
and illegal war of aggression against Ukraine started.
The Russian Federation, a permanent member of the
Security Council, generated and prolonged the gravest
international crisis of multilateralism since the end
of the Second World War. It undermines the Charter
of the United Nations and everything the United
Nations stands for. Today we stand with the Charter
and international law and reiterate that there is only
one way to end the aggression: the Russian Federation
needs to cease its use of force and withdraw completely
and immediately from the territory of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders. Ukraine’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
should be respected by all United Nations Member
States. But peace in Ukraine cannot be restored by
inaction. Romania fully supports the Ukrainian peace
formula as the single framework conducive to a fair,
lasting and sustainable peace — a peace that does not
reward the aggressor.
This illegal war is affecting both our region and,
as the Council knows, the entire world. It is severely
affecting security in the wider Black Sea area. Recently,
fragments of Russian drones were found on our territory
in the proximity of the Romania-Ukraine border,
generating a high risk for the inhabitants of the area.
The war is challenging the resilience of neighbouring
States such as the Republic of Moldova, the State most
affected by the war besides Ukraine itself.
The impact of the war of aggression against
Ukraine also remains a matter of concern for all United
Nations Member States. It has consequences of global
proportions, especially for food security, energy and
economic stability. By terminating the Black Sea
Grain Initiative and attacking Ukrainian ports on the
Black Sea and the Danube River — just across from
the territory of Romania — the Russian Federation
has further intensified the global food crisis. Romania
remains committed to supporting global efforts on food
security. So far, we have facilitated the transit of more
than 25.5 million tons of Ukrainian grain.

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

With another winter approaching, we will meet
the expectations of the vulnerable once again. Since
the first day of the war of aggression, the Government
and people of Romania acted as first responders in
providing help to the some 6 million of Ukrainians
who have crossed our borders and sought shelter in
our country.
Romania strongly supports the efforts to seek
accountability for all the crimes committed against
Ukraine, including the crime of aggression. There
should be no impunity for those responsible for atrocities
in Ukraine. That is another aspect of a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in Ukraine.
The crisis we face today requires enhanced
cooperation and common solutions. Global action for
Ukraine and for defending the rules-based international
order has now become even more relevant. And we now
need an effective United Nations reform, starting with
this very organ, which is entrusted with the maintenance
of international peace and security. We must avoid
fatigue and grow even more united and resolute in
defending and upholding our values and international
peace and security, starting with a just and sustainable
peace in Ukraine.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Australia.
Ms. Wong (Australia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important high-level
open debate. I acknowledge all of our colleagues here
today, in particular the representative of Ukraine.
The Security Council has a singular responsibility
to the people of the world for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The establishment
of the Council was a clear statement of intent by the
nations of the world that the sovereignty of all Member
States must be respected, that larger countries should
not be able to determine the fate of smaller countries
and that disagreement should not spiral into war.
When the Council was established, its members took
on a serious obligation, especially its five permanent
members (P5), who were granted a power to veto the
will of the Chamber. Having that power demands of the
P5 an obligation to prevent conflict, to not act as an
aggressor and to lead by example in upholding the rules.
The veto was never intended to empower a country
to abuse the Charter of the United Nations and to
be above the law. But it has been more than 570 days
since Russia launched its illegal and immoral full-scale

23-2731919/30

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

20/09/2023

invasion of Ukraine, a flagrant violation of the Charter
by a permanent member of the Council and an attack on
every Member State and everyone at this table. Russia’s
actions are driving the global crisis in food and energy
security. Its termination of the Black Sea Grain Initiative
and its attacks on Ukrainian food infrastructure have
kept food from those who need it most.

majority of the members of the General Assembly took a
firm stand by underscoring a commitment to Ukraine’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
The General Assembly also deplored the devastating
consequences of the Russian aggression on civilians,
in particular children, in full violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights.

But while the cost of Russia’s war is being paid by
the world’s most vulnerable people, Ukraine suffers
the most. Russia has inflicted tragic loss of life and
catastrophic damage across Ukraine. It has placed
Ukraine’s very existence under threat. It has torn apart
families, abducting thousands of children in an effort
to re-educate them to disavow their loved ones and hate
their homeland. This conflict has seen great cruelty, but
removing a child from family to such ends is nothing
short of abhorrent. Australia stands steadfast with the
people of Ukraine, who continue to show extraordinary
courage, and we join all those calling for the return
of Ukraine’s abducted children. We contribute
defence, economic and emergency humanitarian
assistance — some 890 million Australian dollars thus
far — and support Ukraine’s efforts to hold Russia to
account. Our objective, like so many others, is to help
empower Ukraine to end this war on its own terms.

We applaud the fact that Russian armed forces and
affiliated groups in Ukraine have been added to the
list of shame in the report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict. We must now take action.
Regrettably, thus far, the Security Council has failed in
its role as the ultimate guarantor of peace. Ukraine is
not the only country to suffer from that powerlessness.
More than ever before, the entire world needs a
functional, effective international order that is rooted
in respect for the Charter of the United Nations.

As United Nations Member States, we all have a
responsibility to call out Russia’s egregious behaviour.
The rest of the Council’s permanent members must be
utterly unyielding in their pressure on Russia to end
this war. Russia’s abuse of its veto is mocking us all. It
underlines the need for urgent reform of the Council,
including constraints on the use of the veto. It has
never been more necessary for the Council to uphold
the principle of the sovereign equality of all members
of these United Nations. That is the first principle
of the Charter and the very rationale for the United
Nations itself.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, European Affairs and Foreign
Trade and the Federal Cultural Institutions of Belgium.
Ms. Lahbib (Belgium) (spoke in French): Eighteen
months ago, the world was stunned as it bore witness
to the Russian aggression in Ukraine, which infringed
upon the Charter of the United Nations. The principles
of the Charter are not only moral and legal imperatives,
but they also determine the very existence of an
international order based on values to which every
human being ultimately aspires — peace, prosperity
and the enjoyment of their rights. An overwhelming
20/30

As Ukraine burns, challenges faced in other parts of
the world persist. The Sustainable Development Goals
are facing enormous delays. Belgium is fully cognizant
of that as it contributes more than ever before to
effective multilateralism and to reform of international
financial institutions. As the European Union and
its member States provide 43 per cent of global
development assistance, Russia has been unscrupulous.
It blocked the maritime transport of grain and targeted
the infrastructure that feeds the entire world. Russia
has transformed its aggression into a cynical business
model and strengthened its position on the grain
market, further increasing some countries’ dependence
on it, while engaging in the vilest form of blackmail.
Broad interregional support for the resumption of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative yet again demonstrates the
intrinsic value of that Initiative, which we hope will
secure greater support in the near future.
The majority of the participants in today’s open
debate have voiced their opposition to a vision of
international relations in which force takes precedence
takes over law. The aggression constitutes a crime
against peace and a crime against international law.
Pursuant to the Rome Statute, the Council should refer
the matter to the International Criminal Court, but it is
paralysed. Belgium therefore fully supports efforts to
establish an international special international tribunal
on Russia’s crime of aggression against Ukraine to
ensure that that crime does not go unpunished.
In conclusion, allow me to emphasize the fact that
respect for territorial integrity and sovereignty are
prerequisites for a return to peace, as emphasized in
23-27319

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

resolution ES-11/6, adopted by the General Assembly
in February. Those two principles are also the basis for
the peace plan put forward by President Zelenskyy and
discussed in both Copenhagen and Jeddah. Belgium
supports that plan and will remain committed to
finding a solution to the conflict that can result in fair
and lasting peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign and European Affairs of Slovakia.
Mr. Wlachovský (Slovakia): I thank the Albanian
presidency for convening today’s open debate.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the representative of the European Union.
Bearing in mind the myriad common challenges
we face, such as climate change and inequality, it is
shameful that we have to meet today to deliberate on
such basic indisputable principles as those set out in
the Charter of the United Nations. Regrettably, they are
being seriously undermined by one Member State — a
State in a permanent seat of the Council with specific
responsibility for upholding international peace
and security.
Ukraine, a Member of the United Nations family, is
exercising its right to self-defence in accordance with the
Charter and its Article 51, due to Russia’s unprovoked,
unjustified and illegal war of aggression. Russia not
only disrespects a sovereign right of its neighbouring
country to choose its own future but escalates the
situation through so-called elections in temporarily and
illegally occupied Ukrainian territories — the Crimea,
Donetsk, Luhansk, Zaporizhzhya and Kherson regions.
We strongly condemn that attempt to illegally
integrate the territory of Ukraine, whose sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity we fully
support. In that regard, I would like to recall that the
opinion of the international community on Russia’s
shameful aggression has already been expressed. In
its resolution of October 2022 (ES-11/4), by its 143
votes, the General Assembly condemned Russia’s
malicious conduct.
We also express our strong concern about the
increasing number of casualties. Intentionally directing
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure
is a war crime. Slovakia will continue to support
all efforts to ensure full accountability for those
responsible, including financial accountability through
compensation for all damage caused.

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

I also want to remind members that the
consequences of Russia’s actions reach far beyond
Ukraine. We deplore Russia’s decision to terminate
the Black Sea Grain Initiative, followed by increased
attacks on Ukrainian ports. With that, Russia is only
further exacerbating the global food crisis. Moscow
is utterly indifferent to the hundreds of millions of
people worldwide facing hunger. Instead, Russia and
its representatives continue spreading propaganda and
disinformation and, even worse, threatening to use
nuclear weapons.
I believe we can all agree that such behaviour
is utterly unacceptable, and we have a collective
duty to take all possible actions to stop Russia from
holding the world hostage to its imperialistic appetite.
We once again call on Russia to immediately stop
its aggression against Ukraine and completely and
unconditionally withdraw all of its military forces from
the entire territory of Ukraine, within its internationally
recognized borders. That way, the Russian Federation
can not only immediately restore peace in Ukraine, but
also demonstrate a willingness to return to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Chile.
Mr. Van Klaveren (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Article
2 of the Charter of the United Nations, which governs
international coexistence, establishes the obligation on
States to refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State, to resolve disputes
by peaceful means and to comply, in good faith, with
the obligations they undertake.
Within that context, the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of every State Member of the
United Nations, including Ukraine, must be respected
and protected. General Assembly resolution 3314
(XXIX), of 1974, defines aggression and stipulates,
in article 5, that “a war of aggression is a crime
against international peace”. As a founding Member
of the United Nations and in full compliance with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law,
Chile reiterates its commitment to the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Once again, Chile expresses its complete rejection
and condemnation of war crimes perpetrated on
Ukrainian territory, under the control of Russian forces,
which have been made known to the United Nations

23-2731921/30

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Independent International Commission of Inquiry in
Ukraine. Our ongoing commitment to international
humanitarian law and to the international protection
of human rights led Chile to convey to the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court its decision to join
other States in referring the situation in Ukraine to the
Court. The decision was communicated by the United
Kingdom on 2 March 2022, on behalf of 39 States
parties to the Rome Statute. The main goal of this action
is to initiate an independent and impartial investigation
of the events, with a view to holding those responsible
accountable and meting out appropriate punishment in
the light of international criminal law.
At this particularly difficult time, when the whole
world is feeling the effects of a conflict between
States, Chile would like to reaffirm its support for the
general mandate of the International Criminal Court,
as well as the need to maintain the conditions needed to
enable it to act effectively and impartially. We firmly
believe that the Court is the most appropriate body to
hear and investigate all crimes committed in Ukraine
under its jurisdiction, while always bearing in mind
the principles of complementarity and cooperation.
We believe it is preferable to strengthen our current
international and national accountability mechanisms,
which would contribute to legitimizing the current
international jurisdictional structure.
We should consider current transitional justice
practices, which would undoubtedly help to establish
a more specific and effective path for the Ukrainian
situation. Transitional justice places victims and
survivors at the centre of the solution and is always
focused on preventing any repeat violations of human
rights and addressing the root causes of the conflict that
gave rise to them. That is why it is vital to ensure that
the process of documenting human rights violations
resulting from this conflict is carried out, as it will
provide the information necessary to determine the form
and type of reparations needed. This war of aggression’s
effects, and the restoration of justice in Ukraine, pose
new challenges to us as an international community.
Facing those challenges as we search for the best possible
solution requires solidarity from all of us.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Hellenic Republic.
Mr. Gerapetritis (Greece): The post-war security
system established by the Charter of the United Nations
relies on one fundamental premise, which is the
prohibition of the use or threat of force. The Security
22/30

20/09/2023

Council is the body that has been entrusted with the
ultimate responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. Unfortunately, however, today
the entire United Nations system is being gravely
challenged by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
The foreign policy of Greece, as a founding member
of the United Nations, has always been defined by its
commitment to international law. Together with our
European Union partners, we are calling on all nations
to do their utmost to ensure that the peaceful settlement
of disputes in full respect for international law by all
prevails. To that end, it is crucial to ensure that all
nations respect the international treaties that have
defined borders between States, as well as important
agreements such as the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea. We have therefore taken a principled
and clear position on Russia’s aggression from the
beginning. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is considered
a grave breach of the Charter and remains a serious
threat both to European security and global peace and
stability. Along with the rest of the European Union
member States, Greece will continue to provide support
to Ukraine. With regard to the issue of accountability,
we firmly believe that the alleged crimes committed in
and against Ukraine should be thoroughly investigated.
An ongoing and far-reaching consequence of
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine is the acute
food insecurity felt by many vulnerable countries
around the world. While the Secretary-General has
been engaged in trying to revive the Black Sea Grain
Initiative, Russia’s regrettable withdrawal from that
United Nations-brokered initiative has nonetheless
brought exports to a halt. Moreover, Russia’s attacks on
Ukraine’s ports have aggravated the security situation
in the Black Sea, making the export of Ukrainian
grain by that route impossible. More than half of that
grain was transported by Greek shipping companies,
and many of those vessels carried grain directly to
the countries that need it most. As a leading maritime
nation, Greece attaches great importance to freedom of
navigation and maritime security. In the light of these
developments, the European Union has decided to
increase the capacity of alternative routes for exporting
Ukrainian grain. In that context, along with the Baltic
and Adriatic corridors, Greece is offering Ukraine an
alternative transportation route to the Aegean Sea by
making use of ports in northern Greece in cooperation
with our partners, Bulgaria and Romania.
23-27319

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Greece is a candidate for a non-permanent seat on
the Security Council for the 2025–2026 term. If we are
elected, our term will be guided by three core values that
are universally expressed in the Greek language — that
is, diplomacy, dialogue and democracy. Diplomacy and
dialogue remain the only path to the peaceful resolution
of disputes, but lasting stability and security cannot be
sustained without democracy. Today Ukrainians are
fighting for the right to live in a democratic society,
and Greece and the European Union stand with them.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Ms. Bruins Slot (Kingdom of the Netherlands):
I would like to thank the Albanian presidency of the
Security Council for arranging today’s open debate,
one that we need to have in the Council right now,
during the opening week of the General Assembly at
its seventy-eighth session. This is a week in which the
world demonstrates its commitment to the Charter of
the United Nations, the United Nations system and
the international rules-based order that the United
Nations represents.
It is now more essential than ever that we show
that commitment, because the rules-based order is
under pressure. Exhibit A, as the Secretary-General
said yesterday (see A/78/PV.4), is Russia’s attack on
Ukraine, which is also an attack on the United Nations
Charter and the rules-based order. Russia’s aggression is
destroying the lives of the Ukrainian people every day,
a people who continue to show immense resilience and
courage in the fight for freedom and independence, a
people who as we speak are dealing with indiscriminate
killings, unlawful attacks on civilian infrastructure,
sexual and gender-based violence and the forcible
transfer and deportation of children. As we all know,
the impact of those violations extends well beyond
Ukraine. Our energy and food supplies, our economies,
our safety and security are all intertwined, and they
are being affected everywhere. Vulnerable countries
are also being disproportionately affected. That could
all end now if Russia ended its unprovoked war of
aggression against Ukraine.
It is our duty, as peace-loving nations, to send a
clear message. Russia’s aggression against Ukraine
and its manifest violations of the Charter must stop.
It constitutes a breach of the peace and a threat to
international security. Russia will be held accountable
for those violations. All of us here are committed to
fostering international peace, prosperity and security.

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

All of us are committed to meeting our obligations
under international law. We must therefore join
forces to prevent further violations, protect civilians
against the violations that are ongoing and prosecute
the perpetrators of past violations. We must do that
by taking action when the Charter’s principles are
violated and by supporting the relevant resolutions
and accountability initiatives. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands stands with Ukraine and with its people.
We are providing financial support and giving Ukraine
the means with which to defend its sovereignty. We will
continue to do whatever it takes, for as long as it takes.
The President: I now give the floor to the Prime
Minister of Spain.
Mr. Sánchez Pérez-Castejón (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): Spain and the European Union are firmly
committed to effective multilateralism that upholds the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. It is within the multilateral framework that,
through dialogue and diplomacy, the great agreements
that ensure peace, freedom and prosperity for our fellow
citizens can be reached. That is precisely why I wish
to reiterate our strong condemnation of Russia’s war of
aggression against Ukraine, as well as our support for
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within
its internationally recognized borders. There is no
room for parity when analysing the situation — in this
conflict, there is clearly an aggressor and a victim.
The situation is serious because it pertains to issues
that we thought we had overcome decades ago, such
as the fact that the legitimate aspirations of one State,
including its security concerns, cannot be defended
at the cost of forcibly violating the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of another. It is even more serious
when those principles are undermined by a permanent
member of the main international organ charged with
ensuring them, namely, the Security Council, before
which we find ourselves today.
The impact of the war at the global level is
devastating. It is affecting food security as well as
nuclear and energy security worldwide, with dire
consequences for millions of people, especially those
living in vulnerable countries. I therefore make a
solemn appeal to the Russian Federation to return
immediately to the Black Sea Grain Initiative and to
stop using hunger as a weapon of war. Its position is
simply deplorable.

23-2731923/30

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Spain and Europe want peace and are working for
it. The aim is to put an end to the aggression and to
the suffering of the Ukrainian people, but it is also
to defend the international rules-based order that
makes possible peaceful coexistence among nations.
We are working with the international community
to broaden the consensus towards achieving a just
and lasting peace. We support President Zelenskyy’s
peace formula, which respects international law and
the United Nations Charter. It will be up to Ukraine to
determine the timing and conditions for initiating the
process to end the conflict.
The European Union will stand united in its quest
for peace. We will continue to provide strong political,
economic, military, financial and humanitarian
support to Ukraine for as long as necessary, and we
will contribute to the reconstruction of that war-torn
country. We will also continue to strive to ensure
full accountability for war crimes and other serious
crimes that may have been committed, using whatever
multilateral instruments are available to us.
However, I conclude by saying that in order
to achieve peace, it is necessary for Russia to end
its aggression and to immediately, completely and
unconditionally withdraw all of its troops from the
entire territory of Ukraine. We believe that it is possible
to have a broad debate on security in Europe in which
the legitimate interests and concerns of all are taken
into account. But such a debate is impossible while
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of one of the
parties is being violated. That is a matter of respect for
the most basic principles underpinning the multilateral
edifice embodied by the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Konaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to express my appreciation for the
invitation to be here today and for the opportunity to
gather in this important Chamber, which symbolizes
the core of cooperation among nations. We are here to
stand together in defence of such cooperation.
Bosnia and Herzegovina fully aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the President of Guatemala
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Accountability
following the Aggression against Ukraine.
Our world is now unfortunately far from peaceful
and secure. It is a world in which both injustice and
24/30

20/09/2023

intolerance are putting in danger our shared values — the
very foundation of our humanity and prosperity.
The Russian aggression against Ukraine is not an
isolated incident but stands as the most obvious violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. Its consequences are catastrophic, with countless
lives lost, families torn apart and millions displaced,
leading to a humanitarian crisis.
As States Members of the United Nations, we
must stand strong. We do not need to look too far into
the past to see what happens when our community
of nations fails to uphold and defend the rules and
norms of the world order. We have a right and an
obligation to speak out about this topic because we
have suffered due to the genocide that took place in an
area of my country under the protection of the United
Nations — Srebrenica — while the rest of the world
stayed silent.
Violations of the rules of the United Nations Charter
are no longer acceptable. They constitute an offence
against our shared values. The ideals of the United
Nations Charter should never be subject to disrespect
or compromised. It is our duty to stand for the noble
principles upon which this Organization is built.
Effective responses require responsibility, respect for
international norms, strong coalitions and progressive,
inclusive leadership.
Despite obstacles such as the abuse of the veto
power, we have taken decisive steps through the General
Assembly, and we are voicing our determination to
defend Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, as
well as all principles based on justice. We are decisive in
our defence of this Organization and what it stands for.
We will stand together in demanding that such violations
stop, and we will work tirelessly for a just peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Panama.
Ms. Tewaney Mencomo (Panama) (spoke in
Spanish): I cannot help but recall that on a day like today,
40 years ago, Panama assumed the presidency of the
General Assembly of this Organization, demonstrating
our tireless efforts to promote the participation of all
countries in overcoming the inequalities that hinder
peace and the well-being of the peoples of the world.
It is with that same determination that I wish to
address the Security Council, based on the soundness
of the arguments that support our position in favour
of achieving lasting peace in Ukraine and with the
23-27319

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

indomitable spirit so characteristic of my people, to
reiterate clearly that we will not cease to persist in any
just cause for peace.
Since the beginning of the conflict, Panama has
been steadfast in its call for respect for Ukraine’s
sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity. We have advocated dialogue and an end to
the aggression, as demonstrated through our support
for the relevant resolutions submitted to the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Human Rights
Council. Our position is one that firmly condemns the
use of force and violence in order to avoid any further
loss of life.
Panama believes that the Organization must
increasingly adhere to its own principles in order
to render its peacemaking action more effective.
International peace rests on efficient and effective
multilateral institutions, full respect for human rights,
overcoming all forms of intolerance and the promotion
and institutionalization of dialogue. I emphasize
the word “dialogue”. The legitimacy, authority
and competence of the Council is derived from the
Charter — the same Charter under Article 2 of which it
is incumbent upon all States to refrain from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State. It is therefore necessary to
reiterate the enormous responsibility shouldered by
every member of the Council to comply fully with the
Charter. Only in that way will we be able to keep open
the paths leading us away from frustration and avoid
violent shortcuts.
Although we are all well aware of the tragedy
under way, we would be remiss if we failed to mention
the humanitarian crisis that has resulted from the war.
Therefore, we reiterate our call for ensuring access
to humanitarian assistance and protecting civilians,
including humanitarian personnel and vulnerable people,
especially children. Panama understands all too well the
struggle of peoples who suffer as a result of defending
their sovereignty and refuse to accept the imposition of
the will of the powerful upon the weak. Based on our
own experience, we know that no State has the right to
appropriate or unilaterally annex the territory of another
nation, much less through the use of force.
We call for respect for international law and
resolving ourselves once again to finding what unites
so that we can focus our undivided attention on the
multiple challenges facing us and continue efforts to
reduce the effects of climate change, poverty, inequality

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

and the impact of transnational organized crime in order
to improve people’s lives. In keeping with its vision as
a country with a pacifist and multilateralist calling
and promoter of dialogue, Panama deeply regrets the
devastating conflict in Ukraine and the impact that it
is having on the entire world, especially developing
countries. We know the causes and consequences of
the conflict, and it is therefore understandable that
the international community persist in its demand for
a definitive solution that, above all, achieves peace.
Such peace will be possible only through the strict
application of the principles of international law.
Beyond the rhetoric and what we have seen on the
ground, the stability that we have achieved to date,
which has brought with it an era of increased prosperity
and global growth, is also at stake. We must therefore
avoid setting a precedent for similar future events,
which could occur in any other part of the world.
Panama reiterates its commitment to the principles
of the Charter and multilateralism, as a means for
promoting peace. Those are the historical pillars of
our foreign policy, and we will continue to defend
them in every forum and throughout the world with the
tools that have always been our trademark: dialogue,
negotiation and words. That is our strength, and, in
accordance with our deep-seated convictions and based
on our calling, we will continue to build bridges of
dialogue and always promote peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Belarus.
Mr. Aleinik (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Attempts
by certain actors to rewrite the basic principles of
international law and international relations to suit
their own interests, while disregarding the legitimate
interests of the majority of members of the international
community, have resulted in an unprecedented degree
of polarization in the world in general and in our region
in particular. The situation has been exacerbated by the
aggressive opposition of certain countries — that have
become accustomed to the belief that they are at the
centre of human civilization — to establishing a fair
and equitable, polycentric world order. Consequently,
the role played by force is increasing in international
relations. The architecture of international security,
non-proliferation and arms control has almost
completely collapsed. We note with great alarm the
disproportionate growth in military capabilities and
the arms race not only in our region, but also in our
neighbouring countries.

23-2731925/30

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

All of Belarus’ initiatives to reduce confrontation,
restore trust and strengthen regional security that
we have proposed over the past years have been
disregarded. For some reason they were looked down
upon. As a result, the conflict in Ukraine flared up
with renewed vigour in the European region, and the
entire world has suffered its harsh consequences, as
manifested in economic, food and energy crises. As a
country having a common border with Ukraine, more
than any other party, Belarus is interested in a rapid and
peaceful settlement of the conflict. As a neighbouring
country, Belarus also has its own profound insight
concerning the conflict. It was in Belarus that the
Minsk agreements were signed, which launched the
Ukraine peace process, as was the package of measures
for their implementation, which was endorsed by the
Security Council.
We believe that that bears mentioning, regardless
of those who would prefer pass over the matter in
silence. The long-awaited result of the negotiations in
the Belarusian capital should have become the basis
for the peace process in Ukraine. The implementation
of the agreements could have put the process on a
sustainable positive trajectory. However, that did not
happen, and today it is obvious why it could not happen.
Our Western colleagues have spoken eloquently in that
regard. Some have bluntly stated that they had no plans
to end the conflict and that today they intend to fight to
the last Ukrainian.
Against that background, the accusation that
Belarus is aiding and abetting the aggression is
completely absurd. I recall that, last year, three rounds
of Russian-Ukrainian peace talks were held in our
country. Since March 2022, Belarus has willingly hosted
Ukrainians and foreign citizens who fled the hostilities
in Ukraine. Immediately upon their arrival, they were,
and continue to be, provided with needed assistance,
including humanitarian aid. By a special decision by
the country’s leadership, they virtually enjoy the same
rights as our citizens. Has any Western country adopted
similar decisions? Since the end of February 2022,
approximately 120,000 Ukrainian refugees have arrived
in Belarus, which is almost 1.5 per cent of our country’s
population. Do you really think that those people would
have come voluntarily to Belarus, had they felt we were
aggressive towards them? The answer is obvious and
logical. Let me recall that our country is bearing this
burden on our own, and, instead of assistance, we are
met only with illegal sanctions from the West. We have
officially invited the Secretary-General to visit Belarus
26/30

20/09/2023

personally or send his representatives to assess the
situation on the ground. Our borders are open, and we
are open to constructive cooperation. The end of the
conflict is inevitable, and it will end at the negotiating
table. We welcome the growing number of countries
that have proposed reasonable and peaceful initiatives
to resolve the situation in Ukraine.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Belarus’
readiness to contribute to resolving the situation in
order to achieve long-term and sustainable peace in
the region, which all our countries and our peoples
need today.
The President: I now give the floor to the Secretary
for Relations with States of the Holy See.
Archbishop Gallagher: This open debate of the
Security Council takes place in the context of the
cruel and senseless war against Ukraine, which, with
great sacrifice, is defending its sovereignty and the
inviolability of its internationally recognized borders.
Those are the same values promoted and shared since
the foundation of this noble Organization. Faced with
the ongoing tragedy, a spontaneous question arises:
Against whom is this war being waged? It is before the
eyes of everyone that those paying the highest price are
civilian, simple people and, above all, children, youth
and the elderly. War is a great evil. At present, we can see
that it is expanding more and more, beyond Ukraine’s
borders, covering not only Europe but other continents
with its thick cloud, and above all infiltrating human
hearts, making them containers of a logic of war. Truly,
as Pope Francis has reminded us, we are witnessing a
third world war that is being fought piecemeal.
It is undeniable that Russia’s attack on Ukraine
has jeopardized the entire global order that arose after
the Second World War. Its negative consequences can
already be glimpsed in the humanitarian, demographic,
food, sociopolitical, legal, economic, ecological,
military, nuclear, energy, health, educational, religious,
migratory and other areas, which taken all together
constitute fundamental elements of the architecture of
world security. Evil is incapable of generating good.
Aggression can generate only new aggression. If this
war is not stopped and peace is not sought at every turn,
the whole world risks plunging into even deeper crisis.
The solution to the war in Ukraine is not only a
matter for Ukraine itself. In the face of the tragedy
unfolding before our eyes, it is past time to ask
ourselves some of Pope Francis’s questions. What am
23-27319

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

I doing today for the Ukrainian people? Am I doing
anything? Today more than ever the entire international
community cannot surrender and let the issue pass
by in silence. In order to have a peaceful and secure
future, all States Members of the United Nations, and
especially those on the Security Council, are called on
to join their efforts in the quest for a just and lasting
peace for Ukraine, as an important element of the
global peace for which the world is thirsting. It is better
and cheaper for all to invest in peace rather than war.
For its part, the Holy See is close to Ukraine and
fully upholds its territorial integrity. It also continues
to engage in humanitarian initiatives aimed at
alleviating the suffering of the Ukrainian population,
especially those members of it who are weakest and
most vulnerable, while at the same time urging all
States and relevant international organizations to
become creative and courageous artisans of peace and
weavers of constructive dialogue. Peace is not a reality
whose features and properties are unknown. Everyone
knows what peace is. It will surely come when there
is a common commitment to implementing it, not only
at the international institutional level but in our hearts
and homes. To all, and especially to tormented Ukraine,
I would like to express my heartfelt wish that the peace
we desire may return to cheer the whole world.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for the Environment, Climate, Communications and
Transport of Ireland.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I thank the Albanian presidency
for organizing this very important open debate. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his contribution today
and President Zelenskyy for his powerful statement.
In our capital city of Dublin, our main street is
called O’Connell Street. At each end of that street there
is a statue, each of them dedicated to a man who worked
for Ireland’s sovereignty and independence. At the north
end of the street, there is a statue of Charles Stewart
Parnell, the leader of our Home Rule movement, and
on it is written the inscription “No man has the right or
any right to fix the boundary to the march of a nation”.
The United Nations is based on that principle — that
every country has a right to its own sovereignty. At the
other end, there is a statue to Daniel O’Connell, our
liberator, who famously said, “Nothing is politically
right which is morally wrong”. What President Putin
has done and what this war has caused is morally and
fundamentally wrong, and it has to stop. Russia’s illegal
war of choice is not only a war on the people of Ukraine

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

but on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
very foundations of our multilateral system. In seeking
to impose its will by force on a peaceful neighbour,
Russia has blatantly violated the Charter’s principles of
the sovereign equality and territorial integrity of States.
In the 19 months since tank columns first advanced
on Kyiv, Kharkiv and Mariupol, we have lost track of
the number of horrific attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Just two weeks ago, 16 Ukrainians,
including a child, were killed in Russia’s indiscriminate
missile attack on Kostiantynivka, an indefensible
violation of international law and a blatant attack
on civilians that no amount of disinformation can
explain away.
All Member States rely on the rules-based
international order as a guarantee of our independence,
our sovereignty and our security. That is why
pushing back on this ongoing and blatant violation
of international law by Russia, a permanent member
of the Security Council, is so critically important.
The Council, charged with the critical mandate of
maintaining international peace and security, is too
often unable to meet its obligations, not least when
one of its permanent members is the aggressor State.
That failure to act has had harrowing real-world
consequences. We have seen the catastrophic impact
that Russia’s disregard for international law has had
on women and children in particular. Conflict-related
sexual violence has been a consistent feature of this
war, while the evidence of the enforced deportation
of Ukrainian children underscores just how the most
vulnerable can suffer the most unspeakable harm.
If we fail to hold Russia accountable, that failure
will have far-reaching consequences in terms of
cooperation on so many of the global challenges we
face, whether they are efforts to address food security,
energy security, nuclear safety or the environment.
Ireland unequivocally condemns Russia’s nuclear
threats and the utter disregard for safety that its forces
have shown at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
As we reflect this week on the Political Declaration
on the Sustainable Development Goals, on which
Ireland, together with Qatar, has proudly led, the threat
to global food security and the increased risk of global
hunger resulting from the conflict have been thrown into
sharp relief. It is encouraging that the General Assembly
has taken action where the Security Council has failed.
There have been six General Assembly resolutions in
reaction to Russia’s invasion. Most recently, the General

23-2731927/30

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Assembly’s adoption in February of resolution ES-11/6,
on the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
underlying a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
Ukraine, was an important signal from an overwhelming
majority of Member States of their commitment to
upholding the Charter of the United Nations.
It is our collective responsibility to stand fully
with the people of Ukraine in the face of this brutal
aggression. Fifteen million people have fled their
homes, and we are proud to have welcomed more than
90,000 Ukrainians to Ireland, which is now close to
2 per cent of our population. The war is entirely of
Russia’s making. Just as Russia chose to start this war,
it can choose to end it. It is up to Ukraine to determine
the terms, conditions and timelines for any peace
agreement, and Ireland reiterates its strong support for
President Zelenskyy’s peace plan in that regard. We
support the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General and
Ukraine itself to bring an end to the war and to achieve
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace based on the
principles of the Charter. We will continue to do our
part to support the Ukrainian people and to ensure that
there can never be impunity for such violent disregard
of the rules-based international system.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Akçapar (Türkiye): We are living on a
precipice where our deliberations do matter. Türkiye has
been a strong advocate of the rules-based international
system, and we are concerned about the possibility
that humankind may not protect it. The United Nations
is at the core of efforts to uphold, restore and bolster
international peace and security and sustainable
development. The United Nations and the Security
Council itself matter.
The Council was created to prevent the scourge
of war, and its primary purpose should continue to be
our guiding light in rendering the United Nations more
fit for purpose. The power of the veto was granted to
the permanent members of the Security Council to
enable them to avert conflicts, protect victims and
facilitate the maintenance of peace. Unfortunately, that
system has morphed into a mechanism that prioritizes
the interests of the few and is becoming increasingly
anachronistic. With the war in Ukraine, the United
Nations is confronting a crisis that has shaken the
Organization’s founding principles. It is fair to say that
such cataclysmic chapters are hardly exceptional in the
history of our Organization. There have been moments
28/30

20/09/2023

in the past when the United Nations failed to do its duty
because the veto of one member trumped the will of
the rest. The ongoing war in Ukraine has laid bare the
crisis in representation within the Organization.
After 18 months, there is still no end in sight for
the war. The protracted and attritional nature of the
conflict continues to exact a heavy toll on Ukraine and
its people, as well as the region and indeed increasingly
the world. The conflict’s regional and global fallout is
becoming worse. Challenges we have been facing in
food, energy and supply line security are deepening.
As we head into the second year of the war, Türkiye
remains firmly committed to Ukraine’s territorial
integrity, sovereignty and independence. In the
meantime, our pursuit of a negotiated end to the conflict
continues. Since the start of the war, Türkiye has assumed
efforts to facilitate diplomatic talks. After negotiations
collapsed in March of last year, we shifted our efforts to
addressing the practical challenges of the war, such as
prisoner exchanges, food security and nuclear security.
Our diplomatic efforts, together with the United Nations,
brought the Black Sea Grain Initiative to life, which lasted
for a year and averted a global food crisis. Its ultimate
termination will unsettle the global food markets and has
already shaken the stability of the Black Sea, creating
risks of escalation, with the rest of the world waiting in
suspense. Now we are working closely with the United
Nations to revive the Initiative.
As unanimously declared by almost every country
that spoke today, overwhelming global support for the
restoration of the Initiative is heartening and central to
the efforts of the United Nations and our own efforts.
Sustainable food security depends on ensuring an
uninterrupted supply from all resources available. Fair
and equitable distribution of food products should also
be integral to the campaign. Ultimately, diplomacy
can, we hope, help us reach our goal to revive this
precious Initiative.
Ukraine deserves a just peace that will secure its
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders. We
remain convinced that this can be achieved through
negotiations and that the diplomatic track is worth
every effort. The broader issues concerning European
security and preventing future crises and conflicts can
be settled only purposefully through diplomacy, and
diplomacy cannot thrive while the cycle of conflict
endures. With that understanding, we have supported
attempts at facilitating that, including the Chinese and
23-27319

20/09/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

African initiatives. We expressed our support for the
Ukrainian peace plan in principle and participate in its
meetings. We also note that a negotiated peace would
have to include both Ukraine and Russia. It may be said
that the current dynamics of the conflict may perhaps
not be conducive to resuming negotiations. However,
we must be ready when that inevitable moment emerges.
Fortune favours the prepared.
That brings me to an even larger issue. Conflicts
are on the rise. The principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes is enshrined in the Charter
of this Organization, whose fundamental principles
we have been striving to uphold and restore over the
past one and a half years. The Charter of the United
Nations already involves essential tools to prevent and
peacefully resolve conflicts such as the one in Ukraine.
Those tools can and must be utilized to the fullest in a
constructive and innovative way.
In the period ahead, Türkiye will maintain its
unwavering support to Ukraine not only to win the war,
but also to win the peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Sheikh Al-Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I congratulate your friendly country,
Mr. President, on presiding over the Security Council
for this month. We wish you, Sir, and your team every
success in the remaining work of the Council. I would
also like to thank you for organizing this important
session, which is held at a very critical time. It has
offered us the opportunity to listen to an update by
His Excellency President Zelenskyy, President of
Ukraine, on the most recent developments related to the
Ukrainian crisis.
Our world today is facing many unprecedented,
intertwined and interconnected political, security,
economic, humanitarian and environmental challenges.
Our multilateral system is therefore facing a true test,
which may be the most difficult test that the United
Nations has faced since its establishment in 1945.
Given the different transnational risks that our world
is facing today, the international community has only
one option — to cooperate — so that we can address
those regional and international challenges. We must
overcome many of the challenges and threats by
committing to the Charter of the United Nations and its
purposes and principles. Upholding the Charter is the
way to achieve international peace and security, and its

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

articles will guide our way to rightfulness, justice and
dignity. Its provisions are a road map for maintaining
relations among countries. It is a constitution for
international action and multilateralism.
The most notable purposes and principles of the
Charter are the following: respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of countries and
non-interference in their internal affairs; the peaceful
settlement of disputes; refraining from the threat or the
use of force against another Member State; establishing
friendly relations among countries; reaffirming equal
rights and the right of peoples to self-determination;
and promoting and respecting human rights.
The State of Kuwait reaffirms its position rejecting
the threat or the use of force in international relations
among countries. We also follow with deep concern the
heightened tensions in Ukraine and reaffirm the need
to remain committed to the principles of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations, as well as
respecting State sovereignty, territorial integrity and
good neighbourliness.
The State of Kuwait also calls for respecting the
independence and sovereignty of Ukraine, and we
reiterate our position that supports all mediation
efforts for calm, de-escalation and restraint. It is also
important to engage in dialogue and settle the conflict
through negotiations. We also call on the parties to
remain committed to the provisions of international
law and international humanitarian law when it comes
to the protection of civilians. They must also facilitate
the quick and safe delivery of humanitarian assistance
to all those in need.
We commend the efforts of the Secretary-General
with regard to the Black Sea Grain Initiative. We also
commend the efforts of Mr. Dashti, the United Nations
Coordinator for the Black Sea Grain Initiative. We
regret that the Initiative was not renewed and stress
the need for renewing it given its great importance in
guaranteeing stability in food prices and establishing
food security at the global level.
The Ukrainian crisis is an example of why we need
to reform the Security Council to enable it to fully
carry out its responsibilities pursuant to the Charter of
the United Nations. In that regard, we reaffirm the need
to move forward with the reform process so that the
Security Council can address the increasing challenges
confronting our world today in a more representative,
transparent, neutral and credible manner.

23-2731929/30

S/PV.9421 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reaffirms that
the United Nations is the cornerstone for multilateral
international action. Upholding the noble purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations is a
solid foundation on which to organize relations among
countries. I also reaffirm that upholding the purposes
and principles of the Charter is the first line of defence
for small countries. That is well recognized in the State
of Kuwait. The liberation of the State of Kuwait is a good
historical example of what the Security Council can do
and a clear reflection of what countries were aspiring
to do when they drafted the Charter, as it corrected an
act of aggression, assault and occupation that destroyed
and violated the noble purposes and principles of the
Charter and must be avoided. The Council’s position
with regard to Kuwait’s right will remain deep-rooted
in the minds of Kuwaitis forever.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Muraikhi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we congratulate Albania for presiding over the
Security Council during the month of September, and
we thank you, Mr. President, for holding this important
meeting on the maintenance of peace and security
in Ukraine, pursuant to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and through
effective multilateralism.
I am pleased to deliver this statement on behalf of
the State of Qatar.
The State of Qatar is committed to the peaceful
settlement of differences and disputes everywhere.
We regret that the war in Ukraine has continued for
more than 18 months. We are particularly concerned
about the humanitarian consequences of that war on
unarmed civilians. Its repercussions on the security,
humanitarian, health and economic situation around

30/30

20/09/2023

the world are getting worse, especially when it comes to
global food security and the efforts to combat hunger.
Those repercussions have been particularly affecting
developing and poor countries. The State of Qatar
therefore reiterates its call on all parties to the crisis
to show maximum restraint, end the war and achieve
sustainable peace.
The State of Qatar takes this opportunity to reiterate
its firm position regarding the Ukrainian crisis. That
position is based clearly and firmly on the principles
of international law, the United Nations Charter and
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. The State of Qatar supports the principles of
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Ukraine within its internationally recognized
borders. We are fully committed to the principles of the
Charter, especially Article 2, which calls on Member
States to settle their international disputes by peaceful
means and to refrain, in their international relations,
from the threat or use of force. We also call on all
parties to fully honour their obligations, pursuant to the
principles and provisions of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar reiterates our
willingness to support all efforts or endeavours to end
the war in Ukraine. We commend the efforts of the
United Nations and humanitarian organizations to meet
the urgent humanitarian needs of civilians, in addition
to their efforts to address the repercussions of the war.
The President: It has been a long day, but there
are still a number of speakers remaining on my list for
this meeting. Given the lateness of the hour, with the
concurrence of members of the Council, I intend to
suspend the meeting until tomorrow at 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 6.35 p.m.

23-27319
