X
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF TIIE JOINT SECOND AND THIRD

COMMITIEE
409 (V). Organization and operation of the
work of the Economic and Social Council and
its Commissions
A

The General Assembly,
1. Talus note with satisfaction of the Economic and
Social Council's decision 1 to undertake in the near
future a complete review of its organization and operation and that of its Commissions ;
2. Expresses the opinion that the regional economic
commissions should be maintained, although their organization and terms of reference may have to be revised in the light of the experience acquired since their
establishment.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.

B
The General Assembly,
Considerinq its resolutions 207 (III) and 208 (III)
of the General Assembly of 18 November 1948,
Taliing note of resolution 295 (XI) adopted by the
Economic and Social Council on 16 August 1950,
1. Recommends the Economic and Social Council to
draw the attention of the Committee appointed in
pursuance of its resolution 295 B ( XI) to the necessity
of taking into consideration General Assembly resolution 207 (III) concerning the distribution of membership in subsidiary organs of the Economic and Social
Council;
2. Draws the attention of Members of the United
Nations to the necessity of implementing as soon as
possible General Assembly resolution 208 (III) concerning the participation of Member States in the work
of the Economic and Social Council ;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to give consideration to the suggestions which will be communicated to
him by Member States in pursuance of resolution 208
(III), and to submit a report on this subject to the
General Assembly.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
C

The General Assembly,
Considering the desirability of laying down guiding
principles for the Committee appointed to review the
1

organization and operation of the Economic and Social
Council and its commissions,
Bearing in mind General Assembly resolution 208
(III),
Suggest to the Committee that it is desirable that
the largest number of Member States compatible with
efficiency should be enabled to participate in the organization and work of the Economic and Social Council
and its subordinate bodies.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.

410 (V).

Relief and rehabilitation of Korea
A

The General Assembly,
Having regard to its resolution 2 of 7 October 1950
on the problem of the independence of Korea,
Having received and considered a report 8 of the
Economic and Social Council submitted in accordance
with that resolution,
Mindful that the aggression by North Korean forces
and their warfare against the United Nations seeking to
restore peace in the area has resulted in great devastation and destruction which the Korean people cannot
themselves repair,
Recognizing that as a result of such aggression the
people of Korea are desperately in need of relief supplies
and materials and help in reconstructing their economy,
Deeply moved by the sufferings of the Korean people
and determined to assist in their alleviation,
Convinced that the creation of a United Nations programme of relief and rehabilitation for Korea is necessary both to the maintenance of lasting peace in the
area and to the establishment of the economic foundations for the building of a unified and independent
nation,
Considering that, under the said resolution of 7 October 1950, the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea is the principal
representative of the United Nations in Korea and hence
must share in the responsibility for the work undertaken
by the United Nations in furtherance of the objects and
purposes mentioned in the said resolution,
Considering that it is nevertheless desirable to set up
a special authority with broad powers to plan and super2
8

See Economic and Social Council resolution 295 B (XI).

31

See resolution 376 {V).
See document A/1493.

General Assembly-Fifth Session

32

vise rehabilitation and relief and to assume such
functions and responsibilities related to planning and
supervision, to technical and _adn:iinistratiye matters, <1;nd
to questions affecting orgamzat10n and 1mpleme_ntat1on
as are to be exercised untler the plans for rehef and
reh:,,bilitation approved by the General Assembly, such
authority to carry out its responsibilities in close cooperation with the Commission,
A. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE UNITED NATIONS KOREAN
RECONSTRUCTION AGENCY FOR
REHABILITATION OF KOREA

THE

RELIEF

AND

l. Establishes the United Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency (UNKRA) under the direction _of a
United Nations Agent General, who shall be assisted
by one or more deputies. The Agent General shall be
responsible to the General A~s~mbly for_ the conduct
( in accordance with the pohc1es established by the
General Assembly and having regard to such general
policy recommendations_ as the Unite_d_ N_ations Commission for the Unificat10n and Rehab1htat1on of Korea
may make) of the programme of relief and reh~bilitation
in Korea, as that programme may be determmed from
time to time by the General Assembly ;

2. Authorizes the United Nations Commission for
the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea:
(a) To recommend to the Agent General such policies concerning the United Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency's programme and activities as the Commission may consider necessary for the effective discharge of the Commission's responsibilities in relation
to the establishment of a unified, independent and democratic government in Korea;
( b) To determine, after consultation with the Agent
General, the geographical areas within which the
Agency shall operate at any time ;
( c) To designate authorities in Korea with which the
Agent General may establish relationships; and to
advise the Agent General on the nature of such relationships;
(d) To take such steps as may be needed to support
the Agent General in fulfilling his task in accordance
with the policies established by the General Assembly
for relief and rehabilitation ;
( e) To consider the reports of the Agent General
to the General Assembly and to transmit any comments
thereon to the Economic and Social Council and the
General Assembly ;
(f) To call for information on those aspects of the
work of the Agent General which the Commission may
consider necessary for the proper performance of its
work;

3. Authorizes the Commission to consult from time
to time with the Agent General in regard to the provisional programme adopted by the General Assembly
on the recommendation of the Economic and Social
Council and especially with regard to the adequacy of
that programme to meet the needs of Korea as defined
in the statement of general policy, and to make recommendations thereon to the Economic and Social Council;

4. Directs the Agent General:
(a) To co-ordinate his programme with measures
taken by the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea to carry out the
recommendations of the General Assembly relating to
the establishment of a unified, independent and democratic government in Korea, and-to support the Commission in fulfilling this task ;
( b) To commence the operation of the programme
in Korea at such time as may be agreed upon by the
United Nations Unified Command, the United Nations
Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of
Korea and the Agent General ;
( c) To consult with and generally be guided by the
advice of the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea on the matters set
forth under paragraph 2 (a) and be governed by its
advice on the matters covered in paragraphs 2 ( b) and
2 (c);
5. Further directs the Agent General, in the carrying
out of his functions :
(a) To ascertain, after consultation with the designated authorities in Korea, the requirements for supplies and services for relief and rehabilitation made
necessary by the consequences of armed conflict in
Korea;
( b) To provide for the procurement and shipment
of supplies and services and for their effective distribution and utilization within Korea ;
( c) To consult with and assist the appropriate authorities in Korea with respect to measures necessary
for the rehabilitation of the Korean economy and the
effective distribution and utilization within Korea of
supplies and services furnished ;
(d) To submit reports to the General Assembly
through the Secretary-General, transmitting copies simultaneously to the United Nations Commission for
the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea, and to the
Economic and Social Council ;
( e) To be guided in matters of administration, to
the extent .onsistent with the special requirements of
the programme, by the rules and regulations established
for the operation of the Secretariat of the United Nations;
Specifically he shall:
( 1) Select and appoint his staff in accordance with
general arrangements made in agreement with the
Secretary-General, including such of the staff rules
and regulations of the United Nations as the Agent
General and the Secretary-General shall agree are
applicable ;
(2) Utilize, wherever appropriate, and within budgetary limitations, the existing facilities of the United
Nations;
( 3) Establish, in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and in agreement
with the Advisory Committee established under
paragraph 6 below, financial regulations for the
United Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency ;

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Joint 2nd and 3rd Committee

(4) Arrange, in consultation with the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, for the rendering and audit of the accounts
of the Agency under procedures similar to those
applicable to the rendering and audit of the accounts of the United Nations;
6. Establishes an Advisory Committee consisting of
representatives of five Member States 4 to advise the
Agent General with regard to major financial, procurement, distribution and other economic problems pertaining to his planning and operations. The Committee shall
meet on the call of the Agent General but not less than
four times a year. The meetings of the Committee shall
be held at the Headquarters of the United Nations except in special circumstances, when the Committee,
after consultation with the Agent General, may meet
elsewhere if it deems that this would be essential to the
proper performance of its work. The Committee shall
determine its own methods of work and rules of procedure;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, after consulting
the United Nations Commission for the Unification and
Rehabilitation of Korea and the Advisory Committee,
to appoint the United Nations Agent General for Korean
Reconstruction, and authorizes the Agent General to
appoint one or more Deputy Agents General in consultation with the Secretary-General ;
8. Authorizes the Secretary-General to establish a
special account to which should be credited all contributions in cash, kind or services, the resources
credited to the account to be used exclusively for the
programme of relief and rehabilitation and administrative expenses connected therewith; and directs the
Secretary-General to make cash withdrawals from the
account upon request of the Agent General. The Agent
General is authorized to use contributions in kind or
services at his discretion;
9. Recommends that the Agent General in carrying
out his functions:
(a) Make use at his discretion of facilities, services
and personnel that may be available to him through existing national and international agencies and organizations both governmental and non-governmental;
( b) Consult with the Secretary-General and the
heads of the specialized agencies before appointing his
principal subordinate personnel in their respective fields
of competence;
( c) Make use of the advice and technical assistance
of the United Nations and the specialized agencies and,
where appropriate, request them to undertake specific
projects and special tasks either at their own expense
or with funds made available by the Agent General;
(d) Maintain close contact with the SecretaryGeneral for the purpose of ensuring fullest co-ordination of efforts of the organs of the United Nations and
the specialized agencies in suppof! of the programme;
10. Authorizes the Agent General to enter into agreements with such authorities in Korea as the United
Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea may designate, containing terms and con• See note en page 34.

33

ditions governing measures affecting the distribution
and utilization in Korea of the supplies and services
furnished, in accordance with the statement of general
policy on Korean relief and rehabilitation contained in
section I3 of the present resolution;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to make available
to the maximum extent possible, and subject to appropriate financial arrangements, such facilities, advice and
services as the Agent General may request;
12. Requests the specialized agencies and nongovernmental organizations to make available to the
maximum extent possible, and subject to appropriate
financial arrangements, such facilities, advice and services as the Agent General may request;
13. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
review the reports of the Agent General and any comments which the United Nations Commission for the
Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea may submit
thereon, and such other data as may be available on
the progress of relief and rehabilitation in Korea and
to make appropriate reports and recommendations
thereon to the General Assembly;
14. Calls upon all governments, specialized agencies
and non-governmental organizations, pending the beginning of operations by the United Nations Korean
Reconstruction Agency, to continue to furnish through
the Secretary-General such assistance for the Korean
people as may be requested by the Unified Command;
15,. Invites countries not Members of the United
Nations to participate in financing the programme of
relief and rehabilitation in Korea;

B.

STATEMENT OF GENERAL POLICY ON RELIEF AND
REHABILITATION IN KOREA

16. Approves the following statement of general
policy:
1. The United Nations programme of relief and
rehabilitation in Korea is necessary to the restoration
of peace and the establishment of a unified, independent and democratic government in Korea.
2. To this end, it is the objective of the United
Nations to provide, subject to the limit of the resources placed at its disposal for this purpose, relief
and rehabilitation supplies, transport and services,
to assist the Korean people to relieve the sufferings
and to repair the devastation caused by aggression,
and to lay the necessary economic foundations for
the political unification and independence of the
country.
3. The United Nations programme of relief and
rehabilitation for Korea shall be carried out in practice in such a way as to contribute to the rapid
restoration of the country's economy in conformity
with the national interests of the Korean people,
having in view the strengthening of the economic and
political independence of Korea and having in view
that, in accordance with the general principles of the
United Nations, such assistance must not serve ru,
a means for foreign economic and political interference in the internal affairs of Ko:--ea and must not be
accompanied by any conditions of a political nature.

34

General Assembly-:Fifth Session

4. The United Nations programme is to be a
supplement to the general recovery effort that will
be undertaken by the Korean people on their own
initiative and responsibility, through the most effective utilization of their own resources as well as of
the aid which is rendered under the programme.
5. Whilst the programme should be consistent
with the pattern of long-term economic development
in Korea, it is itself necessarily limited to re_lief and
rehabilitation, and contributions and supplies furnished under this programme shall be used exclusively for that purpose.
6. First priority shall be given to the provision of
the basic necessities of food, clothing and shelter for
the population of Korea and measures to prevent
epidemics. Second highest priority shall be given to
projects which will yield early results in the indigenous production of basic necessities; this will include
the reconstruction of transport and power facilities.
As the programme develops, emphasis should be
shifted to the provision of other materials, supplies
and equipment for the reconstruction or replacement
of war-damaged facilities necessary to the economic
life of the country.
7. The necessary measures shall be taken to ensure that distribution shall be so conducted that all
classes of the population shall receive their equitable
shares of essential commodities without discrimination as to race, creed or political belief.
8. Subject to adequate control, the distribution of
supplies shall be carried out, as appropriate, through
public and co-operative organizations, through nonprofit-making voluntary organizations such as the
Red Cross, and through normal channels of private
trade. At the same time, measures shall be taken to
ensure that the cost of distribution and the profit
from the sale of supplies are kept to the minimum.
Measures shall be taken to ensure that the special
needs of refugees and other distressed groups of the
population are met through appropriate public welfare programmes, and accordingly the sale of relief
supplies will take place only in justifiable cases and
under conditions agreed upon with the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea.
9. The local currency proceeds derived from the
sale of relief and rehabilitation supplies or, at the discretion of the Agent General, an amount commensurate with the value of goods and services supplied,
shall be paid into an account under the control of the
Agent General. The Agent General, after consultation with the United Nations Commission for the
Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea, and in agreement with the Advisory Committee referred to in
paragraph 6 of section A of the present resolution,
shall use these funds for appropriate additional relief
and rehabilitation activities within Korea, for the
local currency expenses of the relief and rehabilitation operations of the United Nations, or for measures to combat inflation. The proceeds shall not be
used for any other purpose.

10. The necessary economic and financial measures shall be taken by the authorities in Korea to

ensure that the resources provided under the United
Nations programme, as well as Korean resources, are
effectively employed to aid in laying the economic
foundations of the country. Among these, special
attention should be given to measures to combat inflation, to sound fiscal and monetary policies, to the
requisite pricing, rationing and allocation controls
( including the pricing of goods imported under the
programme), to the prudent use of Korean foreign
exchange resources together with promotion of exports, and to the efficient management of government
enterprise.
11. Import taxes shall not be imposed on relief
and rehabilitation supplies received under the United
Nations programme.
12. The authorities in Korea should maintain such
records and make such reports on the receipt, distribution and use of relief and rehabilitation supplies
as may be determined by the Agent General after
consultation with them.
13. All authorities in Korea shall freely permit the
personnel of the United Nations to supervise the
distribution of relief and rehabilitation supplies, including the examination of all storage and distribution facilities as well as records.
14. The personnel of the United Nations shall be
accorded within Korea the privileges, immunities and
facilities necessary for the fulfilment of their function.

15. All authorities in Korea and the SecretaryGeneral shall use their best efforts to inform the
people of Korea of the sources and purposes of the
contributions of funds, supplies and services.
16. In determining Korea's needs for relief and
rehabilitation, in drawing up programmes and plans,
and in implementing such programmes and plans, the
Agency created to administer the relief and rehabilitation programme should consult with and utilize, to
the greatest extent feasible, the services of Korean
authorities.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.

• * *
At the 326th plenary meeting on 15 December 1950, the
General Assembly, on the nomination of the President,
elected the following States Members to serve on the Advisory Committee established under the terms of paragraph
6 of section A of the above resolution: CANADA, INDIA,

the UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN
IRELAND, the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA and URUGUAY.

B
The General Assembly
1. Requests the President to appoint a Negotiating
Committee composed of seven or more members for
the purpose of consulting, as soon as possible during
the current session of the General Assembly, with Member and non-member States as to the amounts which
governments may be willing to contribute towards the
financing of the programme for the relief and rehabilitation of Korea ;

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Joint 2nd and 3rd Committee

2. Authorizes the Negotiating Committee to adopt
procedures best suited to the accomplishment of its task,
bearing in mind :
(a) The need for securing the maximum contribution in cash;
( b) The desirability of ensuring that any contribution in kind is of a nature which meets the requirements
of the contemplated programmes; and
( c) The degree of assistance which can be rendered
by specialized agencies, non-member States and other
contributors ;
3. Requests that, as soon as the Negotiating Committee has ascertained the extent to which Member States
are willing to make contributions, all delegations be
notified accordingly by the Secretary-General in order
that they may consult with their governments;

35

4. Decides that, as soon as the Negotiating Committee has completed its work, the Secretary-General shall,
at the Committee's request, arrange, during the current
session of the General Assembly, an appropriate meeting of Member and non-member States at which Members may commit themselves to their national contributions and the contributions of non-members may be
made known.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.

*

*
*
In acc_ordance with the terms of the above rcsolHtion,
the President of the General Assembly, at the 318th plenary
meeting on 4 December 1950, announced that he had appointed a Negotiating Committee, composed of the fallowing States Members: CANADA, EGYPT, FRANCE, INDIA, the
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA and URUGUAY.
