UNlTEDNATIOiVS

THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR
nd

MEETING: 25 MARCH 1977
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 992) . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . I . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Adoptionoftheagenda
. . . ,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . +. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (. .
1
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Cocxil (S/12295) .

1

s/PV.1992

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records uf the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

1992nd MEETING
Held in New York
President: Mr. Andrew YOUNG (Unit&

on Friday,

25 Mxch

States of America).

1977, at 10.30 am.

Kamana (Zambia) took the-placesreservedfor themat the
sideof the Councilchamber.

Prese/~f: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Republic, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist [<epLlblics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

2. The PRESIDENT: The first speakeris the representative of Guinea.I invite him to take a placeat the Council
table and to makehisstatement.
3. Mr. CAMARA (Guinea) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, permit me, on behalf of my delegation,to
convey to you our most sincerecongratulationson your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month, at a time when this body is once againexamining
suchan urgentproblemasthat of southernAfrica.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l992)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2295)

4. The fact that you have been chosento representthe
United States of America in our Organization is no
accident. The choicewasinspiredby your personalqualities
displayedin your political life and, above all, becauseof
your experienceof the problemswhich face the world in
generalandin particular your intimate knowledgeof the lot
of those who are discriminatedagainstand oppressedand
for whom you have the heavy responsibilityof representing
today a sourceof hope.

The mectitq was called to order at 1 I. OSa.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

5. Before 1 make my statement,permit me to convey to
you and, through you, to the membersof the Council my
gratitude for having been given an opportunity to participatein this debatewithout the right to vote.

The question of South Africa
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/l 2295)

6. I cannot begin my statementwithout payinga heartfelt
tribute to the memory of a heroic sonof Africa, the late
and very much lamentedPresidentMarien Ngouabiof the
sister Republic of the Congo, assassinated
in such a
cowardly mannerby the forces of evil OII 1XMarch of this
year, This lossfor the peopleof the Congoandthe whole
of Africa occurredat a time whenthe strugglefor the rights
to existence and to sovereignty of African peopleswas
becomingever more fierce. We shouldlike to extend our
heartfelt condolencesto the bereaved people of that
country.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken by the Council at previous meetings, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Bahrain, Botswana, Egypt,
Ghana, Guinea, Indonesia, Kenya, Liberia, Madagascar,
Mauritania, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, the
Syrian Arab Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Yugoslavia, Zaire and Zambia to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber, on the usual
understanding that they will be invited to take a place at
the Council table when they wish to address the Council.

7. We should alsolike to expressto the representativeof
Romania our feelings of sympathy and compassionwith
regardto the earthquakewhichhascausedsomuch damage
and resultedin the lossof somanylivesin that country. We
should also like to expressthe same feelings to the
representativeof Iran whosecountry recently fell victim to
a similar catastrophe.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Rahal (Algeria),
Mr, S. M. Al Sal&r (Bahrain), Mr, i? Tlou (Botswarw),
Mr. A. E Abdcl Meguid (Egyptj Mr. T. B. Sam /Ghana),
Mr. M. S. Gmara (Guinea), Mr. A. Marpaung(Indonesia),
Mr. F. M. Kasina (Kenya), Mrs. A. Brooks-Randolph(Liberib), Mr. H Rasolondruibe(Madagascar),ME M. El Hassen
[Mauritania), Mr. L. 0, Harrimqn (Nigeria), Mr. M. Fall
[Senegal), Mrs. S. Y, Gbujama (Sierra Leone), Mr. 1 B.
Fonseka(Sri Sanka), Mr. M Allaf (Syrian Arab RepubW
Mr. S.A. Salim (United Republic of Tanzania),Mr. J. Petrii
(Yugoslavia), Mr. Urnba di Lutete (Zaire) and Mr. .!I. W.

8. The questionof South Africa which is on the agendaof
the Security Council is the most important focal point of
our attention and concern, particularly becausethe obstinacy of those championsof apartheid who hold power is
1

“The IJnited Nations met and withdrew South Africa’s
trusteeship over [Namibia]. The Security Council pronounced itself in favour of the independence of Namibia.
The Organization of African Unity also met and pronounced itself in favour of the independence of Namibia.
All international organizations have already decided along
the same lines. But South Africa refuses to respect this
will of the peoples. It imposes force and does not heed
reason. It does not understand the sense of historic
justice. What can we do ? We too can use force to put an
end to apartheid. ”

threatening to blow apart the edifice of peace which our
respective peoples have sacrificed SO much to build.
9. On 30 September 1974, in its resolution 3207 (XXIX),
which was adopted by an overwhelming majority, the
General Assembly even then was requesting the Council to
examine relations between the United Nations and South
Africa in the light of the constant violation by that country
of the principles of the Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
10. After so many years during which the United Nations
has ceaselessly adopted resolutions ranging from appeals to
warnings and to recommendations for sanctions against the
white minority @me of Pretoria, after,so many years of
patience in the face of the universal condemnation of
apartheid, the Security Council is meeting again to examine
the consequences of the arrogance of the South African
Government, which, year after year, has been defying the
international community while undermining the moral
authority of the Council.

14. Today, more than ever, the concatenation of intemaconal strategic and economic interests in the African
hemisphere is the best explanation of the retreat of various
groups in the face of this evil in its purest form. This
attitude of imperialism, guilt ridden as it is, has encouraged
Pretoria, over the course of time, to adopt every year fresh
discriminatory and humiliating measures and to increase
and worsen its repression to the point where the prime
importance of the right to life is nothing but an empty
word and where non-whites have no means of even peacelirl
protest and no legal means of obtaining redress for the
wrongs that they suffer.

11. Almost nothing has been left unsaid about uphrtheid
and the conduct of those who hold power in Pretoria, All
possible denunciations have been uttered. Right after the
foundation of the United Nations following upon the
horrors of Hitlerian fascism, the signatories of the Charter
adopted resolution 103 (I), which stipulates: “The General
Assembly declares that it is in the higher interests of
humanity to put an immediate end to religious and
so-called racial persecution and discrimination, and calls on
the Governments and responsible authorities to conform.. .
to. . . the Charter of the United Nations, and to take the
most prompt and energetic steps to that end.”

15. We must recognize that all the measures hitherto
advocated by our Organization against the policy of
apartheid of South Africa, the arms embargo, economic
sanctions or assistance to the peoples of South Africa in
their struggle for independence, have proved ineffective
because of the impunity which Pretoria enjoys.
16. South Africa has blocked all possible negotiations to
bring about majority rule, not only in Azania but also in
Zimbabwe. If Ian Smith, in his turn, can defy the
international community, it is certainly because he too has
become a student in the school of apartheid and because
Vorster is giving Rhodesia the necessary economic assists
ante for its survival.

12. Thirty-two
years later, the response of one of the
States Members of the Organization was clearly formulated
by its Minister for Foreign Affairs, none other than the
former Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Mr. Botha. When questioned by the press
as to the future of his country, Mr. Botha hastened to state
that there would never be universal suffrage in South
Africa. That statement is totally in keeping with the
response which Vorster made in 1976 with regard to the
participation of blacks in his Government: that it would
never happen in South Africa.

17. It js clear that all the dialogues in the world wjll serve
no purpose. The only purpose they could serve would be
that of providing the Fascist white minorities more time for
lynching and murdering blacks. That is why it is for us to
take practical action and to opt for the total liberation of
Africa, so as to bring about the exercise by Africans of their
inalienable rights. For that to take place, the capitalist
Powers, the natural allies of South Africa, must immediately cease all aid of any kind whatsoever to the Republic
of South Africa. Those countries must desist from any
attempt at dialogue with the Vorster rbgime, because we
now have damning evidence that any dialogue only provides
respite to apartheid.

13. There is no further need to go into detail about the
inhuman practices and laws adopted by South African
nazism. I should just like to quote President Ahmed SBkou
Tourd:
“In South Africa, the imperialist offensive progresses
from escalation to escalation. Thus those who still speak
of dialogue can see spread before them the dialogue
begun in South Africa. Vorster, their friend, is in the
process of massacring thousands and thousands of our
brothers and sisters in South Africa. We say No to such a
policy of resignation and indignity.

18. We request the Security Council to call upon all
Governments vigorously to respect the Charter by applying
the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, we request the Council to adopt a resolution
condemning all forms of co-operation with the shameless
regime of Pretoria and stress that an embargo should not
only relate to arms but also to matters affecting the survival
of the Fascist regime in South Africa, and we ask the
Council to help to make that embargo obligatory. The
adoption of a draft resolution along those lines, which is so

“In southern Africa, we must liberate Namibia and
Zimbabwe and bury apartheid so that the black majority
can exercise legitimate power over its own territory.
2

much hoped for by Africa in general and by the oppressed
peoples of southern Africa in particular, is the very least
that should be done at this stage, in the light of the
genocide of which our brother peoples are victim.

repressive machinery is always ready to repeat the incidents
of Sharpeville and Soweto. Its prisons are still filled with
innocent victims whose only’ crime was to demand a hir
political and social order. Those inhuman practices aimed at
ensuring permanent power for the white minority COnstitute without any doubt a real danger for thOse*tenlPorarilY
benefiting from them. It is well known that oppression and
humiliation always arouse resistance, revolt and violence.

19. My delegation would like to repeat to the Council the
fact that it iS ready t0 place all its resources at its disposal,
so that we can restore the dignity of the peoples of South
Africa and do credit to the United Nations and the whole
of humanity.

25. “As long as apartheid was practised, days without
violence could be no more than intervals in Which tensions
built up and hatred grew.” That was said 011Monday last bY
the Secretary-Gencrall in his statement on the occasion of
the cornnlenloration of the International Day for the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination. Slarpeville and Soweto are only symbols because, in reality, it is South Africa
as a whole which is now in revolt, and today, at the very
time of this debate, a people composed of 18 million men,
women and children who are exploited, subjugated and
humiliated, arc rising up against oppression and injustice,
fighting and dping in defence of their freedom and their
dignity. The people of South Africa are resolved to exercise
their inalienable rights, and the blind and bloody massacres
of Soweto only reinforced their strong determination to
fight and to win, The citadel of white racisn\has now been
shaken to its very foundations. We should note moreover
that the South African people understood quite early on
that Vorster and his friends left them no alternative but
armed resistance organized and carried out through their
national liberation movements, the legitimacy of whose
struggle is recognized by our Qrganization.

20. Mr. President, your presence as President of the
Security Council in your capacity as Permanent Representative of a great Power, the United States of America, gives
you an opportunity to prove to the world, which is
watching and hoping, that your country is finally committed to a definitive solution of the problem of clpn~thci~.
The abusive use of the right of veto, from which our
Council has suffered, is something that should be stopped,
so that we may be in a position to prove the axiom that all
-our efforts ultimately are judged by one criterion: the
ability to translate into action our human concerns.
21. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Senegal. I invite Mm to take a place at the Council
ldbk and to make his statement.
22. Mr. FALL (Senegal) (interpretation jam French).
Mr. President, allow me first to discharge a pleasant duty by
extending to you my warmest congratulations upon your
accession to the presidency of this august body of the
United Nations, the Security Council. My delegation
believes.it is a good sign that today’s debate on one of the
problems which concern the very future of Africa is
presided over by a distinguished son of the United States of
America, a militant of the first rank who has always been
devoted to the defence of humanity, regardless of colour.
My delegation has no doubt that your past as an activist,
your personal experience of the problem under discussion
and your experience of human relations will make it
possible for us in this debate to achieve positive results.

26. The Vorster regime is showing itself less and less
capable of containing the current revolt of the oppressed
people of South Africa and that is why it is desperately
attempting certain diversionary tactics it thinks it has
discovered in the policy known as bantustanization, which
is presented as a miraculous panacea. But nobody is fooled
by this fraud. Those famous bantustans are intended only
to serve as reserves of cheap labour for the colonial
economy of the South African regime. The black population to be dispossessed of their lands and turned into foreigners in their own country find no positive changein thisnew
policy. For its part, the international community has showli
the Pretoria regime that that is a dead-end road, by
condemning the creation of bantustans and refusing to
recognize the puppet State of the Transkei /Genera/
Assembly resolution 31/6AJ.

23. My delegation welcomed with special satisfaction the
Security Council decision to hold a debate on the question
of South Africa. It hopes that that decision is an expression
of a profound change in the attitude of some of its
members which will permit the adoption of effective
measures to put an end to the apartheid regime which
prevails in that country. That racist and colonialist r&gime,
which has developed in opposition to the natural course of
history, constitutes the root of the evil afflicting South Africa
and by extension the whole of southern Africa. Its very
existence is a permanent threat to international peace and
security, and it becomes increasingly clear that because of
the Pretoria r&me’s inability to change, that threat will
continue to grow, unless the international community
resolves to take appropriate measures to put an end to the
situation.

27. Despite everything, the racist regime of Pretoria
continues to pursue those pseudo-alternatives, once again
demonstrating its inability to bring about reforms likely to
prevent the outbreak of a general conflagration in tile
country. Recently the new Minister for Foreign Affairs of
South Africa reaffirmed his total opposition to the granting
of any civil equality to the black communities.
28. AS part and parcel of’ that arrogant refusal, the
Pretoria regime continues illegally occupying Namibia, a
Territory placed under the authority of the United Nations

24. The racist regime of Pretoria has up to now not given
the slightest indication of a wish to renounce the systematic
violation of human rights, the oppression and the increased
repression of the black population. Its odious system of
discrimination based on skin colour is still in force and its

1 See the summary record of the 344th meeting of the Speciil
Committee against Apartheid (A/AC.llS/SR.344, psm. 1).
3

over which Pretoria has no rights, not even the right of
conquest,
29. In southern Africa, the Pretoria regime increasingly
aspires to the role of regional policeman. Thus it has
embarked upon a policy of provocation, intimidation and
armed aggression against neighbouring States. Not satisfied
with waging a colonial war in Namibia and supporting the
illegal regime of Ian Smith, it has invaded Angola and
Botswana and has attempted economically to stifle Lesotho
in order to force it to recognize the fake State of the
Transkei.
30. There is no denying that the existence of independent
and sovereign African States is for the disciples of apartheid
an embarrassing piece of evidence in that it destroys the
very foundations of their racist thesis of the black man’s
inability to assume responsibility for his own fate.
31. But despite their innumerable acts of aggression
against neighbouring States, the Pretoria racists have with
great publicity launched a policy of currying favour with
many independent African States, in the hope that that
diplomacy of duplicity will gain for them a position of
respectability on the international scene, at the expense of
only minor changes in the basic question, apurtheid. But
these manoeuvres have been condemned in advance since
they go against the stream of history.
32. In reality, if the Pretoria leaders wish to achieve a
peaceful solution they can take no better road than that
leading to the opening of negotiations with the national
liberation movements, in order rapidly to achieve the
elimination of apartheid and the establishment of a democratic regime in South Africa. But the Pretoria racists refuse
even to contemplate such ali alternative. With the same
arrogance, they continue to violate United Nations resolutions and to endanger international peace and security.
33. The present explosive situatidn in southern Africa,
resulting from the unjust political and social system in
effect there, requires strong action by the United Nations
to prevent a tragic development of events. The deluge of
violence now sweeping South Africa could develop into a
confrontation with unforeseeably dangerous consequences.
The succession of violent crises now shaking southern
Africa does not augur well for international peace and
security. Those crises give rise to increasing concern and
disquiet in the international community and the Security
COUIIC~Iis duty bound to put an end to them before it is
too late.
34. The United Nations must without delay compel the
Pretoria r&ime faithfully and honestly to take the path of
co-operation with the other communities of countries in
order to build a multiracial South African State based on
freedom, justice and equality among persons of all races
and origins. The Republic of South Africa is located on the
African continent; 80 per cent of its pOpUkLtiOl1
is black.
No theory, no police repression can destroy that obvious
fact.
35. My delegation believes that the international community, because of its special responsibility towards the

oppressed people of South Africa, must plan concerted
international action swiftly to eliminate apartheid. One of
the priority objectives of that action should be to increase
the assistance given to the national liberation movements
engaged h the struggle against racial discrimination and for
political equality and social justice. Another objective,
which my delegation regards as of great importance, is
respect for the decisions of the United Nations concerning
the Programme of Action against Apartheid (General
Assembly resolution 3116 J].
36. Indeed, so long as the Pretoria regime has all the
necessary foreign loans and investments it wishes, in order
to strengthen its colonial economic system and provide
itself with the means to consolidate its military machine of
aggression and oppression, it will hardly be inclined to take
account of the opinion of those who ask it to change its
politico-economic system which has been universally condemned, The foreign corporations and countries which
provide it with assistance are making themselves accomplices, for sordid material interests, in the perpetuation of
one of the most serious crimes against mankind. That
attitude, which to say the least is hostile to the interests of
the peoples of South Africa, will in the long run militate
against the interests of the very ones who are now its
beneficiaries.
37. With regard to the role of the United Nations, my
delegation believes that the Security Council should take
strong and effective measures against the Pretoria r6gime.
To that end, the Council should be enabled to decide that
the situation in South Africa constitutes a threat to
‘international peace and security and to adopt a mandatory
embargo on the supply of all arms to that country.
Furthermore, it should take other measures provided for in
the Charter to put an end once and for all to the serious
situation in that part of the African continent. The States
which SOfar have delayed Council action in that field must,
in order to lend more credibility to their condemnation of
the apartheid rigime, associate themselves fully with the
adoption of such measures. For the international community, and more particularly the great Powers-whatever
the nature of their interests in the region-must respond to
the irresponsibility of the Pretoria racists and to their
icability to prevent a conflagration in southern Africa, by
adopting a consistent strategy designed to cut out the root
of the evil, that is, the abominable policy of apartheid,
political and social injustice and police repression.
38. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Zambia. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
39. Mr. KAMANA (Zambia): A few days ago [1989th
meeting] I addressed the Security Council in my capacity
as President of the United Nations Council for Namibia.
Today 1 speak as the representative of my country, Zambia.
40. It is with great pleasure that I extend to you, Sir, the
congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the. month of
March. You represent the new United States Administration and, perhaps, a new American spirit. Certainly, you
bring with you a background and reputation which will

stand you in good stead in making a positive contribution,
particularly with regard to the struggle for majority rule
and independence in southern Africa. We fervently hope
that the United States, true to its own ideals of liberty and
justice, will at long last be counted on the side of the
oppressed people of southern Africa.

46. Secondly, Sharpeville and Soweto demonstrate the
determination of the oppressed people of South Africa to
rid themselves of the shackles of apartheid and to regain all
their inalienable rights and dignity. Soweto, in particular,
brought into sharp focus the determination and fighting
spirit of the African people of South Africa.

41. It is not by accident that the question of South Africa
is the first among the problems of southern Africa to be
brought before the Security Council this year. South Africa
is at the core of all the problems of our turbulent region of
Africa. In Southern Rhodesia, Ian Smith and his henchmen
am still running amuck with their rebellion against the
British Crown, largely because of the succour and solace
they receive from South Africa, in contemptuous disregard
of United Nations sanctions. Namibia remains illegally
occupied by South Africa. Angola and my own country,
Zambia, have been victims of South African aggression.
Botswana and Mozambique, and again my own country,
have been victims of aggression by the Smith regime with
the complicity of South Africa. Through the utilization of
its bantustan of the Transkei, South Africa has attempted
to place a stranglehold on Lesotho.

47. Undaunted by the might of their, oppressor, the
African people of South Africa are saying that they have
had enough. Their patience has run out. Their appeals to
reason have fallen on deaf ears. They have therefore now
decided to call the bluff of the South African regime. It
would be foolhardy to minimize the uprisings in South
Africa. They are not mere isolated incidents or riots. They
are the beginning of a major popular revolt. More than 11
years ago, my President, Mr. Kenneth Kaunda, predicted a
racial conflagration of unimaginable proportions in southern Africa. President Kaunda has wished and hoped he
would be proved wrong. 1 fear he has instead been proved
right, for the racial conflagration in fact began long ago.
The battleground for South Africa will be South Africa
itself. The oppressed people will fight their war in the
kitchens and gardens of their white oppressors. In this
respect, South Africa will awaken with a rude shock when
it discovers that its sophisticated military might is irrelevant
because the target is out of range.

42. Inside South Africa itself, the repression of the
African people has taken a turn for the worse. Everyday
there are arrests and detentions of the opponents of the evil
apartheid system. They include those of women and
children, some children being literally taken out of their
class-rooms. While in prison and detention camps, those
victims of apartheid are invariably subjected to despicable
police brutality, including the most primitive forms of
torture. Some of them have been wantonly and brutally
“murdered in prison. Many others face that dreadful
prospect.

48. My colleague and friend, Ambassador Jaipal of India,
aptly reminded us the other day [ibid.] that the United
Nations had been on trial regarding the question of South
Africa since 1946, when his own country had brought this
issue before the General Assembly at its very first session.
One could say that there is a general consensus at the
United Nations that apartheid is unacceptable and must be
done away with, In numerous resolutions, both the General
Assembly and the Security Council have condemned
apartheid, South Africa has literally been exhorted to
change its policies, but to no avail. Thirty-one years of
fruitless efforts is a long time.

43. The beastly treatment meted out by the South African
regime to the African people, coupled with the regime’s
lawless activities outside its borders, is a deliberate and
calculated effort in the defence of that inhuman and savage
abomination known as upartheid. Those activities have
earned South Africa the distinction of being an international outlaw.

49. The time has come for the United Nations to
re-examine its methods. The Security Council in particular
must decide now what role, if any, it is going to play
regarding the grave threat to international peace and
security that now obtains in southern Africa. There is a real
possibility that, unless it acts now, the Security Council
may be irrelevant, if not impotent, as it was in the case of
Viet Nam.

44. It is indeed’ no mere coincidence that this debate of
the Security Council began on 21 March, the International
Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. We held a
solemn meeting on that occasion to commemorate Sharpeville and to pay tribute to the martyrs who died in cold
blood 17 years ago at the hands of the trigger-happy and
Fascist forces of South Africa. But the arrogance and
recklessness of the South African regime has grown over the
years. Last year, there was the massacre of Soweto, which
was far ln excess of that of Sharpeville. The horrors of
Sharpeville and Soweto, in effect, constitute two loud and
clear messages which the international community and the
Security Council in particular would do well to note.

50. This meeting of the Security Council is being held
after the thirty-first session of the General Assembly. There
is no doubt that, at that session, the Assembly understood
the gravity of the situation in southern Africa and saw the
urgent need for effective action against South Africa. After
a most serious and thorough consideration of the situation,
the Assembly adopted important resolutions on southern
Africa with an impressive majority. Thus the position of the
majority of Member States is very clear regarding what
needs to be done. In fact, the General Assembly specifically
urged the Security Council to take urgent action against
South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter.

45. First, they demonstrate that the South African Fascist
regime, the Nazis of today, will resort to the most extreme
and savage measures in defence of the evil system of
apartheid. Let there be no doubt that Vorster and his clique
are determined to preserve the status quo in South Africa.

51. My delegation fully shares the position of ihe General
Assembly in this regard. We therefore call upon the
5

preoccupation or obsession with the notion of spheres of
influence is as misguided as it is, unhelpful to the resolution
of the problems of southern Africa. It is erroneous and in
fact offensive to suggest or imply that the Africans in
southern Africa can only be relatively free within the
framework of international power politics. The’ so-called
strategic considerations of foreign Powers are simply
irrelevant in the struggle of the oppressed people against
domination and for their liberation.

Security Council to impose a mandatory arms embargo
against South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter. This
measure is long overdue. South African militarism has
already caused untold suffering among the African People
inside South Africa itself and in the neighbouring territories. South Africa has provided the Smith r&me in
Southern Rhodesia with weapons and men to fight against
the liberation movement. Namibia is not only illegally
occupiedbySouthAfrica,butthereisalsoamassiveSouthAfrican military buildup in the international Territory. Using its
arsenal of weapons in Namibia, South Africa has intensified
its repression of the people of the Territory and its
offensive against SWAP0 [South West Africa People’s
OrgunizationJ. It has also committed aggression agaillst
independent African States using the vast qualltities Of
weapons stockpiled in Namibia.

56. My delegation earnestly hopes that the major Western
Powers and trading partners of South Africa will not allow
themselves to be duped by South Africa. Since change in
southern Africa is inevitable, we hope that they will
understand that the South African rCgime cannot be the
custodian of their long-time interests in the region. It would
be a mistake for them to be preoccupied with economic
greed and other extraneous considerations. In the fi11a1
analysis, the oppressed people will count among their
friends only those whose policies advance rather than
hinder their cause or indeed make the struggle more
protracted. It goes without saying that the proper way for
the Western Powers and trading partners of South Africa to
generate goodwill among the oppressed people is to stop
being ambivalent in their policies and, instead, identify
themselves with the oppressed people and their liberation
movements, without equivocation.

52. [ am aware that there is supposed to be a voluntary
arms embargo against South Africa. However, by its very
nature, that embargo has not been effective. The Security
Council must no longer leave it to the goodwill of States to
ban arms sales and other forms of military collaboration
with South Africa. What is needed now is a mandatory arms
embargo wllich will oblige every State to terminate all
military relations with South Africa. Any country claiming
to have imposed a voluntary arms embargo against South
Africa cannot have a valid reason for opposing a mandatory
arms embargo.

57. The advent of the new Administration in the United
States offers us hope that the issues of southern Africa will
be seen in their true perspective. We hope that the United
States will assume a leadership role among its western allies
in favour of majority rule in southern Africa. We hope that
the United States will not wait for those others who have
been hesitant for too long. The non-aligned countries, the
socialist countries and the Nordic countries have all made
an important contribution in the struggle for the liberation
of southern Africa. Such a contribution is very much
appreciated by the oppressed people and those of us in
southern Africa whose everyday lives are affected by events
in the region.

53. Another area of grave concern is that of economic
collaboration with South Africa. Such collaboration has in
fact sustained and strengthened lrpartheid in no small
measure. The time has come for the Security Council to
address itself seriously to this problem. At the very least,
the Council must act now to prevent, with immediate
effect, any further foreign economic investments in South
Africa.
54. It is important that all States, particularly the major
Western countries, should be credible in their opposition to
apartheid and in their professed commitment to the cause
of the oppressed people for the exercise of their inalienable
lights. South Africa hopes it can continue to count on the
support of the major Western countries in the unfolding
struggle in southern Africa. To that end, it is attracting
increased Western economic investments, is desperately
seeking increased military collaboration, and has intensified
its propaganda campaign against the so-called communist
infiltration of southern Africa. South Africa has even gone
i)vcr the heads of the Governments in the Western countries
to arouse public sympathy by projecting itself as the
defender of Western interests in southern Africa and the
bulwark against communism. It is all too common these
days to see expensive South African propaganda advertise.
mcnts in Western newspapers, intended for the consumption of right-wing and reactionary elements.

58. This debate is important for zhe credibility of the
Western countries. We hope that they will be counted on
the side of freedom, independence and justice in southern
Africa, which notions we know they value very much for
themselves.
59. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. Olof Palme,
to whom the Council extended an invitation at its 1988th
meeting, as requested of it in the letter contained in
document S/12300. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
60. Mr. PALME: Mr. President, I should like to begin by
congratulating you on your appointment to your high
office. In view of your record in civil rights and many
other fields and in view of your concern for social justice
and peace, you are eminently qualified for your office. You
have created much hope and I wish you the best of luck.

55. No nation should allow itself to be fooled by South
African propaganda. The issues involved in southern Africa
are very clear. The oppressed people are fighting for the
eradication of the evils of apartheid, racism and white
minority ruIe which have afflicted the region for too lollg.
They are fighting for the enjoyment of their inalienable
political rights and for the restoration of their diglfity.
Any

61. I should like to express my deep gratitude to the
Council for the honour it has bestowed upon me and the ’
movement I represent by giving me this opportunity tc
6

make a contribution to its important debate. I should like
also to express a special word of thanks to the African
group at the United Nations, a group of States which plays
an increasingly important role in the work of the world
Organization. When the United Nations was founded 32
years ago, only four of its 51 original Members were
African. One of those was South Africa. Today the
African Group make up 48 out of 147 Members. Thus the
cause of Africa is also the cause of the United Nations.

protests started, to 16 September. Those bullets killed and
wounded 1,611 persons, while another 1,229 were killed
and wounded by “other causes”. According to Professor
S. 3. Taljaard, who examined 229 of the people killed at
Soweto, two thirds of them had died from bullet wounds.
Eighty per cent of those killed were shot in the back. A
doctor at the Peninsula Maternity Hospital at Cape Town
states that, in his hospital alone, 70 infants died from
tear-grbs poisoning.

62. On this occasion I wish also to pay a tribute to the
African States for having so persistently sought to work
through this Organization in findingasolution to theproblems
of southern Africa. The United Nations was created as an
instrument for the peaceful settlement of conflicts. This is
also the way those States have-chosen to work in order to
seek a change in South Africa-through
negotiations and
by seeking support from the rest of the world.

68. Take the system of “mental prisoners”. This very day
the World Health Organization is publishing a report2 on a
chain of privately owned institutions accommodating many
thousands of mentally ill black Africans, detained against
their will. They are being forced to work without any pay.
Those institutions,
labelled “human warehouses” by a
retired official, get the bulk of their “patients’‘-in
reality
“mental” or political prisoners-from
South Africa’s Ministry of Health, The private firm of Smith-Mitchell of
Johannesburg, which operates this $ave-labour system on a
profit-making basis and has done so for more than a decade,
calls it “therapy”. It earned $13.7 million in 1973. Between
8,000 and 9,000 black mental patients are involved.
Testimonies, published, among others, in the Swedish daily
Dugens Nyhetcr, claim that many Africans are arrested in
the slums for having “stirred up trouble” and, after a hasty
examination, are sentenced as “unbalanced” and sent away
to those institutions.

63. South Africa is still a bastion of racism. But an
increasing number of people are beginning to see the end of
apartheid and colonialism and the beginning of freedom
and human dignity for the oppressed majority.
64. At the last Socialist International Congress held at
Geneva in November last year, the problems of southern
Africa were the centre of interest. The democratic socialists
of the world made it clear, through a resolution, that:
“Neutrality towards the existing and coming struggles
in southern Africa is impossible. Between the exploiters
and the exploited there is no middle ground. Action must
be taken designed to end a system which is both evil in
itself and a threat to peace.”

69. Take the torture and deaths in South Africa’s prisons.
Many people have died by “suicide” in the South African
prisons. They have been held under the so-calied security
laws, which allow for incommunicado detention without
charges for an indefinite period. The most absurd explanations have been given for those deaths. The police talk of
hangings, slipping on a piece of soap or on a staircase,
jumping out of a window
and so on. The Minister
responsible for the police, Mr. Kruger, has given his
explanation : the prisoners committed suicide on instructions from the Communist Party. The Catholic bishops of
South Africa have protested against the widespread torture
in the prisons, which is inflicted on children as well as old
people. The authorities answer by preparing new laws
against so-called terrorism-laws
which in other countries
would be applied only in times of war.

65. This week, the people of South Africa have been
painfully reminded of a tragic day: the massacre at
Sharpeville. Sixteen years later, came the events at Soweto.
Both those atrocities against a defenceless population were
logical consequences of the apartheid system. But there are
important differences. During those 16 years, we witnessed
an escalation of the violence of the ruling minority; but at
the same time the will and the ability of the majority to
resist the oppression and to unite against the rulers
increased. A people’s longing for freedom can never be
extinguished. The time of submission is over.

70. Such, then, is apartheid: a weird dictatorship of the
minority for social and economic expioitation. But it also
has a unique feature, Apartheid is the only tyranny
branding a person right from birth according to the colour
of his skin, From the very moment of conception the
child’s destiny is determined. A Swedish author has called
that system “spiritual genocide”.

66. Yet the system prevails, maintained by force. Could
that be because those who are not directly affected simply
cannot conceive what apartheid is really like, what it really
means? Let me give a few examples of what apartheid
means to the people;in human terms.
67. Take Soweto: we know now what really happened in
June last year. The official documents and police reports,
give this picture. It all started at Soweto, but the protests
spread to more than 100 townships in the entire country.
The immediate cause was the children’s protest against the
compulsory study of Afrikaans in the schools. But behind
that there was the dissatisfaction of the black majority with
social and economic conditions in towns like Soweto. The
brutality of the police led to new demonstrations. According to Police Inspector Gerber at Soweto, more than 16,000
bullets were fired at Soweto alone from 16 June, when the

71. Apartheid systematically dissolves family ties. It legalizes a cruel displacement of populations. The whole black
labour force is turned into migrant workers in their own
country. A growing majority of both sexes is forbidden by
law <to live with their families outside the workless
bantustans. Normal family life is increasingly a rarity. The
children are, in the words of Colin Legum, becoming a
2 Apartheid and Mental

Geneva, 1977.

7

Health

Care, document

MNHl77.5,

wdected
and starved generation, with no models of
concern Or caring, no loyalties, no self-esteem, no dependable relationships and no possible aspiratinll to responsible
citizenship. They see their parents constantly humiliated
and have known
only resentment, rejection and violence.
72. Outside South AfTica we may feel that there is time
to go step by step in the struggle against apaHheid. But
time is running out for the children of South Africa. The
white minority should consider that those children are the
People with whom they will have to negotiate one day; and
those are the children whom we look forward to welcoming
hi our midst as representatives of their people.
73. Mr. Ian Smith has said that Rhodesia and South Africa
arc agreed that they are both fighting to preserve the
Western democracy that the white man brought to Africa.
They are both hoping for external aid to fight for the
interests of the so-called Free world. For us in Europe, with
our colonial past, it is necessary to be crystal clear. We will
never accept Smith’s and Vorster’s perversion of Western
democracy. Their oppression ‘and racism will never be
included in a free world. They represent the very opposite
XX democracy. They are denying the peoples of Zimbabwe,
Namibia and South Africa the most fundamental human
and political rights-the
same rights that the European
labour movement was denied and that formed the basis for
the original programmes of our liberation movements.
Therefore the workers of Europe are historically linked in
solidarity with their oppressed brothers and sisters in
Africa.
74. The resistance of the racist r6gimes raises the question
of whether changes can be brought about only by violence
or revolution, or whether there is still a peaceful way of
eradicating the affront to human dignity known as colonialism, racism and apartheid, But it is easy to foresee that
when people in search of peace and progress are met only
by oppression and exploitation they will ultimately resort
to violence. The armed struggle becomes the last possible
resort. Now in Namibia and Zimbabwe continued armed
struggle seems unavoidable. How much armed pressure
from the nationalists is necessary depends on how much
unarmed pressure the Western Powers apply in the form of
sanctions and the like, as President Julius Nyerere so well
put it.
75. It is quite possible that, earlier, white South Africa
could have believed that the policy of apartheid would
succeed, if only it could buy a little more time and show a
little more flexibility in some areas. But the architects of
(zl’artheid have built their plans on a quicksand. Minority
rule is coming to an end and southern Africa is rapidly
moving towards
an uncertain climax. As the climax
approaches and the struggle deepens, the risks of unnecessary violellce and economic disruption increase, as well as
the risk of the wrong kind of foreign intervention. As I have
said before, the wrong kind of foreign intervention is the
colltinued introduction
of major-Power rivalries in the
region, The right kind of foreign intervention is that which
will support the liberation struggle and reduce the resistallce of the forces which still cling to the idea of
maintaining white supremacy.
,

76. Last year, the Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute (SIPRI) published extensive documentation on the
risks of a steep escalatjon of the conflict in southern Africa,
which may become the next major international battlefield.
The SIPRI study points to the risk of extensive foreign
investments in South Africa helping to internationalize the
conflict. The country’s raw material resources and its
strategic position may furnish a pretext for further involvement on behalf of the white r&me. At the same time,
however, such involvement would encourage other Powers
to become more active in the area. The same is true of
Namibia. We are facing the twofold risk of a racial war and
an escalated conflict between the foreign interests in that
area. Thus the global consequences of the development in
southern Africa, South Africa’s threats and aggression
against its neighbours and the situation in South Africa
created by nparflzeid-those three elements constitute a
threat to international peace and security.
77. The liberation of the Africans will be their own work,
and that liberation will inevitably come some day. But the
international community can contribute to shortening the
struggle and making it more peaceful, with less human
suffering. It goes without saying that the United Nations,
with the Security Council, has a very particular and central
responsibility. I sincerely hope that the United Nations,
through the deliberations in the Council, will make a
decisive contribution towards a just development in South
Africa and towards the liberation of the whole of southern
Africa.
78. However, the actions taken by the United Nations, or
the lack of such actions, cannot serve as an alibi for
passivity on the national level. Each country and Govern.
ment, each popular movement, has its own responsibility
and its own role to play, Allow me then, in reply to the
Council’s kind invitation, to mention some of the areas
where such action could be taken.
79. First, we must work for a halt to all arms exports to
South Africa and all military co-operation with its Government. The apparatus of oppression is strengthened by each
new weapons delivery or licence. The military co-operation
gives the country the means to start its own manufacture of
arms in most important areas of weapon technology, maybe
also in the ultimate of weapons. Can one really condemn
the policy of apartheid at the United Nations, while at the
same time sending arms to those who arc practising it? Let
me also point out that the Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apartheid, Ambassador Harriman, recently referred to substantial foreign involvement-direct or
indirect-with regard to the supply to South Africa of rifles,
helicopters, tear-gas and ammunition used in the Soweto
massacres. No African country or combination of African
countries could really be a military threat to South Africa.
Yet South Africa has continued to be armed from abroad.
What is the logic behind such a policy? South Africa’s
continued refusal to heed the demands of the international
community yields no alternative to a mandatory arms
embargo.
80. Secondly, we must deal seriously with the question of
investment and export of capital to South Africa and
Namibia. I shall elaborate on this vital point in a moment.

81. Thirdly, we can give material and political support to
the liberation movements and the already autonomous
States in their struggle for national independence and
economic emancipation. Governments could also easily
increase their contributions to the United Nations Trust
Fund for South Africa and the International Defence and
Aid Fund. Those bodies need funds and are doing extremely
useful work in the field of humanitarian and legal aid to the
victims of apartheid. The repeated acts of aggression against
Zambia, Angola, Mozambique and Botswana must be
condemned. If we are to be credible in our opposition to
foreign involvement in African affairs, we must also put an
end to the recruitment, financing, training, transit and
assembly of mercenaries on our own soil.

87. There is a theory that economic development and
foreign investments will, in the long run, help to loosen up
the apartheid system. The idea is that the lack of trained
manpower will force the Government to admit black labour
to jobs which previously were reserved for whites. The
foreign companies would also be able to set a good example
in their relations to Coloured and blick labourers. Reality
has effectively contradicted this theory. The disparity of
wages between black and white workers, for instance, has
continued to widen. Leading black South Africans, supported by many years of experience, have categorically
denied the claim that it is possible to achieve gradual
development towards greater economic and social justice
within the framework of the apartheid system. Both the
African National Congress of South Africa and SWAP0 of
Namibia have urgently appealed to the international community to try to stop further investments in South Africa
and Namibia. There is a growing understanding of their
demands. Their appeals are being met more and more by
proposals for practical action.

X2. Fourthly, our refusal to recognize $he so-called independent bantustans- the Transkei being the first oneshould be followed up by opposition to the efforts of
international companies to give unofficial recognition to
those areas by massive investments.

88. In November 1976, at the Scandinavian Labour
Congress-an
association of all the Social Democratic
parties and all trade union organizations in Scandinavia-a
resolution was adopted calling for a ban on new investments in South Africa and the adoption of a nationaI plan
oi‘ action in accordance with the recommendations of the
International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU).
And at a conference on apartheid, ICFTU adopted recommendations which, among other things, call for a ban on all
new investments in South Africa, including the replacement
of machinery, repairs and maintenance. Those proposals
reflect a growing awareness among the trade unions of the
treatment of black workers in South Africa-arrests,
dismissals, job reservations, bans on trade union activities and SO
on. The trade unions want to show their solidarity with
their harassed and persecuted friends. And they realize that
unjust and unfair labour policies in South Africa will in the
long run also harm labour relations in the investors’ home
countries.

83. Fifthly, we should increase our efforts to bring an end
to the illegal occupation of Namibia, refute sham arrangements and support SWAPO, without whose participation no
realistic policy can be shaped. Namibia should have
immediate independcncc and majority rule.
84. Sixthly, parliaments could set up parliamentary committees to investigate the activities of those companies
which have subsidiaries in South Africa for the purpose of
making sure that such companies are run along the lines of
internationally acknowledged working practices. Where
these are not adhered to, the company in question should
ceaseits activities entirely.
85. For a long time, the South African Government has
been encouraging foreign investments in its country. Behind
this policy there lies not just a desire to increase the
economic resources of the country. Equally important is
the fact that foreign investments create ties with a number
of rich industrial nations which acquire an economic and
political interest in the preservation of the apartheid
system. The foreign companies benefit both from the
country’s high technical standards and from the extremely
low wages of the black labour force. The return on invested
capital is high, In addition, the investments help the
country’s flow of trade, which in turn makes South Africa’s
trading partners more sensitive to disturbances in the South
African economy. Riots in South Africa have repercussions
on employtnent in other countries.

89. The Social Democratic Government in Sweden has, for
several Years, discouraged Swedish businesses from investing
in South Africa. Last August, we proposed a sharpening of
the attitude against Swedish investments in South Africa.
At the same time, on a Scandinavian basis, the Government
took the initiative for common action at the international
level. That policy has been continued.
90. In this context, I should like to refer to a resolution
adopted two days ago by the Foreign Ministers of the five
Nordic countries at a meeting at Reykjavik.
In that
resolution, they state that they would welcome a decision
in the Security Council on a mandatory arms embargo as
well as decisions with a view to preventing further
investments.

86. Since Angola and Mozambique have become independent, South Africa’s isolation has increased. The country
has no friends on the African continent other than the
Smith regime at Salisbury. In that position, South Africa
has intensified its efforts to attract West European, American and Japanese capital. According to information from
various sources, the Vorster Government is carrying on a
broad international campaign to induce foreign capital to
participate on favourable terms in the exploitation of
natural resources, preferably in the Transkei and in Namibia.

91. Next week, the Swedish Parliament will debate a
motion presented by the Social Democratic Party which
asks for an immediate change in Sweden’s currency
legislation in order to prohibit the export of capital to
South Africa and Namibia.
9

many ways extreme form of human evil; secondly, because
we all know that the system cannot prevail for any long
period of time without direct or indirect support from
abroad, and, thirdly, because the liberation of South Africa
will primarily be the task of the Africans themselves. But
we all know that the international community could make
a decisive contribution if only the necessary political will
were mobilized. The Security Council should be the
expression of a united political will. Therefore the oPpressed peoples look towards the Council with hope and
expectation. It is sometimes said that there is no higher
moral purpose than to preserve peace. Rightly SO. But as
long as there is apartheid and racism there can be no peace.

92. As a second step in guaranteejng the diminution of
Swedish financial interests in South Africa, we are urging
the Government to initiate discussions with companies
which have subsidiaries in other countries investing in
South Africa, for the purpose of reaching an agreement on
how restrictions on Swedish companies operating in those
countries should be applied, If such an agreement cannot be
reached, we will propose further legislative measures.
93. The reason for this increased pressure for unilateral
action is not difficult to discern. We all feel that a dramatic
change has taken place in the political situation in South
Africa since the riots at Soweto last summer. The risk of
racial war has become greater, The question of limiting or
ending foreign economic interests in South Africa thus
becomes not merely a political question about what could
conceivably be done to put effective pressure on the South
African Government; it becomes a moral question for each
Government: whether our companies-in our countriesshpuld be allowed to take part in the exploitation of the
black labour force. According to South African laws, the
foreign companies have to apply the rules of apartheid at
their places of work. They are thus forced to place
themselves on the side of the oppressors in the battle which
is now about to enter a new and more serious stage. In my
opinion, the situation in South Africa has progressed to
such a point that each country has to consider unilateral
prohibitive measures.

98. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. Mfanafuthi
Johnstone Makatini, to whom the Council extended an
invitation at its 1988th meeting, as requested of it in the
letter contained in document S/12299. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
99. Mr. MAKATINI: Mr. President, allow me to associate
myself and our Organization, the African National Congress
(ANC) of South Africa, with the views expressed by
previous speakers regarding your dedication to the cause of
freedom, justice and world peace. We congratulate you
most heartily on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. We are confident that, under your leadership, the
Council will not fail to help to advance the cause of the
oppressed peoples of Africa.

94. It has been argued that a ban on investments in South
Africa would hurt the mother companies in the Western
world and would lead to unemployment for the workers
there. But in this case, it is important to note that the
workers themselves have made their choice through their
International Confederation. They have told their Governments that they support a ban on investments in South
Africa and are prepared to accept the consequences. Now
the Governments and the companies must take their
responsibility. It is time to decide on which side we stand
and which forces we want to support.

100. The situation in South Africa now presents a major
crisis, not just for the people of South Africa and the
African continent but for the whole world community. The
question before us today has in one form or another been
on the United Nations agenda for the past 30 years.
Numerous resolutions have been adopted, both in the
General Assembly and in the Security Council, in an effort
to facilitate the downfall of the South African racist
r&me. That r&me has been repeatedly condemned for its
barbarous and indefensible policy of apartheid. It has been
condemned many times as a threat to international peace
and security. Yet the United Nations has still to take
effective action against apartheid. The flow of noble words
and resolutions continues unceasingly, but nothing results
from it. No real action has been taken. Indeed, as time
passes and the crisis in South Africa grows more serious, we
are asked even more insistently by some to accept rhetoric
as a substitute for action.

9.5. A ban on investments in South Africa can be really
efficient only if it is part of an international action that has
the support of those industrialized countries that have the
largest economic interests in South African business and
industry. It can be really efficient only if it has the
whole-hearted support of the world community, Therefore
the Security Council must take the lead in such actions.
This underlines the great importance of the Council’s
deliberations and its decisions. It is of primary importance
now to get a process started in common action.

101. Mr. President, four days ago you condemned apartheid as an affront to mankind. You are not the first one to
have done so. A number of leading statesmen have in the
past used equally strong language to condemn apartheid.
We recall, for example, the speech by Sir Alec Douglasilome at Manchester on 24 April 1964, in which he equated
the problem of racism with the danger posed by the atomic
bomb. Many others, including men like Dean Rusk, have
had strong things to say against the South African rkgime.
We have welcomed those pronouncements in the past, as we
do yours now, as a prelude to the implementation of
resolutions democratically adopted by the United Nations.

96. Permit me to conclude with one last reflection. The
international debate has taken on a new dimension of moral
commitment and involvement in the human and political
rights of people. This reflects a concern for basic values, a
concern for the fate of people, their plight and their
suffering, but also their hopes and dreams of a better
future. It represents an element of vitality and humanity
that is badly needed today.
97. There can hardly be another case where moral
commitment is more eminently justified than in the case of
South Africa-first,
because apartheid is a unique and in

102. It has been clear for many years that the South
African crisis could eventually become a world crisis.
10

Delegation after delegation iri the Security Council has
warned that the international community cannot afford to
ignore the situation in southern Africa. Repeated attempts
were made to persuade the Council, and its permanent
members in particular, that the only way to avert a major
crisis WEIS to take action against the minority r&&e in
South Africa, action which would force that regime to
recognize the realities and to establish a time-table for the
transfer of power to the majority. These warnings have
been ignored. Many Member States have demonstrated their
solidarity with the struggle of the South African people.
The Council, however, has held back from taking action
against the South African Government. On occasion, when
it was clear that a majority of members intended to take
action, their efforts were thwarted by the use of the veto.

would force the racistsin South Africa out of power. In the
mid-19GOs,the internal situation in the country seemedto
favour the successof such action. The African National
Congressorganized a national strike to protest the proclamation of a Fascist State. The most ruthless repressionwas
mounted to crush that strike by force of arms, and a
consensusdeveloped in the country among ANC members
and their supportersthat the time had come to changethe
methbds of the struggle. It was decided to abandon
non-violence in favour of armed struggle combined with
political agitation. In late 1961, Umkonto We Sizwe-that
is, the Spear of the Nation-the military wing of ANC, was
formed. It immediately announced itself by organizing a
country-wide campaignof sabotage.
108. Pressure was increasing at the time for United
Nations action against the racist rCgime. Resolutionswere
adopted in the General Assembly in the aftermath of
Sharpeville, calling for the severance of all diplomatic,
economic, military and cultural ti.eswith South Africa. We
saw such resolutions as an important beginning, as an
indication that the international community would play an
active role in helping to isolate South Africa. We thought
that the United Nations would lend its active support to
our struggleand thus hasten the downfall of the apartheid
riginie.

103. Today we see the results of this temporizing. South
Africa has gained invaluable time, which it has used to build
its economic and military strength. Far from abandoning
apartheid it has shown itself absolutely determined to
preserve the status quo. South Africa, faced with a greatly
intensified struggleon the part of the South African people,
has today become a volatile and dangerousforce on the
African continent. Its enormous power has become a
standing threat to every independent State south of the
equator.
104. It is against that background that we must ask
whether the United Nations can afford to wait any longer
to take effective action againstapartheid

109. The Security Council seemedpoised on a number of
to take action. In 1964, it constituted an Expert
Committee to study the feasibility of mounting various
kinds of sanctions against South Africa [resolution
191 (I964)/.
The report of the Expert Committees
indicated clearly that South Africa was vulnerable to
United Nations action and that it could be seriously hurt,
for instance, by certain kinds of economic sanctions.The
Council never acted on the report.
OCCMiOllS

105. There was a time when it seemedthat the international community would take the kind of action demanded
by the Charter. I recall how, in the early 196Os,each
sessionof the GeneralAssemblyand eachseriesof Security
Council m’eetingswould raise the expectations of our
people to lofty heights.They were happy witnessesto the
progressiveand apparently irreversiblecollapseof alien rule
in Africa. They watched one African nation after the other
take its rightful place among the community of nations,
And they were convinced that South Africa’s liberation was
also on the agendaand that they would, thanks to their
own efforts and to international solidarity, soon be free
from bondage.
106. There were several other factors that suggestedthat
their hopeswould be fulfilled, The unprecedenteddestruction of human lives and property which had been experienced during the SecondWorld War was still fresh in our
minds.The world’s horror at what had happenedseemedan
assurancethat all nations, irrespective of their political or
ideological affiliations, would make common cause and
help to crush the cancerousevil which was rearingits head
in South Africa. There was a nearly unanimousview that
apartheid wasnot only repugnantand indefensiblebut also
a crime againsthumanity. The massacreat Sharpevillehad
profoundly affected the conscienceof the world. People
sawin it a signof things to come and were appalled.Thus
South Africa, which had onceenjoyed a certain respectability as a founding Member of the United Nations, became
increasinglyisolatedin the international community.
107. The stage seemed to be set for measureswhich,
together with the efforts of the South African people,

110. There have been many similar casesin which the
United Nations has begun to take specific steps to put
pressureon South Africa and then withdrawn from further
pursuit of the matter. Paradoxically, as the crisis in
southern Africa has become more serious,as the liberation
movement has demonstratedthat it could posea real threat
to the power of the minority regimes,lessand lesshasbeen
heard about translating United Nations resolutions into
action. As the situation has become more and more
unusual, the doctrine of businessas usual has taken
command. It is hard to escape the impression that the
successes
of the liberation struggle have been seenlessas
part of a processof ending injustice and oppressionthan as
a “threat” to the interests of certain Powers, and particularly the interestsof the major WesternPowers.
111, It must be said clearly that, in our view, this is now
the core of the problem. South Africa’s actions over the last
10 years have demonstratedclearly that the racist rulers of
our country are determined to try to maintain the system
of exploitation and oppression which now lies so heavily
upon the shoulders of our people. Far from being made
“more humane”, apartheid has beeu given a new and more
horrible form, combining the primitive laws and customsof
3 Official Records of the Security
Special Supplement No. 2.

11

Council, Twentieth

Year,

bondagefor the vastmajority of South Africans, and it will
an exploitative society with the ruthless efficiency Of a
continue to mean perpetualbondageeven if the political
modern police State. And South Africa, sensing that
plastic surgeons
produce a new neo-colonialversionof that
apartheid is now truly threatened,hasturned its energies
to
system.
the creation of a powerful military machinewith which it
seeks to dominate the whnle southern African region.
South Africa has built a garrison State, a new laager 116. I hastento say, however, that, disappointingthough
equipped with the most modern and deadly weapons, the past record of the Security Council may be, we remain
convincedthat this seriesof meetingspotentially marks a
equippedindeedwith a military nuclearcapability.
turning point. Whilst we have always had reason to
denouncewhat we sawasthe imperialistglobalstrategy for
112. This new and more arrogantpostureon the part of
world
hegemonyin which South Africa wasbeing armedto
the apartheid r&me hasbeenmadepossibleby the growing
the
teeth
and assistedin producing an atomic bomb in
support which it is receivingfrom other countries,support
order to play the role of a regionalgendarme,we are today
which is partly invisible but absolutely critical for the
presentregime.Thesecountries,underthe guiseof business heartenedby certain pronouncementsmade by the new
WashingtonAdministration, aswell asthe steadily growing
as usual, have in fact beenhelpingto finance and arm a
Power which is movingawayfrom anypossibilityof reason humanitariansupport from the Western European countries, support that we hope will soonreachthe level of that
or reform. It is clear that they are doingso becausethey
given by the Nordic countries. We hope that the former
believe that, by arming and protecting South Africa, they
are also protecting their own interestsin the southern United States Administration’s position under Memorandum394 on the reported project of establishinga naval
African region. Thus South Africa has been made a
baseat Port St. Johns in the Transkei and other covert
surrogate colonial Power in Africa. It is expected to
perform the function of local gendarme.There is no need activities, will soon be the subjectof public renunciation.
to demonstratethe short-sightedness
of suchpolicies.It is Wealsocall on the Governmentsof Franceand the Federal
Republic of Germany which, together with the former
obvious enough that such calculationsfail to take into
United StatesAdministration, permitted nuclear collaboraaccount the dynamics of the liberation struggle. They
tion
with Fascist South Africa, in addition to supplying
assumewhat cannot be assumed,
that the apartheid system
genocidalweapons,to put an end to that collaboration.
can survive. In the long run the peopleof South Africa will
wrest their freedom and independence
from the country’s Finally, we request the Council, in keeping with the
recommendations
of the GeneralAssemblyat its thirty-first
racistrulersand maketheir own future.
session,to invoke ChapterVII of the Charter and impose
113. The important point for the Council is that South mandatory economic sanctions and an arms embargo
against South Africa, and pronounce itself against any
Africa could not survive as it does today without the
support which the Vorster Governmentreceivesfrom other so-calledinternal solution arrived at with the bantustan
authorities.
countries.This points the way to effective action by the
United Nations, for, if that crucial foreign support for
117. The African National Congresswasfounded in 1912
apartheid were to be withdrawn, the presentr&me would
in
the wake of a heroic resistancewagedby our forebears
have no option but to beginthe disniantlingof apartheid. It
would have no power to resist the efforts of the South againstcolonial conquest.In the samemannerasour fellow
Africans in other African countries which are free and
African peopleto free themselves.
That is the true andonly
independent
today, we in South Africa are resolvednever
way to peacefulchange.
to accept perpetual bondage. After 325 years of white
114. It is a sadcommenton our deliberationsherethat we supremacistpolicies,we areresolvedto strive for self-deterarebeing asked,even at this late date,to believeotherwise. mination in our fatherland. Werecognize,however, that the
For indeed we are being askedto wait yet again for our whites in South Africa, having severedcultural ties with
freedom. Not becausethe props which hold up the their respective mother countries, now consider South
apartheid rigime are to be torn away, but becausesome Africa their home. And indeed it is their home. The
believethat “with time” they canpersuadethosewho now principle of the equality of peoplesis therefore a cornerrule South Africa to changetheir very nature, to abandon stone of ANC policy, asit is of the Charter of the United
the system which has for so long been the basisof their
Nations.Webelievethat the principleof self-determination
unprecedentedpower and privilege.Is this really a credible musthaveequalvalidity for all.
proposition? Cantoday’s rulersof South Africa, who shoot
down children in the streetsand claim that detaineesare 118. Our fundamental objectives were set out in the
under orders to commit suicide, really be expected to
FreedomCharters which was adoptedby the Congressof
abandontheir whole way of life willingly, or evenfor a few
the Peoplein 1955.That documentwasembracednot only
hundredmillion Euro’dollars’?
by ANC but also by its allies,the South African Indian
Congress,
the ColouredPeoples’Organization,the Congress
115. Apartheid is a systemof power, a particular form of
of Democratsand the South African Congressof Trade
economic and socialorganization originatingfrom settler Unions. It faithfully reflects the spirit and idealismof the
colonialism.It is basedupon and institutionalizesthe most Charter of the United Nations. The preamble of that
extreme kinds of inequality in every sphere.Sucha system documentstates:
cannotbe madeinto its opposite.It cannotbe turned into a
4 See The Kissinger Study of Soufhern Africa (Westport, Connecdemocracy, and it cannot assureeconomicjustice which
ticut, Lawrence
Hill and Company,1976).
must mean,at the very least,a decentand reasonablyequal
5 Official Records of the General Assembly, Tenth Session,
chancein life for every citizen. Apartheid meansperpetual Wdvnent No.14, para.295.

“We, the people of South Africa, declare for all our
country and the world to know:

121, However, the rCgime has consistently and stubbornly
stepped up its reign of terror. Its Fascist intransigence,
today characterized by the wanton murder of thousands of
defenceless men, women and schoolchildren, as well as the
assassination of political detainees in prison cells and
torture chambers, has sown seeds of revolution throughout
the length and breadth of the country.

“That South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black
and white, and that no GovernJncnt can justly claiJn
authority unless it is based on the will of all the people;
“That our people have been robbed of their birthright
to land, liberty and peace by a form of government
founded on injustice and inequality;

122. As they enter the decisive phase of the struggle, at a
time when the independence of Mozambique and Angola
has changed the balance of forces to the detriment of the
Vorster rigime, our people are confident of victory. The
role of the international community is actively to support
this struggle and facilitate the elimination of the threat to
peace and international security which the apartheid r8gime
constitutes. It is for that reason that ANC hails the
resolution adopted by the General Assembly at its thirtyfirst session [resolution 31/6 Z/, which declares the Pretoria
rCgime illegitimate and reaffirms the legitimacy of the
struggle by the people of South Africa, by all possible
means, for the seizure of power. We request the Council to
endorse this position.

“That our country will never be prosperous or free until
all our people live in brotherhood, enjoying equal rights
and opportunities;
“That only a democratic State, based on the will of ill
the people, can secure to all their birthright without
distinction of colour, race, sex or belief;
“And therefore, we the people of South Africa, black
and white together-equal, countrymen and brothersadopt this Freedom Charter. And we pledge ourselves to
strive together, sparing nothing of our strength and
courage, until the democratic changes here set out have
been won .”

123. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. Abdul S.
Minty, to whom the Council extended an invitation at its
1988th meeting, as requested of it in the letter contained in
document S/12300. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

I.& me further indicate the principles OJI which the
Freedom Charter was based: “The people shall govern”“All national groups shall have equal rights”-“The
people
shall share in the country’s wealth”-“The
land shall be
shared among those who work it”-“All
shall be equal
before the law”-“All
shall enjoy equal human rights”“There shall be work and security”-“The
doors of learning
and of culture shall be opened”-“There
shall be houses,
security and comfort”-“There
shall be peace and friendship”.

124. Mr. MINTY: I should like to thank the African
Group and the three African members of the Security
Council for having once again sponsored me to take part in
the debate on South Africa. For me, as a South African and
as one involved in the international campaign to end
collaboration with apartheid, it is a special pleasure and
honour to appear once again, for the third time, before the
Council and provide it with information which may enable
it to discharge its solemn responsibilities more effectively.

119. Those are the principles for which we stand, the
principles which we strive to make a reality in our country.
It should be abundantly clear that there is no way in which
those principles could, be applied in an apartheid system.
There is a fundamental incompatibility between the Freedom Charter and the system of exploitation and oppression
so painstakingly pieced together by the present rulers of
South Africa. There is no way in which such a system,
especially in the present circumstances, could be modified
and made to accommodate the just demands of the South
African people. No African parliament sitting on a foundation of transnational corporations could accommodate
those demands. The principles of the Freedom Charter can
only be realized in a free and independent South Africa,
when the repugnant system of racism has been entirely
dismantled.

125. Mr. President, most of us who have known of your
record of personal involvement in the struggle to combat
racism were pleased to hear of your appointment as United
States Ambassador to the United Nations, since it signifies
the new importance placed by President Carter on the
problem now under consideration by the Security Council.
The fact that these meetings of the Council are presided
over by you is also of special significance, and with these
favourable portents it should not be too difficult for the
Council to reach Jneaningful decisions which will result in
the strict implementation of the international arms embargo and the cessation of all future loans to and
investments in South Africa. In saying this, I do not
underestimate the difficulties involved, but I am mindful of
the ever threatening situation in southern Africa, which
could so easily erupt into a major racial conflagration with
menacing implications of a wider global confrontation. The
responsibility of the international community to avert such
a catastrophe has never been greater than it is today.

120. It is clear, therefore, why the decision of the African
National Congress and of the people of South Africa to
wage an armed struggle for the overthrow of the apartheid
rt5gime is irreversible. The songs of “peaceful change” are
simply the means by which some seek to beguile us and to
sow confusion in the international community. We shall
continue our struggle because the South African regime has
left us no alternative. We should, of course, have preferred
to see change come by peaceful means. Our record,
crowned by the Nobel Peace Prize award to our late
President, Albert Luthuli, is eloquent proof of that.

126. The international arms embargo against South Africa
has been considered to be the only effective action taken so
far by the United Nations to counteract apartheid. It is
essentially a voluntary embargo relying on the goodwill and
national discretion of Member States. Even a cursory
13

examination of the operation of that embargo reveals its
only partial implementation and the danger of a gradual
erosion.

13 1. Thirdly, there is the whole question of the supply of
spare parts for equipment already sold to South Africa-a
clear violation of the embargo perpetrated in virtue of the
claim that the country is bound by honour to discharge its
obligations arising out of old orders.

127. South Africa is able to obtain a wide range of
military equipment directly from several countries and it
continues to expand its domestic arms industry with the
active and often enthusiastic co-operation of certain Western countries and their arms firms. It is therefore inevitable
that all those concerned at South Africa’s rapid military
build-up and the threat which this poses to the peace and
securily of Africa and the world should call for a
mandatory and comprehensive arms embargo. But the
growing demand for a mandatory arms embargo has been
firmly resisted by the principal Western Powers, with triple
vetoes being cast in the Council to block such action, thus
giving encouragement to the Pretoria regitne.

132. Fourthly, an indirect method of providing South
Africa with military equipment is to send it via another
country. A recent example was the export of British rocket
motors transported by Martin Baker Limited to France and
then exported to South Africa.
133. Fifthly, British-designed equipment is made under
licence in a third country and then exported to South
Africa. The most flagrant example in this area involves
Rolls Royce engines made under sublicence in Italy and
then either fitted to Italian aircraft sold to South Africa or
exported to South Africa to power Italian-designed
Aermacchi planes which are made in South Africa.

128. The international arms embargo is being evaded in a
number of ways. Let me explain. Prior to the United
Nations embargo decisions, the United Kingdom was South
Africa’s major arms supplier and close ally. Since then,
successive Governments have observed the embargo in
different ways, and it would be true to say that, in the
main, the United Kingdom does not supply any combat
equipment directly to the Pretoria rCgitne today. The
United Kingdom claims to implement the arms embargo;
yet the way in which it interprets and appliesit leaves gaping
loopholes which permit the apartheid armed forces to
ob:ain a wide range of British equipment.

134. Sixthly, there is the whole question of Britishdesigned equipment made in South Africa under licence,
which also assists in building up the internal armamemts
industry in South Africa.
135. Seventhly, British companies have established subsidiaries and invested in South African companies in order
to make weapons there which might otherwise be prohibited for export by the embargo. Such equipment made
in South Africa is supplied to the illegal Smith r6gime to
increase its suppression of the people of Zimbabwe and to
carry out attacks on neighbouring countries. For example,
Racal “Transcriver”
equipment made by a British subsidiary in South Africa, was captured by the Mozambique
authorities following one of the attacks by Rhodesian
forces against that country. All the relevant information
was provided by us to the British Government, since it also
involved a breach of sanctions against Rhodesia, and I have
now been assured by Mr. Ted Rowlands of the Foreign
Office that sanctions have in fact been broken in this case,
that the equipment is of a type designed, developed and
manufactured only in South Africa by Racal but that Racal
there claims that it would not be a party to the supply of
such equipment to Rhodesia. We find it difficult to believe
that Rhodesia could receive such equipment except from
South Africa.

129. The following are examples of this. First, the Export
of Goods (Control) Order 1970 prohibits the export of
certain specified strategic items to other countries listed in
a schedule, but those items may be exported without
licence to any “port or destination in the Commonwealth,
the Republic of Ireland, the Republic of South Africa or
the United States of America”, It is remarkable that South
Africa should be accorded a special favoured-nation status,
which is denied to most Western European countries,
including members of the European Economic Community
and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Thus, a wide
range of equipment may be and is supplied to the South
African armed forces by British companies without a
licence being required, In one example last year, we drew
the attention of the Foreign Secretary to this gap, an action
which resulted in a licence being required for the Marconi
tropospheric
scatter system. However,
subsequently,
despite the control exercised by the Government, that
licence was granted and Marconi is now installing such
equipment in South Africa. We are requesting that the
British Government take away this favoured-nation status
from South Africa.

136. I have spoken at length about the United Itingdom,
but that is not because we feel that it is the major culprit,
since the United Kingdom in fact is not now the principal
supplier of arms to South Africa. That role has been taken
over by France. But what is true of the United Kingdom in
these cases and in the categories which I have mentioned is
also equally true of the United States and the Federal
Republic of Germany-all
three countries claiming to
observe the arms embargo. Those countries also supply a
wide range of non-combat equipment under the general
policy of not interfering with trade in industrial or
commercial items even when such items are purchased
directly by the South African military.

130. Secondly, even in the case of goods which do require
a licence, it is not clear which items are considered to be of
military significance and covered by the embargo. For
example, the tropospheric scatter system which I mentioned, ordered by the South African Armaments Board,
was granted a licence last October, and Her Majesty’s
Government claims that this does not violate British
undertakings in relation to the arms embargo. There is a
whole problem here of ascertaining what those undertakings amount to, since it appears that they limit the scope of
the existing embargo.

137. German firms have helped to construct the Advokaatnaval communications system based near Simonstown, but
this is considered not to be a violation of the embargo,
14

b

_-

There is also the case of the. Transall military transport
aircraft supplied to the South African armed forces, which
is a joint French-German plane being sold to South Africa
via France without the German Government vetoing its
sale.

African r&me-and
that hundreds more should be
manufactured there under licence-without
the knowledge
of the Italian Government?
141. From all this it becomes clear that the arms embargo
is not being strictly implemented by several Member States
and that there is need for a mandatory and all-embracing
embargo.

138. In the case of the United States, a wide range of
radar and other communications equipment as well as
aircraft described as civilian are sold to South Africa. The
United States claims to implement the arms embargo and
declares that no aircraft are supplied to the South African
armed forces. How has it come about then, we wonder, that
South Africa has received Merlin aircraft for its air force?
The South African Air Force has received twin-engined
Swearingen Merlin 4As from the United States. The August
1976 issue of the South African aviation journal Wings
reported that the aircraft were acquired by 21 Squadron a
year ago, but that Commandant Robert Blake, South
African Air Force public relations officer, said it was
decided not to publicize the addition until the order was
completed. One of the Merlins is equipped as an ambulance
aircraft and the others are secret. The exact number of
Merlins supplied directly to the South African Air Force is
not even known. Here is a case of equipment which directly
violates the United States interpretation of its own embargo.

142. The United Kingdom, the United Stales and Germany claim to adhere to the embargo, but as a result of the
narrow way in which they interpret and implement that
embargo there are major loopholes that need to be closed.
France and Italy openly violate the embargo. Canada,
which once supplied arms to South Africa, now operates
perhaps the strictest embargo, having decided in 1970 to
stop all sales of spare parts as well. But, in the absence of a
mandatory embargo, there are other countries, such as
Israel, which are embarking on arms sales to South Africa.
So far, Israel has contracted to supply fast naval patrol
boats equipped with Gabrielle missiles, some of which are
now to be made in South Africa, and it is likely that there
will be further equipment delivered to the Pretoria regime.
143. The need for a mandatory arms embargo thus
becomes clear. But the Security Council should ensure that
such an embargo will be comprehensive and cover all forms
of military collaboration, There is no ban at present on the
exchange of visits between South African defence officials
and those of several Western countries. In 1974, a certain
Mr. van Zyl, a senior South African defence official,
secretly visited defence eslablishments and arms firms in
France, the Netherlands, Germany, the United States and
the United Kingdom. Following representations made by us
in the United Kingdom, the Ministry of Defence stated that
he had discussed procedures for placing research contracts
and methods and procedures. South Africa needs to obtain
considerable information on counter-insurgency techniques
and operations, including surveillance techniques, and visits
such as those enable them to acquire it with ease. That
must be stopped.

139. The two countries which are now the most blatant in
their violation of the embargo are France and Italy, France
has replaced Britain as South Africa’s major arms supplier
and there is virtually nothing needed by the apartheid
regime which is prohibited by France. Sophisticated helicopters and other aircraft, including AIouettes and
Mirage F-l planes are sold to South Africa, and many are
now.being made in that country. An examination of South
Africa’s military hardware bears dramatic testimony to
France’s role in strengthening the apartheid forces. Indeed,
military collaboration between those countries is so intimate and close that South Africa funded the initial
development of the Crotale missile system made in France
which is now being passed off by France to other countries
as if it were a wholly French product. Despite repeated
appeals, France remains adamant and continues to increase
its military collaboration with South Africa.

144. In June 1975, when I appeared before the Council
[1829th meetil7g], we provided evidence which proved
beyond doubt that the NATO Codification System for
Spares and Equipment had been provided to South Africa.
Since then, I have taken the matter up with all members of
NATO, as well as with its Headquarters at Brussels. Last
May, when the NATO Ministerial Council met at Oslo, we
called upon NATO to withdraw the Codification System
from South Africa and to cease providing it with classified
or unclassified information.
Several friendly countries,
including Norway, Denmark, the Netherlands and Canada,
responded favourably, but some of the other members of
that alliance maintain that this is an open system and that
they see no reason for withholding it from South Africa.
Among those countries which provide information about
that codification system to South Africa are the United
Kingdom, the United States, France and Germany. In May
of this year, the NATO Ministerial Council is due to meet in
London just prior to the Commonwealth
Conference in
June, and we shall repeat our appeal to the NATO
Ministers. We hope that the United Nations will be able to
assist us so that the stand already taken by some of the

140. Italy is the other major violator of the arms embargo.
It has supplied the Aermacchi MB326Ms and provided a
licence for over 200 of them to be made in South Africa
under the name Impala I. The more modern Aermacchi 326K has also been sold to South Africa, and a version
of it is now being made in South Africa under the name
Impala II. AM3Cs have also been sold to, and more are to
be made locally in South Africa under the name Bostock.
The Aermacchi-Lockheed
AL60C.5, a United Statesdesigned light plane produced in Italy, is being made in
South Africa under the name Kudu. Those are all aircraft
particularly suited to counter-insurgency operations. The
Italian Government denies at the United Nations and
elsewhere that it sells aircraft to South Africa or sublicenses
them for manufacture in that country. 1~ a meeting I had at
the Foreign Ministry last October, those denials were once
again repeated to me. How is it possible, we wonder, that
hundreds of aircraft of Italian origin should have been
delivered to and should be in the hands of the South
15

friendly countries within
other NATO members.

thdt

sia, then the Council has a clear duly to apply mandatory
sanctions agaillst the major sanctions buster.

alliance may be supported by

145. Another area which needs to. be covered is that
concerning South African nationals who leave that country
in order to avoid being conscripted or serving in its armed
forces. There are today a number of such persons who are
beginning to reach the United Kingdom, the Netherlands
and the United States. Two of them in the United Kingdom
applied for political asylum last year and, to our surprise, we
learned only a few weeks ago that they had been refused
asylum by the British Government on the grounds that
their fear of being persecuted in South Africa was not well
founded. Those two persons have appealed and a number of
parliamentarians have taken up their case and I hope that
the British Government will not repatriate them. But, as the
conflict sharpens in South Africa and more and more
persons desert from tfle service of the apartheid forces, it is
vital that Member States afford full and proper protection
to such persons.
146. It has been claimed by the Western permanent
members of the Council in the past that the situation in
southern Africa does not amount to a threat to peace. 1
would submit that sincethose Powersconcluded in 1960,
immediately after Sharpeville, that the situation at that
time did constitute a disturbance of the peace,we have
now, after 16 years, come to a stagewhere all the objective
evidence points to more than adequategroundsfor determining that there is a threat to peaceundei ChapterVII of
the Charter.
147. First, apartheid, a doctrine which insults the dignity
and worth of dark-skinned people all over the world, is an
affront to mankind as a whole, and in itself constitutesa
grave threat to a world in which there are peoplesof many
colours.

152, Sixthly,
nei~lbouring

South Africa has attacked and invaded
African States and threatens to continue to

do so.
153. Sevent]dy, its defence laws now permit its armed
forces to operate freely in all territories south of the
equator.
154. Despitea11this, somePowers refuse to accept that
SoLlthAfrica is a threat to world peace, and ollc \~ondcr~
what elseSouth Africa hasto do before that determination
is conceded.
1.55, Most of the major WesternPowersclaim that they do
not sLIpport the African liberation slruggle in southern
Africa becauseof their commitment to peaceful Change iI
southernAfrica. Those countries are entitled to that view
and illdeed bear the consequcnccsof SLIC~I a policy. I3ut
what in my view is impossibleto KCC[Jt is a peaceful change
thesis which involves supplying military weapons and
technology to one side of that confrontation in southern
Africa, namely the racist n~mThcid side. Those Western
countries should not wait for mandatory arms embargo
decisionsin order to ceasetheir military collaboration with
apartheid. Indeed,the United States,in 1963, infonncd the
Council that it had already decidedto implement an arms
embargobefore such a decision was adopted by the
Council.Yet it is thoseWesternPowerswhich use their veto
power in the Council to facilitate military collaboration
with South Africa.

156. Now with the rapid transfer of nuclear technology
and equipmentto South Africa by several Western countries, it has been confirmed by Prime Minister Vorster as
well asby overseassourcesthat South Africa has a nuclear
148. Secondly, the persistent repressionof the oppressed capability, and if South Africa dots not already have
people in South Africa hascreated an explosivesituation to
atomic weaponsit can producethem very quickly. Wit11its
which Mr. Palme referred earlier and which islikely to lead modern aircraft it has the meansof delivery. We have,
to a major conflagration in that area.
therefore, the prospectof an apartheid bomb in the hands
of a deSper&
r&gime.Yet it is claimed that there is no
149. Thirdly, South Africa’s rapid arms buildup and its
threat to peace.
threatening military posture towards neighbouringAfrican
157. There is widespreadinternational concern at the
countries reveal its true aggressive
ambitions.
growingthreat posedby South Africa, and that is why tens
150. Fourthly, South Africa has militarized Namibia, of thousandsof British citizens have signed a petition
created military basesin that international Territory and calling for a mandatory arms embargo. We handed this
petition to the new Foreign Secretary on Monday of this
refuses to end its illegal occupation. That amounts to a
threat to the peace as well as an act of aggressionagainst weekwhen the Council beganthis debate. Incidentally, the
that Territory and the world community. And while we at
Councilmay be pleasedto hear that Mr. Owen gave usthe
the United Nations are talking about the Turnhalle agree- assurancethat some of the loopholes to which I have
ments, the South African Government hasjust announced referred under the Export of Goods(Control) Order would
that it is going to introduce legislation to take over Walvis be looked at afreshwith a view to ensuringthat they would
Rayand make it an integral part of the CapeProvince.
be closed.Wehope indeedthat this kind ol action will be
supportedby other WesternGovernmentsaswell.
151. Fifthly, South Africa sabotages United Nations
mandatory sanctions against Rhodesiaand provides it with
158. In our view, a mandatory arms embargo is long
military assistance,thereby perpetuating Rhodesia’sthreat
overdue. The growing war situation in southern Africa
to the peace. Indeed, it was the United Kingdom which
requireseven more decisiveaction if we are to avoid a
brought the Rhodesian issueto the Security Council and
catastrophedescribedby Vorster as being too ghastly to
askedthat it be declared a threat to the peace,If South
contemplate.He should know what he is planning. It is
Africa does not comply with the sanctionsagainstRhode- therefore vital that the Security Council impose mandatory
16

san’ctions against South Africa. Nothing short of that action
will serve to avert the impending disaster. However, he
permanent Western members continue to oppose such
action. Their policies have always been based on the
consideration that there must be no confrontation with
South Africa. Whether WC look at their policy with regard
to Namibia or Rhodesia or other Territories in that region,
the primary consideration seems to be that there must be
no confrontation with apartheid. This no confrontation
policy emanates precisely from those countries with substantial economic interests in South Africa and it is they
who
also argue that increased investment in apartheid will
somehow bring about our freedom. We reject that contention.

162. We hope, therefore, that the expectations the world’s
peoples have placed in the Security Council will not be
betrayed and that the Council will take decisive action to
signal to the Pretoria rigime that it can no longer go on
ignoring debates and discussions at the United Nations and
that we are seriously concerned to avert a racial disaster
which looks almost. inevitable in southern Africa.

159. It is time for the Western permanent members of the
Security Council to decide which side they are on, Last
year in March, the Prime Minister of Norway warned the
Western world that, with regard to southern Africa, it had
too often been identified with the wrong side and that it
was time for it to change sides. At the opening of the
NATO Ministerial Council meeting at Oslo, he gave the
same warning and stated that there should be no doubt as
to where the alliance members stood in the battle between
the white minorities and the overwhelming black majorities
in southern Africa. Yet this is a lead which is not yet being
followed by most of the Western Powers. If the Western
countries are on the side of freedom, they can agree to a
number of initial steps to be adopted by the Council
immediately.

164. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): I listened very
carefully to what Mr. Minty had to say, as indeed 1always
do. He made a number of allegations about violations of the
arms embargo which my Government enforces and imposes
against South Africa. I think all of them hav’e been made
before. He discussed them with ministers in the Foreign
Office last year. Indeed he admitted towards the end of his
statement that he had discussed them with no less than the
Foreign Secretary on Monday of this week and that
assurances had been given to him that matters would be
looked into and looked into urgently. How, therefore, it
helps to come along to the Security Council and spend half
an hour impugning the integrity of my country is frankly
beyond me.

took from the last war. If that should happen, then the
guilty elements will not be only the white rulers of South
Africa.

163. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those representatives who have asked to be allowed to speak in exercise of
their right of reply.

16.5. Nor indeed do I see how it helps to introduce such
matters of a purely domestic concern as political asylum. If
ever there was something which was remote from the
consideration of the Security Council, looking around this
table as I sit here, it would seem to me to be the various
policies that individual countries pursue with respect to
political asylum in their own nations.

160. The first would be to enforce a strict arms embargo
and vote in favour of its being made mandatory by the
Security Council; the second, to ban all future loans to and
investments in South Africa. If those two minimal measures
are supported, then one can at least hope that there will be
further action on the part of the Council to take decisive
measures against South Africa. But the key question is
whether the political will exists to confront apartheid. This
debate and the decisions taken here will give an indication
to the world of the degree of change that we can expect
from We’stern policy. South Africa is immensely encouraged when vetoes are used in the Council to protect it from
international action.

166. Many of the allegations that were made were
indeed recently made in documents of the Special Committee against Apartheid. I do not propose to go into detail
now. Last Monday I sent Ambassador Harriman, the
Chairman of the Special Committee, a letter in which 1
commented on certain allegations against the British
Government and against British companies. I am perfectly
ready at any time to clarify those or any other points which
Mr. Harriman might care to raise with me. If Mr. Minty has
not had the opportunity of reading that letter, I shall
naturally be very pleased to supply him with a copy so that
he can see it.

161. Mention has already been made of the fact that
today the problems of race and colour present perhaps the
greatest single threat to world peace and security. The
policy of the new Administration in Washington gives US
considerable grounds for hope and we trust that it will be
able, under your leadership, Mr. President, to give a decisive
lead to other Western Powers. We are indeed at a turning
point in the affairs of southern Africa in so far as the
United Nations is concerned. If no firm action in the form
of the minimal steps that we have indicated is taken at this
moment, then South Africa will go on feeling encouraged
and interpreting opposition to mandatory action in this
chamber to mean support for its policies in that region. The
South African apartheid policies are bound to lead to
disaster. But the greater danger is that that conflagration
will extend to other territories in the region and will bring
forward the prospect of a global racial confrontation. If
that occurs, it will create a catastrophe of a kind from
which it will take the world much longer to recover than it

167. My Government’s policy, I think, is well known. It
was outlined in a statement in the House of Commons by
the present Prime Minister, Mr. Callaghan, then Foreign
Secretary, on 4 December 1974. The statement was circulated as a General Assembly document.6 The British
Government is totally committed to implementing its
undertakings in respect of the United Nations arms embargo.
I reject and indeed personally somewhat resent the implication that somehow or other we are cheating on it. If I may
say so, we have implemented that embargo at some cost to,
6 See A/9918.

17

speakers. I simply wonder out loud why the Security
Council should have listened to this individual spealcer and
considered him qualified to come here and set forth his
views or render his assistance to an institution whose
debates are normally as calm as possible and concern States.

the British economy, a fact for which 1 think even
Mr, Minty should perhaps sometimes give us some credit.
As I have said, he saw the Foreign Secretary last Monday
and raised certain particular points which Mr. Owen agreed
to look into. It therefore seems to me that all I need to say
at this stage is that we are ready at all times to investigate
alleged breaches of our arms embargc and to discuss these
questions with the British Anti-Apuarfheid Movement. But
the Security Council does not really seem to me to be the
right place to pursue domestic discussions. I do not propose
to go further into these allegations at this stage. I reserve
our right, however, to speak again in the debate should it
prove necessary to do so.

169. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): I am .encouraged by the
statement of my colleague from the United Kingdom, in
which he confirmed that the British Foreign Secretary had
given assurance to Mr. Minty that matters regarding the
arms embargo would be looked into. I shall study the
statement of my friend Mr. Minty and I may be in a
position to comment on it and the remarks made on it at a
later stage.

168. Mr. LECOMPT
(France)
(interpretation
from
French): With regard to the arms sales to South Africa
mentioned today by various speakers, I should like merely
to recall my country’s policy in this respect as explained
before the General AssembIy at its last session.7 The
French Minister for Foreign Affairs has already pointed out
that France has placed a ban on any further contracts or
sales of arms to South Africa. 1 have nothing to add to that
statement and I shall not reply to Mr. Minty, the last of the
7 Officinl Records of the General
Pknary
Meetings,
9th meeting.

AssenCdy,

Thirty-first

170. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): I am glad the
representative of Mauritius is encouraged that assurances
have been given. I am slightly surprised that Mr. Minty did
not take the trouble to inform him.
171. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): I wish to assure 11ly
colleague from the United Kingdom that Mr. Minty did
have an opportunity to advise me of the assurances.

Session,

The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

18
Litho

:

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. 2.00 (or equivalent

Ln other

currencies)

77-700014anuary

1978-2,200
