United Nations

S/PV.3858

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-third Year

3858th Meeting
Monday, 2 March 1998, 6.40 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Sedat Jobe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gambia)

Members:

Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Buallay
Mr. Amorim
Mr. Qin Huasun
Mr. Berrocal Soto
Mr. Dejammet
Mr. Dangue Réwaka
Mr. Owada
Mr. Mahugu
Mr. Monteiro
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Türk
Mr. Dahlgren
Sir John Weston
Mr. Richardson

Agenda
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 25 February 1998 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1998/166)

98-85088 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
The meeting was called to order at 6.40 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of March, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Denis Dangue Réwaka,
Permanent Representative of Gabon to the United Nations,
for his service as President of the Security Council for the
month of February 1998. I am sure I speak for all members
of the Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Dangue Réwaka for the great diplomatic skill
with which he conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 25 February 1998 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1998/166)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Argentina, Malaysia, Mexico and Pakistan in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Petrella
(Argentina), Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia), Mr. Tello
(Mexico) and Mr. Kamal (Pakistan) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on the agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 25 February 1998 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
document S/1998/166. Members of the Council also have

2

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
before them document S/1998/175, which contains the
text of a draft resolution submitted by Japan and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I wish to thank and
commend the members of the Security Council for the
action they are about to take in relation to the agreement
that I secured last week from the Government of Iraq. If
respected, if honoured, and if sustained, this agreement
could constitute one of the United Nations most important
steps in addressing the consequences of Iraq’s invasion of
Kuwait seven years ago.
I should like to take this opportunity to make clear
to the entire international community the nature, the
demands and the promise of this agreement.
I went to Baghdad with the full authorization of all
members of the Security Council, in search of a peaceful
solution to the crisis. I went to fulfil my constitutional
obligation under the United Nations Charter and my
commitment to the General Assembly at the
commencement of my term — a sacred, moral obligation
and commitment to act, any time, anywhere, without
seeking or accepting instructions from any Government,
whenever that action may be helpful in reducing a grave
threat to international peace and security.
No one can doubt or dispute that Iraq’s refusal to
honour its commitments under Security Council
resolutions regarding its weapons of mass destruction
constituted such a threat. That threat has now been
averted.
The mandate of the Security Council has been
reaffirmed. The full and unlimited access of United
Nations inspectors to any and all sites has been restored.
The authority of the Executive Chairman of the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) has been
acknowledged and strengthened. Whether the threat to
international peace and security has been averted for all
time is now in the hands of the Iraqi leadership. It is now
for them to comply in practice with what they have
signed on paper.
I am under no illusions about the inherent value of
this or any other agreement. Commitments honoured are
the only commitments that count. Indeed, this agreement,
and today’s Security Council resolution, will merely be

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
empty words unless both parties now implement it fully,
fairly, and without delay.
For our part, the United Nations stands ready for that
implementation. We shall continue to fulfil our
long-standing obligation to act with respect for the
sovereignty and dignity of every member of the United
Nations. We shall continue to strive to improve in every
way the cooperation and effectiveness of every United
Nations agency.
That includes UNSCOM, which, I am
proud to repeat, has already destroyed more weapons of
mass destruction in Iraq than did the entire Gulf War, and
which under this agreement remains in full operational
control of the inspection process.
For its part, the Government of Iraq must now fulfil,
without obstruction or delay, the continuing obligations that
it reaffirmed last week at the very highest level. That means
accepting all Security Council resolutions; cooperating fully
with United Nations inspection teams; and according
immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access to those
teams to every area, facility, piece of equipment, individual
and means of transportation. Those areas include the eight
sites delineated as presidential sites where members of
UNSCOM and the International Atomic Energy Agency
will be joined by senior diplomats whom I will appoint.
Iraq’s complete fulfilment of these obligations is the
one and only aim of this agreement. Nothing more and
nothing less will make possible the completion of the
United Nations-mandated disarmament process and thus
speed the lifting of sanctions in accordance with the
provisions of Security Council resolutions. With today’s
Council resolution, however, the Government of Iraq fully
understands that if this effort to ensure compliance through
negotiation is obstructed, by evasion or deception, as were
previous efforts, diplomacy may not have a second chance.
No promise of peace and no policy of patience can be
without limits.
This agreement tests as never before the will of the
Iraqi leadership to keep its word. But it also serves as a call
for this union of nations to look to the future, beyond the
horizon and to the time when the disarmament process in
Iraq has been completed.
All of us can agree that sanctions have added greatly
to the Iraqi people’s suffering; that the expansion of the
oil-for-food programme will reduce that suffering without
diluting the disarmament regime; and that someday, sooner
or later — and we pray sooner — a fully disarmed and
peaceable Iraq would be able to rejoin the family of

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
nations. The United Nations, founded even before the
close of the Second World War, over 50 years ago, has
an inherent obligation to remember that even the bitterest
of enmities among nations do not last for ever. It is
therefore not too early for us to think about reconciling
peoples once their Governments are at peace.
The agreement reached in Baghdad was neither a
victory nor a defeat for any one person, nation or group
of nations. Certainly the United Nations and the world
community lost nothing, gave away nothing and conceded
nothing of substance. But by halting, at least for now, the
renewal of military hostilities in the Gulf, it was a victory
for peace, for reason and for the resolution of conflict by
diplomacy. It underscored, however, that if diplomacy is
to succeed, it must be backed both by force and by
fairness.
The agreement was also a reminder to the entire
world of why this Organization was established in the
first place: to prevent the outbreak of unnecessary conflict
when the will of the international community can be
achieved through diplomacy; to seek and find
international solutions to international problems; to obtain
respect for international law and agreements from a
recalcitrant party without destroying for ever that party’s
dignity and willingness to cooperate; to secure, in this
case, through on-site inspections and negotiations, the
assured destruction of weapons of mass destruction that
aerial bombardment can never achieve.
If this agreement is fully implemented and leads
over time to a new day in the Gulf; if this exercise in
diplomacy, backed by firmness, fairness and force, stands
the test of time, it will serve as an enduring and
invaluable precedent for the United Nations and the world
community.
If, ultimately, we have learned the right lessons of
this crisis, then this planet’s age-old prayer for enduring
peace with justice may be within our reach. It was that
prayer, from people of every faith and every frontier, that
sustained me on my journey for peace in Baghdad. I
pledge today, before this Council and the world, to strive,
to seek, to find and not to yield in the fulfilment of my
duty.
The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
put the draft resolution to the vote.

3

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting.
Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): Allow me first,
Sir, to express on behalf of the United Kingdom our
welcome, and our pleasure in seeing you preside over this
important meeting today.
Seven years ago this Council established the United
Nations Special Commission to destroy or render harmless
Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction as an integral part of
the conditions for the ceasefire which ended the Gulf War.
The fact that the Executive Chairman of the Special
Commission and his staff, for all their hard work and
professionalism, have still not completed their task is the
direct result of Iraqi deceit, obstruction and concealment.
The crisis which led the Secretary-General to fly to
Baghdad in a last-ditch effort to find a diplomatic solution
is just the latest and the most serious in a series of Iraqi
provocations.
The Secretary-General deserves great credit for what
he achieved in Baghdad. As the British Prime Minister said
in the British Parliament on the day the Secretary-General
returned to New York,
“I am delighted that Kofi Annan, for whom I have the
greatest respect and admiration, has succeeded in this
mission and has brought back a signed agreement”.
But, as the Secretary-General has himself
acknowledged — and has indeed repeated this evening —
this was not a success for diplomacy alone but a success
for diplomacy firmly backed by the willingness to use force
if diplomacy should fail. Does anyone seriously imagine
that the same result would have been obtained without this?
Welcome though the agreement is, it is by itself not
enough. Whether this crisis is over and the Special
Commission is able to complete its work depends on
whether the Iraqi regime now implements in practice what
it has signed on paper. We are not prepared to see a repeat
of the Iraqi behaviour which led to the present crisis. It is
for this reason that the United Kingdom, with the able and
welcome additional sponsorship of Japan, proposed and
sponsored the draft resolution on which the Council is
about to vote.
The draft resolution is short and to the point. It sends
two important messages: first, that the Security Council is

4

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
giving its full support to the Secretary-General and to the
Memorandum of Understanding which makes clear that
Iraq is bound by all the relevant resolutions and is obliged
to provide immediate, unconditional and unrestricted
access to the Special Commission anywhere in Iraq, not
just in the eight so-called presidential sites which have up
to now been the pretext for so much delay and
obstruction.
The second message is that the Iraqi regime has a
choice. If it fulfils its commitments under the
Memorandum of Understanding and complies with its
obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the way will be open for the lifting of
sanctions. There should be a time, to which the
beleaguered Iraqi people can look forward, when Iraq is
able to return to the respectable company of nations. If,
on the other hand, Iraq fails to comply, continues to
obstruct the Special Commission’s work and fails to
honour the agreement it has signed with the SecretaryGeneral, the draft resolution is again absolutely clear: this
will not be tolerated. The Council is determined that any
violation will result in the severest consequences. This is,
at the very least, a statement of the facts which should by
now be self-evident, as I explained in greater detail
during the Council’s earlier consultations. It is a statement
of the facts, but it bears solemnly repeating in this draft
resolution, since there are none so blind as those who will
not see. If the Iraqi regime doubts the will of the
international community to make good on that warning,
it will, not for the first time, be making a grave mistake.
There is a great need at such moments to face up
with courage and intellectual honesty to unpalatable
truths. Regional security, the future of non-proliferation
under international auspices, and the authority of the
United Nations and its Secretary-General are all involved,
and are all at stake, in our collective efforts to get the
case of Iraq right. The sponsors draw encouragement
from the Council’s unity in backing the SecretaryGeneral. Iraq must draw the lesson.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): First of all, Sir, let me say how pleased my
delegation is to see you presiding over the work of the
Council today.
It has not been easy to arrive at a consensus text.
My country welcomes the fact that, after reviewing

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
several versions, the Security Council is now in a position
to vote on a draft resolution that, in essence, accents three
basic ideas. First, it recognizes the success of the
diplomatic initiative undertaken by the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, and unreservedly endorses the
Memorandum of Understanding signed by the SecretaryGeneral and by the Government of Iraq on 23 February
1998.
Secondly, it reflects the vital need to send a clear and
unequivocal message to the Baghdad regime concerning the
very severe consequences that the Security Council is
determined to consider and adopt under Chapter VII of the
Charter in the event that Iraq fails to comply with the terms
of the Memorandum of Understanding and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, especially resolution 687
(1991) of 3 April 1991.
Finally, it sets out the key concept of international
legality and the primacy of the provisions of the Charter
over any political considerations.
With respect to the first point, as early as 6 February
my country urged the Secretary-General in writing to use
his good offices and travel to Baghdad and negotiate with
the Iraqi authorities to reach a diplomatic solution to this
crisis. We unreservedly supported Mr. Annan’s mission and
were against laying down parameters or terms of reference.
We said that the Secretary-General should simply travel to
Iraq and take action without any parameters or terms of
reference other than those set out in the Charter of the
United Nations. That was what the Security Council
decided; it was proper both legally and politically.
After listening to the views of all members of the
Security Council, the Secretary-General travelled to Iraq
and secured the signing of a Memorandum of
Understanding that fully and without cause for objection
conforms to the position of Costa Rica. The same reaction
has been expressed by all the other members of the
Security Council.
Nonetheless, we stated that in our view — and while
we acknowledged the position of the Legal Counsel on the
binding nature of the document under international law —
the Memorandum of Understanding ought to be formally
endorsed by the Security Council in order to make all its
terms consistent with previous relevant resolutions and with
that which is established by Chapter VII of the Charter,
with regard to actions “with respect to threats to the peace,
breaches of the peace, and acts of aggression”, as the sole
and inalienable prerogative of the Security Council. Thus,

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
my country considers that this endorsement of the
Memorandum of Understanding is not only an appropriate
political decision that we endorse, but is also a required
under international law.
Given this essential element, Costa Rica subscribes
with no reservations of any kind to the Security Council’s
clear and unequivocal message to Iraq on the grave and
severe consequences that would ensue in the event of
failure to abide by the agreed terms. Endorsing the
Memorandum of Understanding and bringing it into the
legal framework authorized by Chapter VII of the Charter
leaves no political or legal doubt whatsoever about the
seriousness and gravity of this warning by the Security
Council.
The draft resolution does not prejudge the actions of
the Security Council. It simply describes the scope of its
competence under the Charter and warns of the
consequences of a failure by the Government of Iraq to
comply — and does so in the precise terms of the
prerogatives and competences set out in Chapter VII of
the Charter.
In my country’s view, these prerogatives and legal
competences are, in accordance with the Charter,
exclusively of the Security Council and cannot be
delegated by it. This is what the United Nations Charter
States. This is what all of us as States Members have
signed and ratified. These are the terms that bind Costa
Rica and the other 184 Members of the United Nations,
without exception, be it in the case of Iraq or in any other
case in which the Security Council is called upon to
decide between peace and war.
For this reason my country is extremely gratified
that we finally have before us a text in which this legality
and these essential principles of international law are
safeguarded and preserved. Thus, we should all sincerely
congratulate ourselves.
With all these key aspects resolved — and
convinced that the depth and vigour of the discussions in
informal consultations during these last few days has
strengthened the institution of the United Nations and the
international legality represented by the Charter — my
delegation will vote in favour of this draft resolution.
The President: I thank the representative of Costa
Rica for his kind words addressed to me.

5

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
Mr. Amorim (Brazil): Sir, let me first congratulate
your country, Gambia, on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. Your presence — the presence of
a Minister — illustrates the importance your Government
attributes to the United Nations. I also want to second your
words about the excellent presidency of Ambassador
Dangue Réwaka of Gabon during the past month.
Less than a fortnight ago, as the crisis over Iraq’s
non-compliance with its obligations developed at full speed,
the Middle East and the Gulf stood on the brink of a
conflict that, as Secretary-General Kofi Annan correctly
stated, could have had unpredictable consequences.
Around the world there was a mood of sombre
apprehension as we contemplated the multiple scenarios that
could have developed and the effects that some of the
options could have entailed: the further deterioration of the
critical humanitarian situation in Iraq itself; a wave of
political and social unrest in the region; and, as the direct
result of a conflict, the withdrawal of United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) and of United Nations
humanitarian personnel from that country.
These developments, depending on the circumstances,
might have placed a multilateral system that is still learning
to cope with the challenges of the post-cold-war era under
a heavy strain.
In view of such dire prospects, the Security Council,
once again faced with the challenge of enforcing its own
resolutions, wisely encouraged the Secretary-General to
undertake a personal mission of good offices to Baghdad.
Brazil had already sent such encouragement in the
form of a letter addressed by Foreign Minister Luiz Felipe
Lampreia to the Secretary-General. At the informal
consultations of the members of the Security Council, we
advised the Secretary-General — and in his mind he had
already decided to act in this way — to be firm in
substance and flexible in form. We quoted in that
connection the Latin adage, “Suaviter in modum, fortiter in
re”.
The Brazilian authorities also signalled directly to the
Government of Iraq, in clear terms, that it should do
whatever was required to provide guarantees of compliance
with Security Council resolutions and thus ensure the
success of the Secretary-General’s mission.
Thanks to the admirable mix of firmness, patience and
courage that is characteristic of his personality, Mr. Kofi

6

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
Annan succeeded in a mission that sceptics had
considered doomed from the start.
The Memorandum of Understanding of 23 February
was negotiated with the Government of Iraq, including, at
the most critical moment of the talks, its Head of State.
It is a legally binding agreement that, among other
elements that were essential to the diplomatic solution of
the crisis, formally reconfirms the acceptance by Iraq of
all pertinent resolutions of the Security Council; reiterates
Iraq’s undertaking to fully cooperate with UNSCOM and
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
grants to UNSCOM, its new special group and the IAEA,
immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access to all
sites in Iraq, including, in accordance with specific
procedures now being developed, the eight presidential
sites.
Upon receiving notice of the Memorandum, the
Government of Brazil expressed the hope that a peaceful
and lasting solution for the crisis between Iraq and the
Security Council would now be feasible. On their part,
the States members of the Southern Cone Common
Market (MERCOSUR) — Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay
and Uruguay — along with Bolivia and Chile announced
in a joint statement their expectation that the solution to
the crisis will ensure a durable and stable peace in the
region. The President of Brazil had the opportunity to
express personally to the Secretary-General our
recognition of what was achieved in Baghdad.
Of course, the hard task of implementing the
Memorandum and verifying the elimination of Iraq’s
programmes for weapons of mass destruction still lies
ahead. But it is our conviction that the mission of the
Secretary-General, together with his determination —
today reaffirmed — to keep this matter under his close
personal supervision from now on, provides the Security
Council with a fair chance to put the problem of the
relations between Iraq and the United Nations on a more
stable foundation.
We believe that, on the basis of future Iraqi
compliance with the Memorandum, the conditions will
established so that the cyclic pattern of crisis in relation
to Iraq can be left behind. The Government of Brazil
considers that the Memorandum provides the basis for a
decision by the Security Council to ensure that Iraq
strictly complies with its resolutions, in accordance with
international law and the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter. The draft resolution that the
Council will be adopting today does just that.

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
Let us be clear here: since 1990-91, faced with the
situation that originated from the invasion of Kuwait by
Iraq, the United Nations, and the Security Council on its
behalf, have taken the responsibility to determine the
measures necessary to maintain and restore international
peace and security, under Chapter VII of the Charter.
Accordingly, at the end of the Gulf War, in which an
enforcement action took place under the authority of
resolution 678 (1990), the Security Council did not limit
itself to taking note of a ceasefire. Rather, in paragraph 33
of resolution 687 (1991), the Security Council declared that
“upon official notification by Iraq ... of its acceptance
of the [relevant] provisions, a formal ceasefire is
effective”.
Not only a cessation of hostilities, but — the difference is
crucial — a formal ceasefire.
Furthermore, in paragraph 34 — the very last one —
of resolution 687 (1991), the Security Council did not limit
itself to the ritual formula, “decides to remain seized of the
matter”. It went beyond that and stated its decision
“to take such further steps as may be required for the
implementation of the present resolution”.
The conclusion we draw is that the question of the
implementation of the conditions for the ceasefire with Iraq
remains firmly under the wing, so to speak, of the United
Nations and the Security Council. Only the Security
Council has the authority to determine if, when and under
what conditions the formal ceasefire it declared on 3 April
1991 holds or not.
Since the beginning of the informal consultations on
this draft resolution, we were assured by its sponsors that
it was not their intention to imply any automaticity in the
authorization of the use of force in case of a possible
violation by Iraq. After the changes made to the text of the
draft resolution — in particular the simplification of the
second preambular paragraph and the new formulation for
operative paragraph 5, which are in line with resolution 687
(1991) — we are satisfied that nothing in its provisions
delegates away the authority that belongs to the Security
Council under the Charter and in accordance with its own
resolutions. During the discussions on the draft resolution,
the Brazilian delegation was also guided by the need to
ensure the unity of the Security Council and sought to make
its contribution to this end.

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
For these reasons, we will cast our vote in favour of
this draft.
The President: I thank the representative of Brazil
for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation for Arabic):
My delegation would like to express its delight, Sir, at
seeing you presiding at this important meeting of the
Security Council. My delegation would also like to
express its deep appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his efforts to contain the crisis and to achieve positive
results for all the parties concerned. We have followed his
efforts all along, from his mission to Baghdad to the
debate on the current Security Council draft resolution.
Today we stand at a historic juncture in terms of the
relationship between Iraq and the Security Council,
specifically, between Iraq, on the one hand, and the
United Nations Special Commission established under
Security Council resolution 687 (1991) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the other.
Until the day prior to 23 February 1998, the date of the
signing of the Memorandum of Understanding between
Iraq and the United Nations in Baghdad, the relationship
between the two parties oscillated between continuity and
breakdown. This had an adverse impact on UNSCOM’s
mission, by which it is entrusted with the elimination of
weapons of mass destruction.
In point of fact, that oscillation in the relationship
resulted in mistrust, and it brought work to a standstill. In
turn, the situation has delayed the closing of files relating
to those weapons. The original time-table for the
elimination of weapons of mass destruction was less than
six months; yet here we are, well into the seventh year,
and the mandate has not been completed.
Under the circumstances, the Secretary-General
undertook a visit to Baghdad and a Memorandum of
Understanding was signed in order to allow UNSCOM to
inspect all sites, at all times, with special consideration
being given to eight presidential sites, while maintaining
the dignity and sovereignty of Iraq. On the other hand,
the Security Council adopted its resolution 1153 (1998) to
increase oil exports under the oil-for-food programme,
and humanitarian supplies would increase three-fold in
order to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people
resulting from the sanctions regime. This increase, which
coincided with the Secretary-General’s visit to Baghdad,
not only gave impetus to his mission but also sent a
signal that the Council is keen on improving the living

7

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
conditions of the people of Iraq. My delegation hopes that
Iraq will respond to the resolution to increase oil for food
in a positive and expeditious manner. We look forward to
the report of the technical group of experts as set out in
paragraph 12 of of that resolution relating to determining
the capacity of Iraq to pump oil worth $5 billion dollars
every six months.
The litmus test now is to implement the provisions of
the Memorandum of Understanding on the ground, and to
create the appropriate conditions for its successful
implementation. Therefore, the Council should help the
Secretary-General, and we appreciate his efforts to speed up
the implementation process.
Against this backdrop is the draft resolution to be
adopted today. The Council members made an immense
effort by way of preparation and support for the SecretaryGeneral’s visit to Baghdad. The Council also made an
intensive effort to achieve consensus, as reflected in the text
of this draft resolution. This represents a logical step
emanating from the Memorandum of Understanding signed
by the Secretary-General and the Deputy Prime Minister of
Iraq on 23 February 1998.
The elements of this draft resolution are coherent and
balanced in terms of order and phases of implementation.
First, as regards the reference to preserving the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Iraq, Kuwait and
the neighbouring States, we particularly appreciate the
Council’s incorporation, as set forth in operative paragraph
5, of the Council’s responsibility for securing peace and
security in the area.
Secondly, the Council endorses the Memorandum of
Understanding and looks forward to its early and full
implementation.
Thirdly, the Secretary-General is requested to finalize
the necessary procedures so that UNSCOM and the IAEA
can carry out the mandate fully, within the presidential sites
or other sites, as indicated in the Memorandum of
Understanding. In this context, it is to be noted that the
State of Bahrain contributes to the smooth implementation
of these procedures by providing the operational
headquarters for UNSCOM.
Fourthly, Iraq is requested to provide to UNSCOM
and the IAEA full freedom of access to all sites without
any conditions or restrictions, in order to ensure the full
implementation of resolution 687 (1991).

8

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
Fifthly, the Council undertakes to consider the
duration of the prohibitions under resolution 687 (1991).
This is no less important than the other issues, such as the
issue of Kuwaiti prisoners of war and prisoners of other
nationalities and the question of property owned by the
State of Kuwait.
The Council has made enormous efforts in order to
maintain its unity, stature and authority during the crisis
with Iraq. Also, the Council has made a conscious effort
to steer away from military options that would have
brought devastating effects on Iraq and the entire region.
Therefore, a peaceful defusing of the crisis was not easy
at all. Indeed, we would like to convince ourselves that a
new page in dealing with Iraq has now been turned,
thanks to this Council. On the other hand, Iraq, for its
part, has to demonstrate good faith and cooperate with
UNSCOM and the IAEA in both a serious and speedy
manner, with a view to eliminating its weapons of mass
destruction as a prelude to the lifting of sanctions and
moving towards its own development and reconstruction,
thus ensuring the well-being of the Iraqi people.
This moment is indeed a unique and historic one, as
the Council sought and succeeded in securing a peaceful
resolution of the current crisis. However, Iraq’s behaviour
from now on will define the future course of action.
Hence, as the Council has endorsed the peaceful solution,
we call upon Iraq to respond favourably to United
Nations efforts, and we call upon the United Nations to
encourage Iraq to pursue that course so that peace will
prevail throughout the region and to stay away from the
options that would pose danger to the entire region.
The State of Bahrain agrees to the draft resolution
put to the Council, and we will vote in favour of it.
The President: I thank the representative of Bahrain
for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): Let me start by expressing
our pleasure in seeing you preside over this important
meeting of the Council.
In our view, the draft resolution on which we are
about to vote contains four very important messages, each
addressed in a separate paragraph.
First, the draft resolution endorses the Memorandum
of Understanding signed by the Secretary-General and by
the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq. We all recall that the
Secretary-General undertook his important mission to

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
Baghdad with the full support of the Security Council. In
this draft resolution, it is made clear that the Council is also
backing the outcome of his mission.
Secondly, the Security Council is determined to see
the resolution implemented and will not tolerate a violation.
The Council’s message is firm and clear: a violation would
have severest consequences for Iraq.
Thirdly, this draft resolution means that if Iraq
complies with all its obligations under relevant resolutions,
it will be possible for the Security Council to lift the
sanctions, as stipulated in its resolution 687 (1991).
Fourthly — and very important for us — the Security
Council’s responsibility for international peace and security,
as laid down in the Charter of the United Nations, must not
be circumvented. The last paragraph of the draft resolution
is an expression of the need to safeguard this responsibility.
The Council will remain actively seized of the matter, and
the Council will ensure implementation of this resolution.
In conclusion, in our view the United Nations means
working together. And working together will lead to results.
Sweden will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us.
The President: I thank the representative of Sweden
for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Dangue Réwaka (Gabon) (interpretation from
French): First of all, I would like to thank you for the very
kind words you addressed to me and to express the great
pleasure I take in seeing you preside over our meeting. In
addition, I would like to express our best wishes for success
under your presidency.

I should like to reiterate our congratulations and
appreciation to the Secretary-General, which the Gabonese
authorities expressed to him upon his conclusion of the
Memorandum of Understanding with the Government of
Iraq on 23 February 1998. Indeed, this agreement has
helped defuse a critical situation that threatened to darken
the horizon of international relations.
Now, when the Security Council is about to adopt the
draft resolution before it, I think it is useful to recall the
importance of this meeting. For us this meeting is an
opportunity to solemnly reaffirm the confidence the
Security Council continues to have in the Secretary-General

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
for the full implementation of the Memorandum of
Understanding he signed with the Iraqi authorities.
My delegation strongly hopes that the Iraqi
authorities will take advantage of the favourable climate
thus created to translate the commitments undertake into
deeds. We are convinced that Iraq’s strict compliance
with these commitments will enable the Security Council
to consider in due course the possibility of lifting the
sanctions that have so harshly stricken and punished the
Iraqi people.
There is no reason to believe that the Iraqi
Government, which has made a solemn commitment
before the international community, will not keep its
promises. We believe that if the Iraqi authorities failed to
meet their obligations, the Security Council would draw
its conclusions and would not hesitate to give an
immediate and appropriate response.
In view of all these considerations, my delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution.
The President: I thank the representative of Gabon
for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): May I begin by saying how
honoured we feel to have Mr. Momodou Lamin Sedat
Jobe, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of the
Gambia, presiding over this important meeting. We also
recognize the presence of the Secretary-General among us
this afternoon.
Today’s meeting is for us a recognition by the
Security Council of the tireless efforts of the
Secretary-General, whose excellent diplomatic skills
culminated in the Memorandum of Understanding we are
formally endorsing today. My delegation was acutely
aware of the difficult circumstances and extremely
challenging international atmosphere in which the
Secretary-General operated, and that is why his
achievements are so profound. My Government issued a
statement supporting the mission of the Secretary-General
on the eve of his departure and another one upon his
return endorsing the outcome of his mission. Indeed, the
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, President
Robert Gabriel Mugabe, in a message to the SecretaryGeneral stated,
“The agreement you reached with President
Saddam Hussein, we all hope, will contribute
significantly to the peaceful conclusion of the

9

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
implementation of United Nations Security Council
decisions on the issue. The success of your mission
has brought relief and joy to all those who wish to
ensure completion of the United Nations Special
Commission’s mandates and avoid further military
confrontation in the Middle East region.”
The text we are about to adopt reflects a joint effort to
address the situation we are faced with. In that regard, we
are appreciative of the work done, and the flexibility
shown, by the delegations of the United Kingdom and
Japan, the sponsors of the draft resolution, in
accommodating the various views and positions.
The concerns of my delegation, which included in the
first instance the firmest possible endorsement of the
achievement of the Secretary-General, have been reflected
in operative paragraph 1 of the current draft. To us, this is
a sign of our full support and total confidence in his ability
to implement the Memorandum of Understanding in the
shortest possible time, and we are glad to note that the
Secretary-General has already embarked on this exercise.
It is also our understanding that paragraph 3 recalls the
commitment given by the Government of Iraq in the
Memorandum of Understanding with respect to according
immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access to the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and strongly
warns against any reneging on that undertaking, which
would lead the Security Council to take further action in
line with paragraph 5.
Our concern regarding paragraph 4, on the lifting of
sanctions in accordance with paragraph 22 of Security
Council resolution 687 (1991), has also been addressed by
casting the paragraph in a more positive light, thus bringing
it more into conformity with paragraphs 6 and 7 of the
Memorandum of Understanding. Indeed, we are sensitive to
the importance of this issue to the people of Iraq, and we
believe it should be measured against the level of
compliance by the Government of Iraq. In that connection,
we hope that UNSCOM will expedite and complete the
final phase of its work to enable the Council to reach an
early agreement on the lifting of sanctions.
As we have continually stated, we expect the
Government of Iraq to fulfil all its obligations under
relevant resolutions and to cooperate fully with UNSCOM
and IAEA. It is our fervent hope that following the signing
of the Memorandum of Understanding there will be a new
spirit of understanding that will facilitate the smooth

10

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
conclusion of all outstanding issues fully, fairly and
without delay, as the Secretary-General said.
Finally, we should like to place on record our
conviction, based on assurances we have been given by
the sponsors, that the draft resolution contains nothing
that could open the door, in any eventuality, for any kind
of action without the clear authority of the Security
Council. When all is said and done, the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security remains with the Security Council.
We hope that dialogue and the use of diplomatic
means will lead to constructive cooperation between the
United Nations and Iraq. It is on the basis of the above
understanding that my delegation will vote in favour of
the draft resolution before us.
The President: I thank the representative of Kenya
for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Owada (Japan): At the outset, Sir, I wish to
offer the sincere congratulations of my delegation on the
assumption by Gambia of the presidency for the month of
March, as well as my hearty welcome to you, Mr.
Foreign Minister, to this Council.
I wish also to offer the gratitude of my delegation to
Ambassador Dangue Réwaka of Gabon for the exemplary
manner in which he conducted the business of the
Security Council for the month of February.
During recent weeks the Security Council and the
international community have been engaged in intensive
efforts to cope with the grave situation created as a result
of Iraq’s non-compliance with its obligations under
relevant Security Council resolutions. In this regard, Japan
wishes wholeheartedly to welcome the breakthrough
brought about by the recent visit of the Secretary-General.
Japan believes that the agreement the Secretary-General
secured in Baghdad constitutes a determining step on the
way to the solution of the crisis.
In the Memorandum of Understanding signed by the
Secretary-General and the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq
on 23 February 1998, Iraq has reconfirmed its acceptance
of all relevant Security Council resolutions and has
undertaken to accord to the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) immediate, unconditional and
unrestricted access, in conformity with relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
This Memorandum of Understanding provides a
framework for the full and unconditional inspection of all
sites by UNSCOM, in conformity with all the relevant
resolutions. May I express the sincere hope that the
finalization of the procedures for presidential sites will be
worked out and reported to the Council as soon as possible,
and that UNSCOM inspections, with immediate,
unconditional and unrestricted access, will be carried out in
practice.
What is most essential with regard to this whole
achievement secured by the Secretary-General is that all the
obligations contained in this Memorandum of
Understanding be implemented fully. In this context, the
Security Council has an extremely important role to play —
to declare its own position, in the light of its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and security, on
the basis of the Memorandum of Understanding which has
been worked out by the Secretary-General in the exercise
of his own competence under the Charter of the United
Nations.
It is for this reason that today the Council, for its part,
is taking action on this draft resolution. We the members of
the Security Council are happy to make the position of the
Council clear in this draft resolution by commending the
initiative of the Secretary-General, by endorsing the
Memorandum of Understanding and by looking forward to
its early and full implementation.
As one of the sponsors of this draft resolution, Japan
wishes to register its position that the purport of the draft
is threefold. First, in endorsing the effort made by the
Secretary-General with the Iraqi authorities, it is the
intention of the Security Council to declare its united
position: that it is giving its full support to the achievement
of the Secretary-General. What is truly important now is to
see the obligations assumed on paper in the Memorandum
of Understanding implemented fully in practice.
Secondly, the purport of this draft resolution, and in
particular its paragraph 3, is to stress that compliance by
the Government of Iraq with its obligations, repeated again
in the Memorandum of Understanding, to accord
immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access to the
Special Commission and the IAEA is essential for the
implementation of resolution 687 (1991). Together with it,
the Council wishes to register its firm resolve that violation
in this regard would have severest consequences for Iraq.
In this context, I wish to confirm what I have been
making clear through the consultations: that it is the

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
understanding of the sponsors that this paragraph is not
meant to address the issue of so-called automaticity. This
point should be clear from the purport of paragraph 3, as
I have explained, as well as from what this paragraph so
clearly states.
I wish also to draw the attention of the Council to
paragraph 5 of the draft resolution, which states that the
Council remains actively seized of the matter, in order to
ensure implementation of this resolution, and to secure
peace and security in the area. The draft resolution simply
is not designed to prejudge the issues of the future.
Thirdly, on the question of the prohibitions referred
to in resolution 687 (1991), the resolution makes
abundantly clear the intention of the Council to act in
accordance with what is prescribed in that resolution. In
this regard, it is the sincere desire of Japan that the day
will come as soon as possible when the sanctions
currently applied to Iraq will be lifted through Iraq’s full
compliance with its obligations and other relevant
resolutions, so that Iraq can come back to claim its
worthy place within the international community.
As one of the sponsors of this draft resolution,
working in cooperation with its most competent partner,
the United Kingdom, Japan has spared no effort in trying
to work out a fair and dignified draft resolution that can
demonstrate the unified will of all the members of the
Security Council, in full consciousness of the heavy
responsibility incumbent upon it at this time of crisis.
Japan believes that we in the Security Council have
succeeded in achieving a united voice to seek the full and
unconditional cooperation of Iraq with UNSCOM thanks
to the very positive and constructive cooperation of all of
its members.
Japan wishes to place on record its deep gratitude to
all its fellow Council members for their cooperation in
making this possible. We have succeeded in
demonstrating the unity of the Council on this most
important question relating to weapons of mass
destruction, which affect peace and stability in the region.
In the light of all these factors, Japan will vote in
favour of this draft resolution.
The President: I thank the representative of Japan
for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Türk (Slovenia): Sir, let me congratulate your
country, Gambia, on its assumption of the presidency of

11

Security Council
Fifty-third year year

3858th meeting
2 March 1998

the Security Council for the month of March. We are
particularly honoured, Mr. Minister, by your presence
today. We wish the Permanent Representative of Gambia,
Ambassador Sallah, success in his work as President, as we
are grateful to the President for the preceding month,
Ambassador Dangue Réwaka of Gabon, for the excellent
work done.

by Iraq to fully implement that Memorandum are essential
for the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM)
and International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
inspectors to continue and finish their work. That would
eventually enable the Security Council to consider the
lifting of the prohibitions referred to in resolution 687
(1991).

Today, the Security Council is about to take action
which has been awaited since the Secretary-General
returned from Baghdad last week. By the draft resolution
submitted for action, the Council endorses the
Memorandum of Understanding signed by the SecretaryGeneral and the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq on 23
February 1998.

The draft before us reaffirms the commitment of all
United Nations Member States to the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of Iraq,
Kuwait and the neighbouring States. It is important that
we keep in mind the needs and the legitimate expectations
of these States, in particular those of Kuwait, which has
suffered the most seriously. It is appropriate to recall
today that some issues concerning Kuwait, have not yet
been resolved, including the issue of missing persons and
prisoners. The Security Council remains aware of these
issues and will have to address them on another occasion.

We believe that this endorsement is appropriate and
helpful. It reinforces the agreement reached in Baghdad, an
agreement which in our view is fair, balanced and in
conformity with resolution 687 (1991) and other Security
Council resolutions.
By commending the initiative by the Secretary-General
and by endorsing the Memorandum, the Security Council
is doing its part in the efforts to secure compliance by the
Government of Iraq with its obligations.
The implementation of the Memorandum of
Understanding should begin without delay. We are
heartened to learn that progress is being made in the
preparations for the additional procedures for the inspection
of presidential sites. The implementation process will be
closely monitored by the Council. The message of today’s
draft resolution is clear: full compliance by the Government
of Iraq with its obligations, reaffirmed in the Memorandum
of Understanding, is the way to implement Security Council
resolution 687 (1991). On the other hand, any violation of
these obligations would have extremely negative
consequences. It would destroy everything that has been
achieved through the difficult mission of the
Secretary-General. It would certainly prompt the Council to
consider other measures to ensure compliance.
In this context, we wish to emphasize that firmness
and resolve to use means other than diplomacy were of
critical importance for the mission of the Secretary-General.
Furthermore, the unity of the Security Council was, and
continues to be, of paramount importance.

Today the Security Council is taking decisions at a
time which, in many ways, is a defining moment for the
United Nations. This is the time when the potential of
diplomacy is being reaffirmed. The role of the
Secretary-General has been again reconfirmed as an
invaluable asset of the Organization and of the
international community in general. This is also a moment
when the Security Council has to demonstrate its ability
to act with unity, swiftness and determination. T h e
adoption of this draft resolution today will be a positive
sign in this regard. We wish especially to commend the
delegations of Japan and the United Kingdom for their
efforts in preparing this draft resolution before us.
It is important that in the process of implementation
of this draft resolution the Security Council should show
the same resolve and ability to act as the situation may
require. The responsibilities of the Security Council under
the Charter, and corresponding obligations, ought to be
clearly borne in mind. In operative paragraph 5 of the
draft resolution before us, the Security Council will
decide, in accordance with its responsibility under the
Charter, to remain actively seized of the matter in order
to ensure implementation of this resolution, and to secure
peace and security in the area. We expect the Council to
continuously receive information on the situation and to
act as necessary in accordance with its powers.
Slovenia will vote in favour of this draft resolution.

It is our hope that the Government of Iraq will not
forfeit the unique opportunity that was provided by the
conclusion of the Memorandum of Understanding. Efforts

12

The President: I thank the representative of
Slovenia for his kind words addressed to me.

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): My delegation is pleased to
see you, Sir, such a distinguished representative of your
country, presiding over this meeting. We could not have a
better start for our work this month under Gambian
leadership.
One week ago in Baghdad, the Secretary-General and
the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq signed a Memorandum
of Understanding which offered new perspectives for
ending the crisis between Iraq and the United Nations. As
the Secretary-General underlined, this is not just any type
of agreement: the Iraqi leadership is committed to this
agreement at its highest level, since it was negotiated by
Mr. Kofi Annan directly with President Saddam Hussein.
This remarkable diplomatic achievement averted war
and immediately garnered the unanimous support of the
members of the Council. The Council had encouraged the
Secretary-General to go to Baghdad and try to achieve a
diplomatic solution to the crisis in accordance with all
relevant resolutions.
It is now incumbent upon the Council to do its part,
by endorsing the agreement reached by the
Secretary-General in Baghdad. The expression of the
Council’s unanimous support for the Secretary-General’s
démarche is clearly reflected in the draft resolution that we
have before us, which my delegation supports. In this draft
resolution, the Council commends the initiative of the
Secretary-General and endorses the Memorandum of
Understanding.
In welcoming this outcome, my delegation naturally
expects that this Memorandum will be implemented as soon
as possible. All sites in Iraq are now accessible to United
Nations inspection. We now have a new opportunity to see
that all relevant resolutions of the Security Council are
finally fulfilled. We look forward to the rapid completion
of the necessary procedures in order to allow United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to discharge
their mandate.
The unity of the Council in adopting this draft
resolution will send a strong and unambiguous signal to
Baghdad. The implementation of the Memorandum of
Understanding obviously requires Iraq’s full cooperation.
We trust that Iraq will not fail to live up to its
commitments.
UNSCOM and IAEA have a task to complete on
behalf of the Council, and we want them to be able to do

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
it rapidly and efficiently. The objectives of this task —
ensuring the inability of Iraq to use prohibited weapons of
mass destruction — are clearly outlined in resolution 687
(1991). We should not forget that to achieve those
objectives is to open the way to the lifting of the
sanctions, which so dramatically affect the Iraqi people.
Both these aspects are reaffirmed in the present draft
resolution. In this context, the importance of the action
taken by the Council the week before last in adopting
resolution 1153 (1998), on the reinforcement of the
humanitarian programme in Iraq, as recommended by the
Secretary-General, should not be ignored.
We hope this message of unity from the Council will
open a new era of cooperation between the Iraqi
Government and the United Nations, since we genuinely
want the Iraqi nation to regain as soon as possible its full
stature within the international community and the Iraqi
people to see an end to their suffering.

The President: I thank the representative of
Portugal for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): The Chinese delegation wishes to join other
delegations in welcoming you, Sir, to the presidency of
the Security Council at this first meeting of the month.
Not long ago Secretary-General Kofi Annan, with
the broad support of the international community, made
a successful visit to Iraq and signed a Memorandum of
Understanding with the Government of Iraq, thus defusing
the weapons-inspection crisis. Peace-loving people all
over the world were overjoyed and encouraged by this
event. China greatly appreciates the wise decision made
by the Secretary-General at the critical juncture between
war and peace and supports his diplomatic efforts. We
also view positively the flexibility and wisdom
demonstrated by the various parties in bringing about this
successful result.
We believe that the Memorandum of Understanding
has resolved the question of access for the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) and at the same time
responded to Iraq’s legitimate concerns over sovereignty,
dignity and security, in full accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. This is a major breakthrough
for the inspection work of UNSCOM and will definitely
help UNSCOM complete the task entrusted to it by the
Security Council at an early date.

13

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
The situation in the Gulf region is complex and
sensitive. If it is dealt with appropriately there will be
peace. Any imprudence, however, may trigger a war, which
is in no one’s interest. Resolving peacefully the problems
that have arisen during the inspection process is the general
demand of the majority of the United Nations Member
States and is in the fundamental interest of the people of
the various countries in the Gulf region. The Security
Council must bear this in mind while dealing with this
major issue. China has always maintained that
international disputes should be resolved through peaceful
means in accordance with the United Nations Charter and
the basic norms of international relations. We are not in
favour of resorting to or threatening to use force, because
this would not favour an appropriate solution to these
problems. It would only cause heavy civilian casualties and
possibly even more severe consequences.
The successful visit by the Secretary-General has once
again proved that political and diplomatic efforts and
patient dialogue are the only way to dispel mistrust and find
an appropriate solution. We sincerely hope that under the
present circumstances the parties concerned will create a
favourable atmosphere for an early and comprehensive
implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding and
refrain from any action that might worsen the situation.
The draft resolution before us is intended to support
the good offices of the Secretary-General and to endorse
the Memorandum of Understanding. It also makes it clear
that the Security Council will act to lift the sanctions as
Iraq implements the resolution. That reflects our views, and
the Chinese delegation will therefore join the consensus on
the draft resolution before the Council.
I wish also to note that during the Council’s many
consultations the Chinese delegation repeatedly and
unambiguously demanded that the draft resolution should
contain no automatic authorization of the use of force
against Iraq. This evening we listened very carefully to the
explanations offered by the sponsors of the draft resolution,
but these did not eliminate our misgivings about possible
abuse of the draft resolution. I wish therefore to stress that
the adoption of this draft resolution will in no way mean
that the Security Council is automatically authorizing any
State to use force against Iraq. The Council cannot and
should not prejudge whether Iraq will violate its resolutions;
even less should the Council predetermine the course of
future action. The Security Council can make judgements
and decisions only on the basis of prevailing circumstances.

14

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
It has been China’s consistent position that Iraq must
implement in full the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and must cooperate fully with the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM). At the same time, Iraq
is a sovereign State, and its sovereignty, dignity and
legitimate security concerns should also be respected.
The Security Council should make a timely and
objective assessment of Iraq’s implementation of its
resolutions. UNSCOM has made considerable headway in
its inspections and in the destruction of Iraq’s weapons.
We hope that, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and with the understanding reached
with Iraq, UNSCOM will implement the proposals put
forward at its emergency session and will complete its
task of verification and the destruction of Iraq’s weapons
of mass destruction at an early date, so that steps can be
taken to lift the sanctions against Iraq at the earliest
possible date.
The President: I thank the representative of China
for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from
French): I wish first of all, Sir, to say how pleased and
honoured we are to begin our deliberations this month
under the guidance of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Gambia. I also wish to convey sincere congratulations
to your predecessor, our friend the Permanent
Representative of Gabon, and to his entire delegation.
France will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before the Security Council, whose central purpose is to
endorse the Memorandum of Understanding signed on 23
February by the Secretary-General, for the United
Nations, and by the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq, for
Iraq. This draft resolution is not necessary either legally
or politically to give effect to the Memorandum of
Understanding, which gained the assent of the Council on
24 February.
Nevertheless, in order to dispel any hint of
interpretations of or reservations about the content of the
23 February Memorandum of Understanding, it was a
good idea for the Council — on the initiative of the
United Kingdom and Japan — to seek to confirm the
authority of the Memorandum through a particularly
forceful decision taken under Chapter VII of the Charter.
The draft resolution upon which we shall be taking action
is thus welcome and worthwhile.

Security Council
Fifty-third year year

3858th meeting
2 March 1998

The draft resolution before us meets what we view as
the indispensable criteria: it is brief and it cleaves to the
text of the Memorandum of Understanding, which it
ratifies. It does not seek to rewrite it or to modify its scope.

It is important that the Council should have met
today to decide, unanimously and solemnly, that it will
remain actively seized of the matter in conformity with its
responsibilities under the Charter.

While affirming its determination to ensure immediate
and comprehensive respect for obligations under resolution
687 (1991), the Council reaffirms in the preambular part the
commitment of all Member States to the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of Iraq,
Kuwait and the neighbouring States. There is a point to
reaffirming that commitment at this time.

Today’s meeting is taking place in the presence of
the Secretary-General. We have passed through a time of
serious crisis which it has been possible to settle
peacefully. That peaceful outcome would have been
impossible without the courageous action of the
Secretary-General, without his determination, without his
negotiating talents, without his firmness. France was
happy to support him. But the best tribute we can pay
him is to see to it that his work endures.

In the operative part, the Security Council quite rightly
commends the initiative by the Secretary-General and
endorses the Memorandum of Understanding. The Council
places on record Iraq’s commitment to accord immediate,
unconditional and unrestricted access to the Special
Commission and the International Atomic Energy Agency.
But the Council also backs UNSCOM’s commitment to
respect the legitimate concerns of Iraq regarding national
security, sovereignty and dignity.
The draft resolution requests the Secretary-General to
report to the Security Council as soon as possible with
regard to the procedures for presidential sites. This too is
important, because the recent crisis concerned access to the
presidential sites. Here the Council acknowledges the
overriding competence of the Secretary-General.
One reason for this draft resolution — apart from its
indispensable tribute to the Secretary-General — is to
address a serious warning to Iraq about complying with its
obligations, as well as to dispel any ambiguity about the
duration of the sanctions. This dual objective is achieved in
paragraphs 3, 4 and 5. I shall not dwell on those
paragraphs; their meaning is clear to the reader. Our
objective is, of course, to ensure respect for Council
resolutions, including those relating to sanctions against
Iraq. But it is also to underscore the prerogatives of the
Security Council in a way that excludes any question of
automaticity. Most of the preceding speakers made
reference to this, and it was stressed quite firmly by the
representative of Japan on behalf of the sponsors of the
draft resolution; I thank him for that.
The Council is justified in debating certain measures
because of their gravity. It is the Security Council that must
evaluate the behaviour of a country, if necessary to
determine any possible violations, and to take the
appropriate decisions.

Nothing will be possible without constant vigilance,
without strict respect by each and everyone for the
Memorandum of Understanding and without also giving
extensive and dispassionate thought to the lasting means
to bring back peace and stability to the Gulf region and
to the Middle East as a whole. For the neighbours of Iraq
must not live in insecurity. Kuwait must regain
confidence. The Middle East must regain peace with
justice.
Nothing will be possible without the constant
involvement of the Secretary-General in our work and in
our deliberations.
The President: I thank the representative of France
for his kind words addressed to me.
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in S/1998/175.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1154 (1998).
I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.

15

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
Mr. Richardson (United States of America): Allow
me to begin by welcoming you, Sir, to the presidency of
the Security Council and to thank your predecessor,
Ambassador Dangue Réwaka of Gabon, for his skillful
guidance of the Council in February. The United States
thanks the Secretary-General for his strong, clear speech.
The United States welcomes the Secretary-General’s
efforts to obtain Iraqi agreement to comply with its
obligations. We are impressed that through his dedication
and skill he was able to bring back the Memorandum of
Understanding the Council has just endorsed. The
Memorandum forcefully reiterates that Iraq must cooperate
fully and unconditionally with the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). We are all deeply grateful to the
Secretary-General for his courageous and diligent efforts.
Through his diplomacy, backed by America’s willingness
to use force, he has achieved what could be, if implemented
fully by Iraq, a breakthrough.
I also would like to thank my fellow Council members
for their patience and spirit of cooperation. We should take
some time to congratulate ourselves, because we’ve worked
hard to reach unanimity on a solid text that we all can and
will stand by — and that, if adhered to by Iraq, could lead
to a resolution of this crisis.
The issue here is not the so-called eight presidential
sites. The principle is access. The Secretary-General’s
mission to Baghdad has secured commitments from Iraq
which, on paper, promise that Iraq will provide UNSCOM
full, immediate and unrestricted access to all sites within
Iraq. The Secretary-General’s mission secured an Iraqi
commitment to adhere to the terms of all relevant Security
Council resolutions — not just on disarmament, but also on
prisoners of war (POWs) and Kuwaiti property. And while
we welcome the statements by Iraq, its commitments are
mere words on paper. The proof is in the testing.
We are skeptical after six years of broken promises.
Iraq has yet to live up to its word, or up to the demands
made by the Security Council in its resolution.
Yet, we hope the Memorandum of Understanding,
signed by the Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister and the
Secretary-General, will mark an end to Iraq’s policy of
non-cooperation and confrontation and will lead to Iraq’s
full compliance with all relevant Security Council
resolutions.

16

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
We look forward to receiving the SecretaryGeneral’s proposed procedures for the presidential sites,
and we have full confidence that the guidelines will
conform to all Council resolutions.
We have full faith in the United Nations Special
Commission and its Executive Chairman. We will be
watching UNSCOM’s inspections to be sure that Iraq has
provided full and unrestricted access to UNSCOM —
access that Security Council resolutions demand and
require.
The resolution that this Council has just adopted
unanimously states this plainly yet eloquently. Iraq must
comply with Security Council resolutions or else face the
consequences of its actions. Any, repeat any, attempt by
Iraq to provide less than immediate, unrestricted and
unconditional access to any site will, as this resolution
states, result in the severest consequences for Iraq.
This resolution also provides for a new beginning for
Iraq to cooperate fully with UNSCOM and the IAEA.
The Secretary-General’s initiative offers us all new hope.
But only Iraq has the choice, only Iraq holds the key.
And that key is full and complete cooperation. Unless
Iraq demonstrates that it is ready to rejoin the
international community and abide by the rules of
civilized behaviour, it can expect nothing but certain
punishment and continued isolation. The choice, as I said,
is Iraq’s.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): First of all, allow me to express our deep
satisfaction to today see you, Sir, in this Chamber serving
as the President of the Security Council during the month
when Gambia has taken on the responsibilities of the
presidency. We also are grateful to your predecessor,
from whom you have taken the baton of Africa in the
work of the Security Council. We have all been very
lucky to have been working this month and last under the
presidency of Africa, which has given the world many
wise and thoughtful political leaders.
Russia has consistently been committed to a
comprehensive implementation of the resolutions of the
Security Council to settle the crisis in the Persian Gulf.
We have completely supported the activities undertaken
by the United Nations Special Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency to carry out their
mandates. We have unswervingly striven to bring about
Iraq’s complete fulfilment of its obligations under those
resolutions. That is the only way that sanctions can be

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
lifted. In this regard, to comply strictly with resolution 687
(1991), the first step will be to lift the oil embargo once all
the Iraqi “disarmament dossier” issues have been dealt with
and moved to the long-term-monitoring stage.
Thanks to the successful mission of the SecretaryGeneral to Iraq, there exists a real opportunity to speed up
the process of achieving a comprehensive settlement in the
Persian Gulf. Moscow greatly appreciates the agreement
between the Secretary-General and the Iraqi Administration.
It is a major diplomatic success for the entire international
community, and it testifies to the effectiveness of the
instruments the United Nations has to peacefully resolve
international conflicts. We pay tribute to the diplomatic
skill, wisdom and courage of the Secretary-General in
defending the principles of the United Nations Charter.
Russia has taken concrete steps to support the
Secretary-General’s mission and has done everything
possible to overcome the crisis relating to the activity of the
United Nations Special Commission in Iraq. My country
was guided, moreover, by the main goals: the need for full
elimination of Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction,
maintaining United Nations monitoring in this field and
avoiding the extremely dangerous consequences for the
entire region in the event of an uncontrolled development
of the situation.
The Memorandum of Understanding, signed in
Baghdad on 23 February 1998, meets these goals. The
United Nations Special Commission has been given the
opportunity to continue its work unhindered in Iraq on the
basis of current procedures, in full compliance with the
decisions of the Council, including the need to respect
Iraq’s sovereignty, dignity and legitimate security concerns.
A firm basis has been laid to speed up the implementation
of the recommendations made last November by the special
session of the Special Commission as to the need to make
its work more effective and to enjoy broader international
support. Russia, for its part, has already made proposals to
the Special Commission for further enhancement of its
participation in the Commission’s activities.
We also expect a rapid clarification of the agreed-upon
procedures for examining and inspecting the presidential
sites, so as to promptly get on with full implementation of
the Memorandum of Understanding, under the control of
the Secretary-General. The Memorandum has full legal
force. It meets all the generally accepted norms for the
practice of international law in the area of international
agreements. Already approved by the Security Council on
24 February when the Secretary-General reported to

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
Council members on the results of his mission, this was
addressed by the Council President in a statement on that
very same day.
The resolution adopted today, despite the
complicated process for harmonizing it, reflects many
points fundamental for us and for many other delegations.
This made it possible to ensure a consensus in the
Council.
The main goal of the resolution is not only to again
reaffirm support for the Secretary-General’s mission, but
also to officially approve the Memorandum and to
emphasize the need for its rapid and full implementation.
The resolution contains nothing that would go beyond the
boundaries of the agreements achieved by the SecretaryGeneral in Baghdad. It is important that the resolution
contains a confirmation of Iraq’s obligations and that
there is mention of the commitment of all United Nations
members to the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Iraq, Kuwait and the
neighbouring States.
The resolution contains a political warning to Iraq,
whereby new violations by that country will have
extremely serious consequences. At the same time, there
has been full observance of the legal prerogatives of the
Security Council, in accordance with the United Nations
Charter. The resolution clearly states that it is precisely
the Security Council which will directly ensure its
implementation, including the adoption of appropriate
decisions. Therefore, any hint of automaticity with regard
to the application of force has been excluded; that would
not be acceptable for the majority of the Council’s
members.
A special role in reaching consensus was played by
the clear and unambiguous statements by the sponsors of
the draft resolution during informal consultations about
the absence in the text of such automaticity. If the
Memorandum of Understanding is violated, which we
hope will not happen, then the Security Council would
discuss the situation that would have arisen at that time
and would take the relevant decision. In the statement of
the representative of Japan at today’s official meeting,
this position was clearly confirmed on behalf of the
sponsors. We are grateful for this.
No one can ignore the resolution adopted today and
attempt to act by bypassing the Security Council. At the
same time, the resolution clearly shows that there is a
light at the end of the tunnel by confirming that, with

17

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
regard to the current sanctions regime, the Council will be
guided by the provisions of its resolution 687 (1991), which
include, of course, paragraph 22 on the criteria for lifting
the oil embargo. We hope that this will take place soon.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Russian Federation for his kind words addressed to me.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of the Gambia.
The situation in Iraq and its relations with the United
Nations have been very disturbing for a long time, and
more particularly in the past few weeks. Following the
ceasefire agreements of 1991, Iraq has been in constant
violation of its obligations to the United Nations.
Notwithstanding these violations, the United Nations
has been considerate enough to put in place the oil-for-food
programme, which was recently generously increased as per
Security Council resolution 1153 (1998), a humanitarian
gesture geared towards alleviating some of the hardship
faced by the Iraqi people. This programme is apparently a
successful one.
Reports reaching the Council, however, have revealed
that Iraq has constantly obstructed the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) in the performance of its
duties and denied the Commission access to the eight
presidential sites it unilaterally declared as sensitive sites.
The reports also reveal that Iraq is not just being
obstructive, but also not transparent in its disclosures. It is
the position of my delegation that Iraq must comply with its
obligations or be made to comply.

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
should Iraq, as usual, violate its obligations under the
Memorandum of Understanding and/or other relevant
resolutions.
My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
register our profound appreciation for the job done by the
sponsors of the present resolution on Iraq. The lengthy
consultations that took place recently and their present
outcome clearly manifest the unity of this Council. The
present resolution is a welcome idea. It has very
important provisions which my delegation believes should
be applauded in lending our support to it.
In paragraph 1, the resolution clearly endorses and
approves the noteworthy achievement of the
Secretary-General. This resolution is not meant to address
the question of automaticity.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The Council will now hear statements under rule 37
of its provisional rules of procedure.
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Egypt, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Memorandum of Understanding signed between
the Secretary-General and the Deputy Prime Minister of
Iraq is a very welcome window of opportunity. We once
again congratulate the Secretary-General for his heroic
achievement. This is a clear manifestation that preventive
diplomacy is the best solution to threats to world peace. My
delegation applauds this achievement. It has brought great
relief to the world and will thus remain indelible in the
annals of history of the United Nations.
The present Iraqi issue has revealed how very peaceloving this world is, and thus we must always endeavour to
give the world that which it cherishes: peace for humanity.
We hope that Iraq will share the same sentiments.
While we call on Iraq to comply with its obligations,
it is our belief that this Council should be prepared to act

18

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Elaraby
(Egypt) took the seat reserved for him at the side of
the Council chamber.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Mexico. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Tello (Mexico)(interpretation from Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your country’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. I also wish to
congratulate your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Gabon, who presided with great skill
over the work of the Council in February, a month
characterized by intensive activity.

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
My delegation is participating in this debate today to
reaffirm Mexico’s unswerving commitment to the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter. The history of
the Organization has undoubtedly recorded successes and
failures, stagnation and creative spirit. We are gathered here
today to pay tribute to diplomacy, to bear witness to the
glowing possibilities still offered by the Charter and its
institutions.
Mexico is a country firmly convinced that the peaceful
resolution of disputes must prevail at all times as a means
of choice to reconcile differences and foster understanding.
This is one of the immutable principles governing my
country’s foreign policy, principles that are rooted in our
history and peaceful tradition and are enshrined in our
Constitution.
Mexico wishes to express once again its gratitude for
the steps taken by various countries and organizations to
reach a diplomatic solution to the dispute that arose with
respect to United Nations inspections in Iraq.
My Government has already expressed its full support
for and solidarity with the delicate and crucial mission
undertaken by Mr. Kofi Annan, Secretary-General of our
Organization, to find a political solution that would ensure
full compliance with United Nations resolutions and avoid
the use of force. For that reason, I am most pleased to
extend my sincere congratulations to the Secretary-General.
His mission, of course, had considerable means and
expressions of broad support, but his talent, skill and
perseverance showed the valued of diplomacy and raised
high the name of the United Nations.
The agreement reached, thanks to the SecretaryGeneral’s endeavours with the highest authorities of the
Government of Iraq, contains the commitments necessary
to give full effect to the resolutions of the Security Council.
My Government welcomes this outcome. We trust that the
Government of Iraq will show good faith and will adhere
to the obligations entered into. This undoubtedly constitutes
the best path towards a new approach to international peace
and security: replacing acts of defiance and force with
measures to foster peaceful coexistence and make it
possible, respect for international law and negotiated
solutions to disputes.
The ideals of San Francisco are alive and well. Recent
events have shown that we can and should aspire to
civilized coexistence among the peoples of the earth, a
coexistence in which arguments of reason, equality, justice,
democracy and law prevail. The United Nations continues

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
to be the pre-eminent forum of human society in which to
achieve that objective.
The President: I thank the representative of Mexico
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Pakistan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): Allow me at the outset to
express my pleasure at addressing the Council under your
distinguished presidency, Sir, and our appreciation to your
predecessor for the excellent manner in which he
conducted the affairs of the Council during the previous
month.
My delegation would like to congratulate the
Secretary-General for his sincere and sustained efforts in
finding a peaceful resolution of the crisis in the Gulf. We
welcome the Security Council’s endorsement of the
agreement which he so painstakingly negotiated in
Baghdad. In the end, good sense and wisdom appear to
have prevailed, and we can all rejoice.
Pakistan’s principled position on this issue is well
known. In a letter addressed to the Secretary-General on
21 February 1998, the Prime Minister of Pakistan
reiterated that,
“Pakistan supports the full implementation, in letter
and spirit, of all United Nations resolutions without
exception, whether they pertain to Iraq, Kashmir,
Palestine or any other issue”.
Pakistan upholds the principle of sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all countries. We have constantly
advised against the use of force. Military action against
Iraq would only increase the hardships of the innocent
Iraqi people, who have already suffered gravely over the
last seven years due to the sanctions and deprivations
imposed on them.
Pakistan earnestly hopes that the approval of the
Memorandum of Understanding by the Security Council
will pave the way for the full and scrupulous
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, as well as for the early lifting of sanctions
against Iraq. We urge all parties to faithfully fulfil their
respective obligations under the Memorandum of
Understanding so that that day can dawn soon.

19

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
The President: I thank the representative of Pakistan
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Malaysia. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): I wish to extend my
delegation’s profound appreciation and congratulations to
the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, for
undertaking his bold initiative to visit Baghdad and for
concluding an agreement with the Iraqi Government on 23
February 1998 which has profound implications for
international peace and security. The Secretary-General had
prepared his visit well, with the unanimous support of the
Security Council and with the encouragement and prayers
of the entire international community. Malaysia warmly
welcomes the agreement concluded between the SecretaryGeneral and the Government of Iraq, which has averted
what we believe would have been an unnecessary and
senseless military attack on Iraq that would inevitably have
resulted in the tragic loss of innocent lives and the
destruction of properties.
The Secretary-General, in accomplishing his mission,
has, in the words of my Foreign Minister in his letter to the
Secretary-General late today,
“reaffirmed the authority of the office of the United
Nations Secretary-General as well as restored, at a
very critical time, mutual trust and understanding
between and among Member States as well as respect
for international law and the dignity and sovereignty
of Member States, and not only prevented a senseless
military conflict but also returned the United Nations
to its proper place at the forefront of international
diplomacy.”
Malaysia draws a great sense of relief and gratification
from the fact that in the end, wisdom, common sense and
constructive, creative diplomacy by all concerned — and
particularly by the Secretary-General — have prevailed
over the initial temptation to use force.
Malaysia served in the Council in 1990, when the
invasion of Kuwait took place. Together with other
members of the Security Council, we supported Security
Council resolution 678 (1990) calling for the withdrawal of
all Iraqi forces from Kuwait. Today’s Council meeting
takes place amid developments precipitated by the crisis
over full access by the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) to all suspected weapons-of-mass-destruction

20

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
sites in Iraq and Iraq’s full compliance with all Security
Council resolutions. Malaysia joins the rest of the
international community in calling on Iraq to honour all
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including the
resolution just adopted, unequivocally and without
reservations, while at the same time calling on the
Council to respect the sovereignty, dignity and territorial
integrity of Iraq.
It is Malaysia’s fervent hope that the Memorandum
of Understanding signed by the Secretary-General, Mr.
Kofi Annan, and by the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq,
Mr. Tariq Aziz, and the resolution just adopted will be
upheld by all the parties concerned, thereby resolving
once and for all the dispute between Iraq and the Security
Council over the issue of UNSCOM’s access to these
suspected weapons-of-mass-destruction sites in Iraq.
Malaysia further hopes that following this latest
agreement and the adoption of today’s resolution, there
will no longer be any necessity or excuse for military
action against Iraq and that there will be no further
misunderstanding on this issue, which, should it
unfortunately arise again, must be resolved through
diplomacy rather than the use of force. This, to my
delegation, is the only acceptable and civilized way in
which relations between nations should be conducted,
consistent with the Charter of the United Nations. In our
view, the use of bombs in these circumstances, however
smart these bombs may be, would indeed be a sad failure
of diplomacy and an unwillingness to use it to its utmost
limits.
Malaysia continues to be profoundly concerned at
the desperate plight of the long-suffering people of Iraq,
many of whom are experiencing the debilitating effects of
the seven years of sanctions imposed on them by the
international community. We therefore implore members
of the Council, in the name of humanity, not to mete out
further punishment to the hapless Iraqi people and to
ensure the smooth implementation of Council resolution
986 (1995) as well as resolution 1153 (1998), which was
adopted recently. We hope with that with the full
implementation of this latest agreement, Iraq will be able
to see the longed-for light at the end of the tunnel.
Malaysia warmly welcomes and strongly supports
the recent decision of the Council to double the
oil-for-food programme as a practical arrangement to
avoid further deterioration of the current humanitarian
situation in Iraq. It is Malaysia’s hope that this will bring
an additional measure of relief to alleviate the plight of
the people of Iraq and ensure that they are allowed to

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
benefit from their rich natural resources, as set out in the
provisions of Security Council resolution 986 (1995). It
remains our hope and prayer that with the resolution of the
current differences between the international community
and Iraq, the sanctions on that country will be lifted in the
near future.
The President: I thank the representative of Malaysia
for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Argentina. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): May I congratulate the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Gambia for serving as President of the Council
in this month of March. We would like also to extend our
warmest thanks to Ambassador Dangue Réwaka of Gabon
for having contributed, during his term in the month of
February, to creating an atmosphere conducive to the
Secretary-General’s complex and far-reaching mission in
Baghdad.
In the same context and at the same time, on 17
February last, under circumstances of dramatic uncertainty,
the President of Argentina, Mr. Carlos Menem, addressed
a letter to the Secretary-General in support of a diplomatic
solution to this serious crisis.
Today we can welcome the determination, the calm
and the diplomatic skill shown by the Secretary-General
and those officials who accompanied him on his goodoffices mission to the Government of Iraq. Because of that
success, the indispensable role of the United Nations in the
maintenance of international peace and security has been
enhanced and has gained greater visibility. In addition, the
jurisdiction of the Security Council has been strengthened.
Its responsibilities are clearly set out in the Charter and
may not under any circumstances be evaded.
The Memorandum of Understanding reached by the
Secretary-General in Baghdad addresses the question of
compliance with Security Council resolutions, including
observance of those aspects related to the mandate of the
Special Commission. That agreement should be strictly
interpreted and complied with in good faith and in
conformity with international law. This too is the clear
message that the Government of Argentina, holding the pro
tem presidency of the Southern Cone Common Market, sent
on 26 February last on behalf of that organization.

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
Furthermore, we believe that the statement made by
the Secretary-General at the start of today’s meeting very
accurately and eloquently summarized the thinking of the
Government of Argentina.
Lastly, we express to all members of this Council
our gratitude for the sensitivity shown in the unanimous
adoption of resolution 1153 (1998). We hope that its
prompt implementation will substantially improve the
humanitarian situation of the people of Iraq and contribute
to mobilizing definitively the economy of the region,
which has excellent human potential for progress and
sustained development.
The President: I thank the representative of
Argentina for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
At the outset of my statement, I would like to welcome
you, Sir, Your Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Gambia, and congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. I am also
pleased to extend my sincerest appreciation to the
Permanent Representative of Gabon, His Excellency Mr.
Dangue Réwaka, for his able presidency of the Council
last month.
Firstly, I would on behalf of Egypt like to pay
tribute to the sincere and persistent efforts of the
Secretary-General and congratulate him for the historic
success achieved in accordance with his responsibilities
under the Charter. He managed to defuse the crisis and
sign a Memorandum of Understanding with Iraq that
allows for special arrangements for the inspection of
presidential sites, which, in any country throughout the
world, are considered important symbols of sovereignty.
The intensive negotiations that were held by the
Secretary-General with all the members of the Council,
both permanent and non-permanent, as well as his
constant contacts with the leaders of States that were able
to influence the course of the crisis have undoubtedly
been fruitful and saved the world from sliding into the socalled abyss of the use of force. Certainly, it could have
had devastating effects, not only on the Iraqi people, but
also on the peoples of the region as well as on peace and
stability in the region. It could have even spilt over to the
world as a whole.

21

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
Undoubtedly, in Egypt we think that the success of the
Secretary-General in his historic mission attests to the
central role that the United Nations must perform in order
to maintain international peace and security in all parts of
the world. We think that the success of his mission
demonstrates that it is necessary to depend on the him
when it comes to very sensitive diplomatic missions.
Since the outbreak of the crisis, Egypt has expressed
its rejection of the use of military force as a means to
settling international disputes. In general, the use of force
is not only prohibited internationally under the rules of
international law but also in accordance with the Article 2,
paragraph 4, of the Charter. There are controls in Article 42
on when force can be resorted to, and also in Article 51,
which is related to legitimate self-defence. In all cases,
these controls must be subjected to the discretion of the
Council.
Egypt hastened to intensify its contacts with all the
concerned parties. President Hosni Mubarak, when the
crisis was at its height, sent a number of letters to the Iraqi
President urging him to take part in reaching a solution that
was in conformity with the Security Council resolutions.
The President also made a number of contacts with the
leaders of the Arab States with all influential countries and
with the Secretary-General. He also dispatched Mr. Esmat
Abdul Maguid, the Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States, to Baghdad to exert his utmost influence to
find a peaceful solution to the crisis, which contributed,
along with the Russian Federation and France as well as
other States, to creating a favourable atmosphere for the
successful visit of the Secretary-General to Baghdad.
The United Nations Special Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency for almost seven years
have made tangible progress in the disarmament of
prohibited weapons in Iraq in accordance with paragraphs
8 to 13 of Security Council resolution 687 (1991). This
progress must be taken into consideration when taking stock
of Iraqi compliance as a prerequisite for lifting the
sanctions that have led to the deterioration of the living
conditions of the Iraqi people. In this connection, Egypt
would like to see similar progress made when it comes to
the question of the Kuwaiti prisoners of war, missing
persons, and properties.
In conclusion, the Egyptian delegation places great
importance on recalling paragraph 14 of resolution 687
(1991), related to zones free from weapons of mass
destruction, which has yet to be implemented. Since 1990,
Egypt has requested that this paragraph should include all

22

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
of the countries of the region without any exception.
While we confirm the importance of Iraq complying with
all its commitments in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, it is necessary for the
Council not to ignore seriously considering the
implementation of this important paragraph in order to
achieve national security of States in the region; such
consideration would also help the Security Council to
discharge its responsibilities without any selectivity.
The President: I thank the representative of Egypt
for the kind words he addressed to me.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representatives of Kuwait and
Peru, in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abulhasan
(Kuwait) and Mr. Guillén (Peru) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Peru. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Guillén (Peru) (interpretation from Spanish): I
have the pleasure to extend my Government’s
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency, as well as to your distinguished predecessor.
I would also like to thank you for this opportunity to
speak under rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure
of the Security Council, whereby Member States have an
opportunity to speak on matters before the Council.
Peru has taken the floor on this occasion, first of all,
to welcome the fact that the Security Council authorized
the Secretary-General to carry out his mission to see to it
that the most basic tenets of law prevail, in fulfilment of
the decisions adopted by the United Nations.
Fortunately, the Secretary-General’s mission took
place under circumstances and with a mandate quite
different from those of January 1991. The Memorandum

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
of Understanding of 23 February 1998, which the Security
Council has now endorsed, highlights not only the initiative,
skill and authority of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, but also the importance of his functions. The
Government of Peru vigorously supports the SecretaryGeneral’s action.
This success in reaching an agreement also shows that
the norms of international law should be the pillars of
international peace and security, as the Security Council
itself decided in adopting resolution 687 (1991) of 3 April
1991, which punished the breach of international norms
protecting the integrity of State boundaries, when an
attempt was made, through the invasion of Kuwait, to make
force prevail over law.
We earnestly hope that compliance by the Government
of Iraq with Council resolutions, along with an awareness
of humanitarian issues, will put an end to the suffering of
the Iraqi people.
Finally, and above all, this is an agreement with full
legal validity signed on behalf of the entire United Nations
and bearing on the maintenance of international peace and
security. In other words, this event is also an
acknowledgment of the Organization as a whole.
The President: I thank the representative of Peru for
the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Kuwait. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
agreed with the Government of Iraq by the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kofi Annan. That achievement resolved a
problem that came close to imperiling peace and stability
in our region as well as threatening the people of Iraq and
all the other peoples of the region. Through its Council of
Ministers, Kuwait issued a statement immediately upon
the Secretary-General’s triumphant return, officially
endorsing the Memorandum of Understanding.
Kuwait has always earnestly followed a policy aimed
at protecting our region from crises resulting from a
failure to implement relevant Security Council resolutions.
For that reason, we hope that the Iraqi Government —
having tested the determination of the Security Council,
the probity of the Secretary-General and the unanimous
nature of the message he carried — will implement the
Memorandum of Understanding in full, both in letter and
in spirit, along with the relevant Security Council
resolutions.
We in Kuwait and in all the other countries of the
Gulf Cooperation Council believe that there is an organic
relationship between the success of the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) and peace and security
in our region. That is why all statements issued by
Kuwait or by any other member of the Gulf Cooperation
Council — most recently the statement adopted at the
Gulf Cooperation Council summit conference — have
called upon Iraq to cooperate with the Special
Commission. We have on earlier occasions stated our full
support for the Special Commission and its efforts to
carry out its mandate.

I wish also to pay tribute to the Permanent
Representative of Gabon for the manner in which he
presided over the work of the Council in February.

We fully understand the eagerness of the Security
Council to protect Iraqis as individuals and other
inhabitants of the region from the scourge of weapons of
mass destruction. But we also believe that there are other
scourges sorely afflicting many Kuwaitis whose fate is
unknown — prisoners of war and detainees held in
Iraq — and many nationals of third countries. Here I
thank the representatives of Bahrain and of Slovenia,
along with other representatives, who spoke of the tragedy
of Kuwaiti prisoners of war and detainees. Addressing
this problem is among the basic commitments that Iraq
must meet before there is any question of lifting the
sanctions.

The Security Council has just adopted a resolution that
we in Kuwait view as an outstanding and most important
example of diplomacy supported by force — and by a
firmness that is reflected in this evening’s unanimous vote.
The resolution endorses the Memorandum of Understanding

We in Kuwait pinned high hopes on the SecretaryGeneral’s mission and on today’s meeting of the Security
Council. Kuwaitis are praying and beseeching the Council
to attach the same importance to Kuwaitis and Kuwaiti
prisoners and detainees as it has attached to others in the

Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic):
It gives me great pleasure, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of March. Your presence in the Chair has
enhanced today’s meeting. We are confident that the
diplomatic skills of Ambassador Momodou Sallah and the
entire Gambian delegation will enable the Council to
achieve success in its work.

23

Security Council
Fifty-third year year
region when it sought to save them from the threat of
weapons of mass destruction. We know that neither the
Charter nor international law discriminates among human
beings.
That is why I address the Council not in my official
capacity, but as a Kuwaiti, a Kuwaiti individual who carries
here at the United Nations the responsibility of defending
the destiny of the Kuwaiti detainees and prisoners, who
represent 1 per cent of the total population of Kuwait. I
repeat, 1 per cent of the total population. Even if this
number were much smaller, a human being is

3858th meeting
2 March 1998
a human being, and respect for his dignity must come
before any other consideration.
That is why I come to the Council to present the
tragedy of these innocent people. They expect from the
Council the same enthusiasm that they felt it expressed
when it dealt with the subject of Kuwaiti detainees,
prisoners of war and citizens of third countries.
In conclusion, I would like to say that Kuwait has
blessed the recent Council resolution 1153 (1998), which
permits an increase in oil sales to $5.256 billion, because
Kuwait suffers exactly as the Iraqi people do. That is
why, when a measure is taken to relieve the Iraqi people,
we in Kuwait bless it without any reservations, and we
expect the Council to take similar measures when it
comes to the Kuwaiti prisoners and detainees.
We would like to conclude by thanking God and
thanking you, Mr. President.
The President: I thank the representative of Kuwait
for his kind words addressed to me.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 9.15 p.m.

24
