General Assembly-Fortieth Sesslon

168
XV

ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION AMONG DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
1. Ca/Is upon ali developing countries to implement the recommendations on economic co-operation among developing countries, as contained
in United Nations Conference on Trade and Development resolution 142
(VI);
2. Requests ali donor countries and multilateral organizations to support and strengthen economic co-operation among developing countries, in
particular conceming the projects of special interest to the least developed
countries, in order to ensure that the countries concemed will fully benefit
from the results of such co-operation;
XVI
ROLE OF NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
Recognizing that non-govemmental organizations can contribute positively to the development of the least developed countries as well as provide valuable disaster relief,
1. Ca/Is upon the Govemments of the least developed countries and
donors to encourage active participation of the local population, both
women and men, through non-govemmental entities;
2. Ca/Is upon non-govemmental organizations to comply with the
national policies and legislation of the host countries and, while preserving
their character, to contribute to the development priorities of the least
developed countries, co-operating with appropriate authorities and organizations in order to implement effective development programmes;
3. Invites the non-govemmental organizations ofthe donor countries to
reinforce their role in consciousness-raising in their countries of origin and
in mobilizing increased prívate and public resources for the benefit of the
least developed countries;
XVII
CO-ORDINATION AND MONITORING
1. Reaffirms the importance of co-ordination, follow-up and monitoring at the national, regional and global levels as crucial to the implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Action;
2. Reaffirms a/so the monitoring role ofthe United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development at the global leve! and requests the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
continue and intensify his work, as specified in paragraph 121 of the Substantial New Programme of Action;
3. We/comes the growing attention to co-ordination at the national
leve!;
4. Recognizes that effective co-ordination, monitoring and follow-up at
the national leve! must be a continuous process;
5. Endorses the results conceming the co-ordination of assistance programmes of the Meeting of Govemmental Experts of Donor Countries and
Multilateral and Bilateral Financia! and Technical Assistance Institutions
with Representatives of the Least Developed Countries as part of Preparation for the Mid-term Global Review of the Substantial New Programme
of Action, held at Geneva in May 1985; 117
6. Welcomes the steps taken by the World Bank and the United
Nations Development Programme to improve the consultative groups and
round-table meetings by, ínter afia, enhancing co-operation among multilateral institutions and agencies, as well as efforts made with the help of the
Special Measures Fund of the United Nations Development Programme
and voluntary contributions and specific contributions of donor countries
for the lcast developed countries;
7. Emphasizes the primary role of each !casi developed country in the
co-ordination of aid activities;
8. Further emphasizes the importance of co-ordination in each least
developed country at the sectoral level in order to ensure the greatest possible effectiveness of development activities;
9. Requests the Govemments of the !casi developed countries to continue to strengthen their planning machinery and administrative capacity
so as to improve the planning, negotiation and utilization of externa!
assistance;
10. Requests the least developed countries, with the assistance of the
lcad agencies, to attend to the quality and early availability of preparatory
117 See TD/B/1055 and Corr.l, part two.
l l 8 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-eighth Session.
Supplemenl No. 3 (A/38/3), chap. 11, paras. 61-64.
119 A/40/591.

documents for round-table conferences and meetings of consultative
groups, which are essential for their success;
11. Requests the multilateral agencies to improve further the quality,
coherence and timeliness of the background documentation they present al
round-table conferences and meetings of consultative groups;
12. Requests donor countries and multilateral institutions to pay more
attention to appropriate local representation and sectoral co-ordination;
13. Urges donors in a position to do so to support development plans
or programmes of the least developed countries with multi-ycar, predictable and monitorable commitments and timely disbursements;
14. Ca/Is upon the organizations of the United Nations system to cooperate closely in each lcast developed country under the aegis of the resident co-ordinator, as provided for in paragraph 124 ofthe Substantial New
Programme of Action;
15. Reiterates paragraph 123 of the Substantial New Programme of
Action, in which the Director-General for Development and Intemational
Economic Co-operation is called upon, in close collaboration with the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the executive secretaries of the regional commissions and the lead
agencies for the aid groups, to ensure at the secretariat leve! the full mobilization and co-ordination of ali organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system for the purpose ofimplementation and follow-up of
the Programme;
16. Urges the resident co-ordinators of the United Nations system to
respond constructively to requests by the Govemments of the host
countries to play a broader co-ordinating role in appropriate cases;
17. Requests the intemational community and the multilateral agencies:
(a) To cnsure that review meetings result in facilitating an increased
flow of extemal assistance through, ínter afia, a better understanding anda
candid dialogue between the least dcvcloped countries and their developmen t partners;
(b) To harmonize terms and procedures of donors to the extent possible
in order to achieve a co-ordinated approach conducive to the implementation of the dcvclopment programmes of the least developed countries.

40/206. New intemational human order:
aspects of development

moral

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/225 of 20 December 1982
and 38/170 of 19 December 1983 entitled "New intemational human order: moral aspects of development", as
well as the report of the Economic and Social Council on
its consideration of this question 118 and Council decision
1983/171 of 25 July 1983,
Having considered the report ofthe Secretary-General 119
containing the responses of Govemments conceming the
question,
Taking into account the views expressed on the question
in the Second Committee, 120
l. Requests Member States to submit to the SecretaryGeneral additional comments and suggestions on the question;
2. Decides to consider the question at its forty-second
session on the basis of a report of the Secretary-General
taking into account suggestions of Member States.
119th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/207. Long-term trends in economic development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New Intemational Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
l 20 See Official Records of /he General Assembly, Fortieth Sesswn, Second
Committee. 24th and 30th meeting.s; and ,bid., Second Commi/11'<'. Sessional
Fascic/e, corrigendum.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Duties of States, 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on
development and intemational economic co-operation
and 35/56 of 5 December 1980, the annex to which contains the Intemational Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade,
Recal/ing a/so its resolutions 3508 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, by which it initiated the analytical work relating
to the examination within the United Nations system of
long-term trends in world economic and social development, and 37/249 of 21 December 1982, by which it
decided, inter afia, that the overall socio-economic perspective of the world economy to the year 2000 should be
revised and updated,
Recalling further its resolution 32/197 of 20 December
1977 on the restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the United Nations system, by which it decided,
inter afia, to undertake in-depth intersectoral analyses and
syntheses of development issues and to identify and bring
to the attention of Govemments emerging economic and
social issues of intemational concem,
Affirming the need for an effective and timely response
to unforeseen intemational economic problems,
Taking into account that 1985 marks the fortieth anniversary ofthe founding ofthe United Nations and that the
implementation of Article 55 of the Charter will contribute to the creation of the conditions of sustained growth,
stability and well-being which are necessary for peaceful
and friendly relations among nations,
Mindful that the maintenance ofpeace and security, the
promotion of disarmament, mutual trust and the strengthening of intemational co-operation would contribute to
the improvement of the overall socio-economic perspective of ali countries,
Concerned that low growth rates would have serious
repercussions for the world economy, in particular for the
developing countries,
Noting with grave concern that Africa is the only continent in which standards of living have declined over the
past decade and that, as underscored by ali forecasts, the
real economic growth per capita will remain near zero or
will be negative, on average, until the year 2000 unless
drastic action is taken,
Reaffirming the relevance of long-term perspectives for
providing impetus to policies and decision-making processes in relation to development strategies and economic cooperation on a national, regional and global scale,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the overall socio-economic perspective of the world economy to the year 2000; 121
2. Decides, subject to review of the next report at the
forty-second session ofthe General Assembly, to continue
the submission of reports on the overall socio-economic
perspective ofthe world economy to the year 2000, which
should be prepared so that they contribute to the identification of potential problem arcas and critica! issues in the
world economy;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, when preparing the
report, to give special attention to the impact on economic
and social development of trends and prospective changes
in, inter afia, intemational trade, financial flows and debt
problems, including the net outflow of resources from
developing to developed countries, technological change
and the transfer of technology to developing countries,
capital formation and investment pattems, development
of human resources, the allocation of public resources
between developmental and non-developmental purposes,
12 1 A/40/519

169

environmental issues, economic co-operation and integration among developing countries, the implications of different economic and development policies, special problems faced by the least developed countries and the critica!
economic situation in Africa;
4. A/so requests the Secretary-General, in preparing the
report, to take into account socio-economic analyses that
give special attention to mechanisms and forros of intemational economic co-operation aimed at facilitating structural adjustment within the world economy towards the
new intemational economic order;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to convene,
if necessary, a meeting of a group of experts, acting in their
personal capacity, to elaborate on the elements of the
report specified above, and invites the Committee for
Development Planning to review progress in the preparation of the report;
6. Cal/s upon the relevant organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system, including the
Administrative Committee on Co-ordination Task Force
on Long-term Development Objectives, to contribute, in
their respective arcas of competence, to the preparation of
the report;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second session an itero entitled "Long-term trends in
social and economic development", and requests the Secretary-General to submit to it at that session, through the
Economic and Social Council, the report on the overall
socio-economic perspective of the world economy to the
year 2000, together with the views and recommendations
of the Committee for Development Planning.
119th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/208. Development of the energy resources of
developing countries
The General Assembly,
Recal/ing the Declaration and the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New Intemational Economic
Order contained in its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, contained in its resolution 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974, its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and intemational economic co-operation, and the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade contained in the annex to its resolution 35/56 of 5
December 1980,
Recal/ing a/so its resolutions 37/251 of 21 December
1982, 38/ l 5 l of 19 December 1983 and 39/176 of 17
December 1984 on the development of the energy
resources of developing countries,
Reaffirming the importance of the development of the
energy resources of developing countries and the need for
measures by the intemational community to assist and
support the efforts of the developing countries, in particular the energy-deficient among them, for developing their
energy resources, in order to meet their needs through cooperation, assistance and investment in the field of conventional and of new and renewable sources of energy,
consistent with their national plans and priorities.
l. Reaffirms its resolutions 38/ 151 and 391176 and
calls for the effective implementation of ali their provis10ns:
