S/PV.7062

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7062nd meeting

Monday, 18 November 2013, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(China)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Ms. King
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Maes
Mr. Laassel
Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. M’Beou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (S/2013/651)

13-56810 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1356810*

S/PV.7062

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on
South Sudan (S/2013/651)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Hilde
Johnson, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/651, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Ms. Johnson.
Ms. Johnson: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
Secretary-General’s report on South Sudan (S/2013/651).
The world’s youngest nation is still travelling a bumpy
road but there are also positive indications that the
country can turn the corner. I will talk about three
important trends that have emerged since my last
briefing to the Council in July (see S/PV.6998).
First, as noted in the Secretary-General’s report,
despite enormous challenges and a State struggling to
establish and to extend its authority, progress has been
made in some key areas. There are new opportunities to
strengthen State-building and accountability. The new
Cabinet is in the process of entering into a New Deal
compact with international partners and is showing
genuine commitment to improving relations with the
Sudan.
Secondly, however, the situation in parts of Jonglei
State continues to be worrying despite intermittent
calm during the major part of the rainy season.

2/7

18/11/2013

Thirdly, the behaviour of security forces continues
to be a cause for grave concern whether with regard
to human rights abuses and the incidents of violence
and harassment affecting United Nations personnel,
diplomats and ordinary citizens. Let me start with the
two latter concerns and revert to the opportunities last.
Despite the relative stability in Jonglei in recent
weeks, the vicious cycle of retaliatory violence continues
and poses significant risks to the Government’s efforts
to stabilize Jonglei. The latest deadly attacks occurred
on 20 October in Twic East County and resulted in a
significant loss of life. Those attacks, as well as tensions
between the Lou Nuer and Anyuak in Akobo and Uror
counties and possible retaliations, may lead to further
instability in the State.
The attacks have made it even more urgent to make
concrete progress in the ongoing peace efforts between
the Government and the David Yau Yau armed group,
which should be complemented by intercommunal
reconciliation, to address the underlying causes of
conflict. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) is supporting those efforts. Additionally,
beyond Jonglei, for the first time in more than two
years, there have been reports of suspected attacks and
abductions by the Lord’s Resistance Army in South
Sudan, in Western Equatoria state.
With the dry season fast approaching, the mobility
of both armed groups and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army (SPLA) will increase, creating risks of increased
attacks but also opportunities for response. With that in
mind, UNMISS has developed a series of contingency
plans to address the emerging security threats and
protection of civilians needs, especially in the high-risk
state of Jonglei, the tri-state areas of Lakes, Unity and
Warrap and Upper Nile state. The contingency plans
provide for graduated responses to foster a safe and
secure environment across the affected areas.
Concurrently, UNMISS is utilizing all available
assets and measures in areas with a history of violent
incidents to prevent recurrences. Nevertheless, the
critical mobility gaps that continue to face the Mission
make timely responses to early warning a significant
challenge, even during the dry season.
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2109 (2013),
UNMISS has deployed more forces in high-risk areas.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report, the Mission
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations are
also currently planning to implement the geographical

13-56810

18/11/2013

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

reconfiguration of the Mission’s military to focus
more of its forces in those areas, while at the same
time maintaining the strategic flexibility to respond
to emerging threats elsewhere. The reconfiguration
will be subject to full consultation with the troopcontributing countries and will be implemented in
sequenced phases, subject to periodic review, based on
threat assessments and political milestones.
Meanwhile, regarding the significant mobility
challenges facing the Mission, it is imperative that force
multipliers be identified with requisite capabilities
to augment the Mission’s early warning and rapid
response capability to enable timely access to hotspots.
A reconfiguration that increases the presence in highrisk areas makes such needs even more critical and
urgent.
Allow me to now turn to the performance of South
Sudan’s security forces. South Sudan continues to
face serious challenges in the area of the promotion
and protection of human rights. Key issues include
prolonged and arbitrary detentions, the excessive
use of force and arbitrary killings by ill-disciplined
security forces and agencies, and individual incidents
of interference with the rights to freedom of expression,
association and assembly.
UNMISS continues to monitor and investigate
reports of alleged violations and abuses, and will
increase its public reporting. In addition to the two
public human rights reports already issued on Jonglei
since 2011, the Mission is currently finalizing a
comprehensive report on nine alleged major human
rights-related incidents that occurred in Jonglei between
December 2012 and July 2013. In addition, a report on
arbitrary and prolonged detentions, which we will issue
early next year, is under preparation.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report, in an
encouraging sign, the highest levels of the Government
are speaking out publicly about the need to address
human rights abuses by members of the armed forces.
Partly as a result of the active engagement of UNMISS
and strong political advocacy, the SPLA has ordered
several boards of inquiry into allegations of murder
in Pibor, Bor, Boma and Manyabol in Jonglei. The
responsible commander for the Pibor operations has
been arrested and charged. Out of a total of 115 court
martial cases for contraventions of the SPLA Act,
92 were convicted. Thirty-nine SPLA officers have
been charged with murder or rape. For the first time,
the convictions are announced publicly.

S/PV.7062

To support the Government’s efforts, UNMISS
continues to conduct capacity-building activities in the
area of human rights and protection of civilians. That
includes conducting human rights training for security
forces and other national stakeholders and exploring
new ways to galvanize the security forces to take on
their responsibilities to protect civilians. The Mission
is also providing technical assistance to strengthen the
legal framework for the promotion and protection of
human rights.
In his recent reports to the Council, the SecretaryGeneral has repeatedly raised his concerns about
continued violations of the status-of -forces agreement
in South Sudan, particularly with regard to incidents
involving staff members. The most serious incidents
have been reported to the Council.
The recent security incidents involving United
Nations personnel, especially in Juba, are of deep
concern. The diplomatic community and ordinary South
Sudanese citizens themselves are also affected. The
Council has already received a more detailed briefing
from the Secretariat on that issue on 6 November. In the
past six months, a total of 67 violations of the statusof-forces agreement have been recorded, including
threats, assaults, arrests and the detention of United
Nations personnel, mostly in and around Juba. That is
unacceptable.
During a briefing to the new Cabinet a fortnight
ago, I expressed grave concern over that worrying
trend. I urged the Government to take immediate and
concrete action to bring to an end those incidents and
to hold perpetrators to account. Separately, I also raised
such issues directly with President Kiir, who expressed
dismay at the reports of abuse and harassment of United
Nations and diplomatic personnel.
Thanks to our collective pressure and the
engagement of the Security Council, violations of
the status-of-forces agreement and the security of
United Nations and diplomatic staff were addressed
by the Council of Ministers. The President instructed
the Ministers of Defence, National Security and the
Interior to issue clear orders to the security forces to
respect the violations of the status-of-forces agreement
and the diplomatic immunity of the United Nations
and the international community. Written orders to
the SPLA and the police were issued last week. The
Minister of Defence has reiterated the regulation to all
SPLA members that off-duty personnel are not allowed

13-568103/7

S/PV.7062

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to wear uniforms or carry weapons, which must be
kept in safe storage. The Minister also promised that
ill-disciplined members of the security forces would
be held accountable for violating those directives.
UNMISS will closely monitor the implementation of
those commitments.
Key to a durable solution to such problems, however,
is security sector reform and the transformation of the
armed forces. I am pleased to report that the South
Sudan National Police Service (SSNPS) continues to
make progress on its transformation. With UNMISS
support, the SSNPS has undertaken a comprehensive
institutional needs assessment to identify institutional
gaps and to determine the way forward for police
transformation. The recommendations for major
reform measures have been endorsed by the Council of
Ministers and all governors, and have galvanized donor
support.
The Government, supported by UNMISS, has also
completed the registration and screening of the South
Sudan National Police Service, which verified the
existence of 35,633 police officers after weeding out
more than 16,000 “ghost officers”, with an additional
11,000 whose status needs clarification. That has
resulted in savings of approximately 160 million South
Sudanese pounds, to be re-allocated to the police for
infrastructure and training. The Mission is supporting
the transformation process at all levels.
Following the example of the police, the
National Prison Service is also undertaking a similar
registration and screening of its personnel. Elsewhere,
UNMISS training of senior SPLA officers on command
responsibility and military justice processes has
intensified.
With UNMISS support, the authorities also
continue to address cases of prolonged and arbitrary
detention. Following extensive consultations with
authorities and civil society at the national and state
levels, the draft national security policy is now under
review by the presidency, and it is expected to be
adopted by the National Legislative Assembly before
the end of the year.
Let me now finally move to the political situation
in the country. Despite initial concerns over the risk
of instability following President Kiir’s decision to
dismiss his Cabinet and restructure the Government on
23 July, a smooth transition took place within both the
executive and the legislative branches of Government

4/7

18/11/2013

following these changes. Members of the new Cabinet,
with more technocratic ministers in key positions, have
shown commitment to reform and are determined to
improve performance and service delivery.
Last month, an executive order was issued
pardoning key opposition leaders, including Lam Akol,
chairman of the largest opposition party, the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement for Democratic Change.
Akol has since returned to Juba from his self-imposed
exile and was accorded a State welcome. He is giving
public statements on political issues, including the need
for constitutional review and timely elections. These
trends are promising signs in the light of approaching
key transitional political milestones for South Sudan’s
progress. These include the constitutional review
process and national elections.
A key determinant for developments on this front
will nevertheless be the management of divisions
within the ruling party, the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement (SPLM). The way the preparatory process for
the national convention of the SPLM is being handled
will give an indication of this. Consultations within the
SPLM on the convening of the party organs preparing
for the Convention are still ongoing. The internal party
dynamics will need to be monitored very carefully.
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2109
(2013), the United Nations undertook an electoral
needs assessment in September. Public debate and
the announcement on 15 November by the President
indicate that South Sudan is committed to holding the
national elections in 2015, as constitutionally mandated.
The needs assessment mission has formulated
recommendations on the scope and nature of United
Nations support to facilitate electoral preparations.
Donor programmes are also being launched to provide
support for elections.
Time is running short, however, with regard to
election funding and the necessary preparations. The
Government also has to decide whether elections can
take place without a census, as the census preparations
have already fallen behind schedule. That would require
an amendment to the Transitional Constitution.
As Council members will recall, South Sudan
has volunteered to be a pilot country for the so-called
New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States. At the
economic partners forum held in Washington, D.C.,
in April, the Government committed to entering into a
compact of mutual accountability with its international

13-56810

18/11/2013

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

partners, focusing on a set of key State-building and
peacebuilding priorities. The United Nations, together
with key donors, is part of the steering committee that
has guided the New Deal process in South Sudan.
Consultations have been held in all 10 states to
enable members of civil society, the media, state
legislatures and Government to voice their views.
UNMISS has supported that process. The compact is
now well on track to lead to an agreement between
international partners and South Sudan on 3 December,
although agreement on an International Monetary Fund
staff-monitored programme is expected to precede the
compact, and time is very tight to agree on that before
the end of November.
To assist that process and the core priorities, and
pursuant to resolution 2109 (2013), UNMISS and the
United Nations country team are conducting an analysis
of their respective comparative advantages to further
synergies, complementarity and collaboration. While
significant challenges continue to confront the world’s
newest country and impede progress on several fronts,
as noted in the Secretary-General’s report, recent
developments still give reason for cautious optimism.
South Sudan is at a crossroads. As an international
community, we cannot afford to see the newest country
in the world fail. UNMISS and all of us have only one
option, and that is to try to help South Sudan take the
right course, consolidating peace and building the
foundation for democracy and respect for fundamental
human rights.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Johnson for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Sudan.
Mr. Deng (South Sudan): It is an honour and a
privilege to once again address the Security Council on
the situation in my country. As this is the first time that
my delegation is addressing the Security Council during
your presidency, Sir, let me begin by congratulating you
on your already successful presidency and extending
my best wishes to you and your delegation as you
continue to carry the mantle of leadership this month.
The Republic of South Sudan welcomes this
opportunity to contribute to the Security Council’s
discussion of the situation in our country. We would
like to reiterate once again our appreciation to the
members of the Council for their continued interest in

S/PV.7062

the process of peace consolidation and State-building
in South Sudan. We thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2013/651) and welcome
the briefing provided by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Hilde Johnson, whose commitment
and dedication to the cause of peace, security, stability
and good governance in our country go deep and are
much appreciated.
The Republic of South Sudan recognizes that it
faces continuing challenges in building its institutions,
consolidating progress towards democracy and
protecting civilians, among many other pressing issues.
Our vision is nonetheless clear; we seek a stable,
peaceful, economically vibrant and democratic South
Sudan that is committed to the promotion of human
rights and humanitarian principles. No one should
doubt our ambitions in that regard, although we fully
accept that we lack the capabilities we need to achieve
our vision as quickly as we would all like.
Both our aspirations and our limitations are
embedded in our long struggle, which lasted for
over half a century and beyond. Ours was a struggle
for human dignity, justice and equality for all — the
normative foundations of universal human rights. By
the same token, that war devastated our country and
shattered our society. It has left a legacy of violence,
fuelled by the spread of small arms and, paradoxically,
the violation of rights. We are not in denial about
those ills. On the contrary, we acknowledge them as
challenges we are committed to addressing. However,
we also recognize that they are challenges for which
our capacity for effective response is unfortunately
limited, for reasons that are well known. That is despite
the large size of our Government, which was brought
about by the quest for peace and inclusiveness.
We have now recognized that this is untenable. As
the Secretary-General notes in his report, President
Salva Kiir downsized and restructured the Government
in July in order to ensure better delivery of services
to our citizens. He reduced the national ministries by
one-third and appointed a new Cabinet after extensive
consultation with other political parties. This leaner
and stronger Government will focus on tangible results
in the areas of social services, agriculture, transport,
mineral resources, energy and security.
On the development front, the Government produced
a South Sudan development plan in 2011. Later, we
realized that the New Deal compact would be a way for
us to articulate and implement our development plan.

13-568105/7

S/PV.7062

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We are about to conclude the widespread consultations
we have been holding across the country, working
closely with civil society, state Governments and
development partners. We look forward to signing the
New Deal compact with our partners in December. In
that connection, I would like to thank all of our partners
for their support of the endeavour.
The people of South Sudan are firmly committed
to democracy as one of the lofty objectives of our long
struggle. That is why we agree with the SecretaryGeneral about the importance of holding elections in
2015 and strengthening the processes leading up to
those elections. The importance that the Government
and people of South Sudan attach to democracy and
elections is evident in the fact that the political climate
in the country is already vibrant in anticipation of the
2015 elections.
The situation in Jonglei is obviously of great concern
to us, as it is, understandably, to members of the Council.
The background to the present situation is complex.
We are dealing with cycles of intercommunal violence
that go back many years — well before the advent of
the United Nations peace consolidation mission. The
situation is compounded by an armed insurgency, in
an environment that has almost no infrastructure and
is very difficult to control. It is a situation that clearly
presents a challenge to our Government’s ability to
take the primary responsibility for the protection of its
citizens, a responsibility we take seriously.
The repeated cycles of violence between
communities, including senseless killings, the
kidnapping of women and children, the destruction
of property and cattle rustling, clearly need to be
stopped. We continue negotiations with David Yau Yau,
the leader of the insurgency, so that intercommunal
violence can be brought to an end as soon as possible.
The Government, in collaboration with the Church, has
been in dialogue with Yau Yau and his followers.
As all Council members know, President Kiir has
repeatedly extended offers of amnesty to various militia
groups operating in South Sudan. Many groups have
responded positively to the offers. This year, the South
Sudan Liberation Army and other groups operating in
Upper Nile state have accepted the President’s offer.
As the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
has noted, President Salva Kiir has pardoned opposition
leaders, some of whom have returned to Juba from exile.

6/7

18/11/2013

We should not see the situation in Jonglei as one
of villains and victims. The legacy of over 50 years
of war has been a vicious cycle of violence, whether
it is between Anuak and Nuer, or Murle and Dinka.
There are victims and perpetrators on all sides and
in all communities. We must stop those cycles. Our
Government recognizes that to do that and to ensure
the safety of all of our civilians we must assist them
to address the root causes of conflict and discontent.
That is precisely why the President launched a national
reconciliation process.
The long-term work needed to address
intercommunal violence will involve the provision of
services such as schools and health centres, all-weather
roads and stronger Government. Progress in those
areas has been hampered by the presence of the armed
insurgency in Jonglei, which we believe has been
fuelled — at least in part — by external forces and by
the difficult terrain and climatic conditions.
It is encouraging to see civilians return to Pibor
town. We are working with the humanitarian community
to support those returns and welcome cooperation with
concerned agencies in that endeavour. We note that the
challenges of humanitarian access appear to have been
largely addressed, an objective to which we are deeply
committed.
Our Government remains committed to a policy of
zero tolerance for crimes against civilians, especially
by the army, and those who commit such abuses will be
held fully accountable. The Government has arrested
a general who was in charge of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army in Pibor during the 2012 civilian
disarmament exercise. The Government has courtmartialed those soldiers who committed abuses and
has opened new investigations into such abuse. The
Government is planning to publish the list of the cases
that are presently under investigation or prosecution.
It is my belief that we have responded as fast as was
possible in difficult circumstances to the need for
justice and accountability
We deeply regret any violations against the
United Nations status-of-forces agreement and other
international personnel. The Government is seriously
committed to ending those violations. Orders have
indeed been given to that end and to hold those
responsible accountable. Longer term measures will,
however, require increased sensitization and training of

13-56810

18/11/2013

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

security forces, including security sector reform, which
has begun.
We also recognize the role that the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) is playing, not
least in Jonglei, where its increased presence and
enhanced patrolling are desperately needed. On that
basis, we fully accept the requirement that UNMISS
is to have unhindered access across the territory in
order to undertake its important work and support
my Government in the consolidation of peace as a
prerequisite to sustainable development.
With regard to the fulfillment of our obligations
under the status of forces agreement, we deeply regret
both the character and the number of incidents that
have occurred. We would, however, like to reiterate that
those incidents are by no means a reflection of either
our policies or our aspirations. Our recent actions in
Jonglei speak to that. In the interest of constructive
dialogue towards greater mutual understanding
between UNMISS and our Government’s authorities,
I believe there is a need for greater communication
between UNMISS and the relevant national authorities.
During my last visit to Juba, I heard complaints about
the conduct of some UNMISS and other international
personnel associated with the status-of-forces
agreement. I was briefed extensively by the national
aliens committee on those complaints. The committee
consists of high-level Government officials from
the Ministries for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation, National Security, Defence and Veterans
Affairs and the Inspector General of Police.
I briefed the Special Representative about that and
recommended to her and the chair of the committee that
they meet, to enable our Government, together with
UNMISS, to seek ways of reducing misunderstandings
and managing the response to the incidents more
effectively. Some of the incidents highlighted as
violations may have simply resulted from a lack of
communication and coordination on both sides, but that
is not withstanding the unacceptable occurrences for
which we are responsible and continue to reiterate our
deep regret.
We fully realize that UNMISS presents the goodwill
and the strong desire of the international community,
and the United Nations in particular, to support South

S/PV.7062

Sudan in a wide range of areas. South Sudan has
nothing to gain, but much to lose, in jeopardizing that
support. However, there can be no doubt that mutual
understanding and close cooperation are necessary,
including the full implementation of Security Council
resolutions relating to other challenges in our region,
especially those concerning our relations with the
Sudan.
We are of course encouraged by the renewed spirit
of cooperation with the Republic of the Sudan. South
Sudan was pleased to welcome President Al-Bashir
to Juba, in late October, for the third presidential
summit to be held this year between the two leaders.
I should mention that our Government continues to
meet its financial obligations to transfer the fees for oil
processing and the funds for the transitional financial
arrangement, as stipulated in the 27 September 2012
cooperation agreements, a contribution worth several
hundred million dollars this year alone.
In conclusion, we echo the Secretary-General’s
cautious optimism about the months ahead. That there
is still much work to be done, we recognize. That we
must improve the performance of our security services,
we acknowledge. That it will take some time before we
solve some of the problems mentioned heretofore, is
widely understood. All that having been said, our will
to remove the obstacles we face and become a peaceful
member of the community of nations is undiminished.
But we need the understanding and the support of
the international community for us to achieve that
objective.
Finally, on behalf of the Government and the
people of the Republic of South Sudan, I would like
to express our deep appreciation to Ms. Hilde Johnson,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and to the
entire UNMISS team, for their support and their continued
engagement in promoting international cooperation with
our Government. We would like also to express our deepest
gratitude to all the troop-contributing countries for their
participation in the Mission.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

13-568107/7
