UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS
FOURTH YEAR
No. 3

PROCES·VERBAUX OFFICIELS
QUATRIEME ANNEE

No 3

THREE HUNDRED AND NINETY.
NINTH MEETING

TROIS.CENT-QUATRE-VINGT.DIX.
NEUVIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, Nw York,

Tenue
Lake S1tCCess, New-York,
le jeudi 13 janvier 1949, 15 hcures.

on Thursday, 13 January 1949, at 3 p.m.

President: General McNAUGfITON (Canada).

a

Presidt1~t: Le general

a

McNAUGI-ITON (Canada).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Repu·bli-c, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom, United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
France, Norvege, Reptlbliglle socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume~Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amcrique.

1. Provisional agenda (S/Agenda 399)

1. Ordre du jour provisoire
(S/Agenda 399)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Acloption de ]'ordre du jour.

2. The India-Pakistan question:
Letter dated 10 January 1949 from the Chairman and Rapporteur of the Unitedi Nations
Commission for India and Pakistan addressed
to th~ President of the Sec:urity Council transmitting the Second Interim Report of the
Commission (5/1196).

2. La question lnde-Pakistan:
Lettre, en date dn 10 janvier 1949, adressee
all President dl1 Conseil de seclIrite par le
President et le Rnpporteur de la Commission
des Nations Unies POllt" t'Inde et le Pakistan
.et transmettant le deuxieme rapport provisoire de la Commission (5/1196).

2. Adoption of the agenda

2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour

The agenda was adopted,

L'ordre aft jour csl adopte.

3. The India·Pakistan question

3. La qu~8tion Inde.Pakistan

On tAl! invitation of the President, Sir Benegal
RamG Rau~ repreJrmtative of India, Mr. Shafji,
upreJentative of Pakiltan, and the Chairman
and number.; of the United Nations Commirsion
for India 'alld PakiJtantook their places at the
Council tab/e.
'

S1ir l'invitatio'L dl~ President, Sir Benegal
Raffia Ra-u, reprl!stmta11,t de l'Inde; M. Shaffi,
reprhentant djt Pakista,~,1 et le Prcside1tt et le'S
membres de la Commission des Nations rhties
pour l'J,ld.. 'et le Pakistan pre-nnent place d /a
table all Conseil.

The PRESIDENT: This meeting of the Security

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de i'mlglads): Le
Canseil de secllrite a ete convoqt1(~ en cette
seance, qui doh etre consacree a la qtlestion de
]'Inde et du Pakistan, pour que le President de
la Commission des Nations Unies pour l'Inde et
le Pakistan nous presente le deuxiel11e rapport
interimaire de cette Commission, Cc rapport fait
l'objet du document 5/1196. en date elll 10 janvler, qui a ete distribue aux membrcs elu ConseiI.
Je demande maintenant au Pnbidcntc1e JaCom-

COl1ncij on the India-Pakistan question has been

called in order to give the Olairman of the
United Nations Commission for India and Pakis_
tan an opportunity to 'Present the seeond interim
report of that Commission. This report is con_
tained in docnment S/1196, dated 10 January,
and has been circulated to members of the
Council. I call upon the Chairman of the Com~
mission to present the report, ,but before he

z
speaks I would, uy that the speeches of me~bers
of the Council will be interp,ctccl cOllsecutlvely
and all other sfeeches slmul:aneollsly.

nission de presenter son rapport, mais, avant de
lui aonner la parole, je voudrais souligner que
lcsdiscot.;rs des membres duCoDseil donneront
lieu interpretation consecutive, alors que, pour
les ~lUtres discours, la methode d'interpret<ltion
sirnultanee seta employee.

Mr. KORllEL (Chairman of the United Natior,s
Commission ior India and Pakistan) : May I be
allowed lo say on behalf of t:te Commission that
it feels highly r.onollred to appear today before
the Security COllncil to p"csent its second interim
repor,t. The first interin rqort [5/1100] was
pn:sented to the Council on 25 November 1948
and covered the period of the Commissior.'s
activities in the oub-conti:1ent, The second interim
report covers the Commission's work in Geneva,
in Paris, and at L.tke Success to the present date.

M. KORBEL (Presideat de la Comn:ission des
Nations :J"nics pour l'Inde et le Pakistan) (trIYduit de l'anglais); Au nom des membres- de la
Commission, je voudrais remel'cier le CUD:;eil de
securite de l'honneur qu'il nous a fait en nons
appelant a lui presenter aujourd'hui not~e
dell}::i~me rapport inr-erimaire. Le premier ra?port mterimaire [S/11 00 ] a ete soulllis au
Conseil de 25 noven~bre 1948; il pormit sur les
truyaux effecttte's par la Commission ~endant
qll'elle sejournait clans le Sot1s~continent indien.
Le deuxieme rapport ir.terirnaire ,pQ.rte :sur le
travail accompli par la Commission jusqu'a cc
jour, Geneve,
P2.ris et Lake Sttccess.
Comme 1es membres du Conseil de securite se
le rappcllent, le 13 aout dernier, alors ql1'e1le
sejoumait a Karachi, la Commission a adopte unc
resolution qui comprenait trois parties et qui
figlJre dans le premier rapport interimaire de la
Commission [Sll1G'?]. La premiere partle demandait aux GOllvernemen!s de l'lndc et du
Pakistan de mettre fill aux combats; la deuxiemc
exposai: certains princiJles en vue d'une treve;
dans la troisicme, la Commission dedarait en
termes generaux qu'elle Hait convaincue que le
statut :utur de l'E:at de Jamnm et Cachemire
devait etre decide par la libre vo:onte de la
population de cet Etat.

a

a

Members of the Secu,ity Council will remember that on 13 Allgust last yeil-r, when in Karachi,
the Commissior. passed a resolution consisting of
three parts, w:,ich appears in its first interim
report IS/110D). In part one it asked the Governments of India·<.ndJ Pakistan :0 stop 1ighti~g;
in part two it proposed certain principles. for a
truce; an-d in ~art three it expressed in general
terms its convi::tion that the future statU-5 of the
State of Jammu and Kashrrir should be decided
by the free will of the people of that Sta,te.

The Government of India signified its aeceptance of the Commiss:on's resolution, and the
Gove:nment of P.alcistan attached to it:; a'Ccepl~
anee certain conditior.s regarding mainly the
question of conditions under which the plebiscite
shOUld be held in the State of Jarumu and
Kasl1mir.

On the basis of 1his, the Commission, whe:l in
Paris, sugges:ed that :wo representatives of the
Governments of India and Pakistan should take
part in conversations regarding the conditions
and, the basic principles wl:ich should govern the
holding of the plebiscite, Both Governments
responded to this suggestion affirmatively. Thua)
the Commission held several informal conversa~
tions with the representatives a! lndia add Pakis_
tan, these <onversations being held partly by the
Commission as a body, arid partly by iridividual
members of lhe Commission.
These conversations led the COnunission to
formulate its .final proposals, which were com.
municated to both Governml:'.nh on 11 December.
In the Commission's comn:unication it was stated
that the Commission hope:! that those proposa1s
woul-d ·be accepb~{.I hy boti-. Governments in their
entirety.

The main points of those proposals were: that
the accession of the State of ]amrnu and! Kashmir
would be decided by way of a free and impartial
plebisl':ite; tltat tht: Secrctary-Gc:1.cral of thf.>
United Nations would. nominate, in agreement
witb the Commission, a plebiscite administrator
who would be i'. pe:-son of high international
standing aud who would d.;rive from the Government of Jamml1 and Kashmir the powers which
he considered necessa:-y to organize and conduct
a free an-d impartial plebiseite. The Commission

a

a

Le Gouvernemcn: de nnde a fait savoir qu'il
acceptait cette resolution de la Commission;
qllant au Gouvernement flu Paki.~tan, il .a subordonne son accepta:ion
certaines reserves qui
COncernent surtout la question des conditions de
l'of/z-anisation du plebiscite dans I'Etat de Jamrnu

a

et Cac~emire.

Ceci etar.t, la Commi5sion, qui se trouvait aIor~

a Paris, a propose que deux representants des

Gouvernements de l'Inde et du Pakistan pren·
nent part aux cunversations wr l'organisation du
plebiscite et les principes gcneraux a appliquer
en la matiere. Les deux G01.lvernements ont
reponcu affirrnativtment
cette proposition. La
Commissiun eut ensuite avec les representants dt
l'Jnde et du Pakistan plusieur5 entrctiens offi·
deux)
certains desque1s'la -Commission a pris
part en corps congtitue, alars qu'a d'autce~
certaillS :;eulement de ses membres ont participe.

a

a

Ces conversations ont amene la Commission .a
formu[er ,ses propositions finales, qui ont ete
cotnmuniquees aux deux Gouverm;ments le 11
decembre, Dans S<l <communication, la Comrni~·
sian dectarait qu'elle esperait que Ses proposi~
tions seraient integraleme:J.t acceptl~es par les
deux Gouvernements.
Les points principaux de ces propOSitIOns
etaiem les suivants: la question de :'accession de
l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire serait reglee par
till plebi~cite libre et impartial: d'acconj avec Ja
Commission, le Secretaire general de l'Organisafon des Nations Unies designerait Un adrr:inis.
trateur du pleb1sdte t]ui serait une personnalite
intl"rr.at'ionalement reconnue et a qui le Gouver.
nement de Jammn et Cachemire c1eleguerait Ies
Fouvoirs que \'administratellr estimerait lui etre
necessaires pour ,organiser et diriger un plebiscite

3
libre et impartial. La Commission proposalt,
d'une part, le retablissement et la garantie de
tous les droits de I'homme et de tous les droits
politiques; elle suggerait, d'autre part, que des
commissions, dont les membres seraient designes
par les Gouvernements de l'lnde et du Pakistan
respectivement, s'occnpent du retour des rMugies; que la question de savoir ce qu'il adviendrait des forces armees qui se trouvent actuellement dans I'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire soit
resolue par l'administrateur du plebiscite et la
Commission, de concert avec les deux Gouvernements et avec les autorites competentes; et, enfin,
que l'adl11inistrateur du ple'biseite rende compte
des l'esultats du plebiscite it. la Commission et au
Gouvernement de Jammu et Cachemire, la Commission devant faire connaitre au Conseil de
securite si le plebiscite avait reellement ete libre
et impartial.
La Commission a soumis ces propositions aux
The Commission put these proposals before the
two Governments and decided to send one of its deux Gouvemements et a decide d'envoyer dans
members to the su-b-continent so that he might le Sotts-continent indien un de ses membres, qui
place his services at the disposal of both Govern- se mettrait a la disposition des deux GOllvernements, if any clarification or interpretation of the ments pour clarifier ou interpreter les proposiCommission's proposals were needed.
tions de la Commission, s'il y avait lieu.
M. Lozano Agudelo, Ministre ptenipotentiaire,
The representative of Colombia, Minister
Lozano Agudelo, accompanied by his alternate, representant de -la Colombie, accompagne de
Mr. Samper Gomez, and the personal representa~ M. Samper Gomez, son suppJeant, et du repretive of the Secretary~General, paid a short visit sentant personnel du Secretaire general, s'est
to both capitals and held several conversations rendu, pour une courte visite, clans les deux c:ap.j,with officials of the Governments of Pakistan and tales et a eu plusieurs conversations avec des
Indlia. In view of the clarifications which Min- personnalite.s des Gouvemements du Pakistan et
ister Lozano offered to :both Governments, I am de l'Inde. Je suis tfllS heureux d'annoncer que,
highly privileged to announce that both Govern~ apres les eclaircissements que M. Lozano a
ments have accepted the Commission's proposals donnes aux deux Gouvernements, ceux~ci ont
and, on the basis of these, have declared the accepte les ,propositions de la Commission, et,
cessation of hostilities in ·the territory of the State sur la Ibase de ceUes-ci, ont proclame la cessation
of Jammu and Kashmij' as from 1 January 1949. des hostilites sur le territoire de l'Etat de Jammu
et Cachemire a la date dlt 1er janvier 1949.
The Commission reconvened on 5 January at
La Commission s'est reunie de nouveau le
Lake Success, where the report of Mimster 5 janvier
Lake Success. Elle a examine et
Lozano Agudelo was considered and approved, approuve le rapport de M. Lozano Agudelo, a
where the second interim report to the Security prepare et a approuve le deuxieme rapport inteCouncil :vas elaborated and approved, and where rimaire au Conseil de securitc et a adopte une
a ;resolutlOl) was acJoptedI embodying the proposals resolution contenant les propositions acceptees
accepted by 'both Governments. The Commission par les deux Gouvernements. Elle a decide enthen resolved to retltm to the sub..continent in suite de retourner tres prochainement dans le
the immediate future.
sous-continent indien.
If the Commission has succeeded in ·the first
Si la Commission a pu terminer heureusement
stage of its work, it is onl), thanks to the Govern- la premiere phase de ses travaux, eUe le doit
ments of India and Pakistan. The Commission entierement aux Gouvernements de l'Inde et du
has been working on these proposals in Paris in Pakiston. A Paris, en preparant ses propositious.,
dose contact with the representatives of both elle a ete en wntact constant avec lcs represenGovernments, who have offered the Commission tonts de ces deux Gouvernements qui lui ont
'all pos~ible help and assi,stance; and thus they offert toute l'aide et toute l'assistance possibles.
have gwen proof of then' desire to solve the EIIe a pu ainsi se convaincre que les deux pay!
problem of Kashmir in a pe2l:eful way.
etaient desireux de resoudre pacifiquement le
probh~me du Cachemire.
The Commission will return in a. few 'days to
La Commission va retourner, clans quelques
·the sub-continent in order to work in close co~ jours, dans le sous-continent indien, afin de traoperation with the two Governments on the vaiJIer, en etroit contact avec les deux Gouverneimplementation of part I and part II of its reso- ments, iJ. la mise en <:cuvre de la premiere et de
lution of 13 August, and, at a later stage, it will la. del1xieme p~rtie de la resolution du 13 <lOUt.
elaborate the details of the Commission's pro- Plus tard, elle mettra au point les details de se!
posals. The Commission sineerdy believes that propositions. La Commission espere tres sincereon returning to Lake Success it will be able to ment <jue, a SOn retour a Lake Sl1ccess, eUe
report to the Security Council that it has carried pourr<i rendrc compte au Conseil de securite du
to a happy conclusion the honourable mission succes de la mission qu'il lui a fait l'honneuf de
which has been bestowed upon it.
iui confier.
further proposecJ, that all human and political
tights should Jbe rc-established and guaranteed;
that the return of refugees should be organized
'by two commissions to be nominated by the GOYerrunents of India ancl Pakistan respectively; that
the question of the final disposal of the armed
forces which are in the State of Jammu and
Kashmir should be solved-by the pl~iscite administrator and the Commission in consultation with
both Governments and the eompetent authorities;
finally, that the plebiscite administrator should
report the result of the plebiscite to the Commission and to the Government of Jammu and Kashmir, and that the Commission should infoNn' the
Security COllncil whether the plebiscite had been
free and impartial,

a

The PREsm£NT: The Security COuncil has just
statement of the Chair.'llaI1 of the

~heard, the

Le PRESIDENT (tradu-il de l'allgfCllis): Le
Conseil de securite vient d'entendre la declara~

4
United Nations Commission for India and Pakis~
tan. As President of the Council, I ~hould like
to take this 0p;Jortun:ly to express on behalf of
the Council onr sin.:ere satisfaction with the
report whid:: W~ hz..ve now 1'eceived. All members
of this Council, and, indeed, all Members of the
United N~ti()ns, were I:eartened to learn from
the jOiilt commuwiqne issued by the Governments
of India and Pakistan on 1 January that they
had accepterl the proposals which had been
advanced to th<m1 by our Commi3sicn, and that
arrangements for a cease~fire had been made to
come into effect at one minute before midnight
on 1 }aou<lry. T~is action on the part of Inda
and of Pakistan represents a most important 3:1d
encouraging event in the history of the United'
Nations.

tiOrl du President de. la Commission des Nations
Unics pour l'I:1de et le Pakistan En tant que
President du Conseil,je voudrais saisir cettc
occasion pour expri1l1er au nom du Conseil la
grande satisfaction que nou; cuuse le rapport que
nous venons de reeevoir, Tous les rnembres du
Cot1seil et, en fait, tOllS les Membres de l'Organisation ues Nations rnics se sont rejoeis
d'apprendre, par le communique cornmt:.n pub~ie
le ler janvier par les Gouvernements de I'lnde
et du Pakistar:, que <.:es dernien; avaicnt a::cepte
les propositions CJui leur avaient ete faites par la
Commission et que le ne;:essaire avait ete fait
pour mettre fin aux hostilitl~s un: minute ayant
minuit. Cette decision de ~a part de l'Inde et du
Pakistan constitue tlTI evenement tres important
et tres encouragt:ant dans l'histoire de l'Ol-ganisation des Naticns Unies_

The situation in Kashmir, which :laS oeen bcfOl-e this Ct:mndl for over .a year and which has
,been a source of grave anxiety, now seems to be
on the way towards an acceptable solution. The
ending of this controversy will :have a profoL:.nd
result, not only for the good relations between
India and Pakistan, but its effect will extend to
peoples far beyond those territories, who will
be inspired by the goood example which has been
set and encouraged by the fact that this very diffi~
cult and grave controversy has yielded to patience
and (ll'rsi~tp.nt effo:t by. the parties through the
med.iuffi of an agency created by the United'
Natwns.
In expressing, tterefore, our appreciation and.
gratification to the two Governments whose
earnest effats for an agree:nent ha\'e now
reached the satisfactory stage which has been
repotted to :IS tnday, I should a:so like to express
the apQreciation of the Council to the Commission
for India and Pakistall, whose members wc are
privileged to have at our table today, They are
discharging with every credit the exacting task
with which they have been entrusLeu. 1 belicvc
that the members of this Council would like to
take advantage of this opportunity to hear from
the l'epr1'.se:ltatives at India and Pakistan.

L'afhire du Cache11lirflo, dont. le Conseil s'occupe depllls plus d'un an et qui a donO{~ lieu
de vives inquietudes, sem)le maintenant s'orienter vers unc mlution acceptable pOllf tOllS, La fin
ae cette cont~overse aUralln l'e;ultat important,
et non pas settlement sur les bonnes relations
~ntre l'Iude et le Pakistan. Ses effets se feront
sentir bien an dela de ces pays: d'<:,.utres nat!ons
s'inspireront de cet excellent exemple ct seront
encouragees par le fait que cette controverse tre!':
diffieile et tres grave a ete resolue, par l'intermediaire d'uno:"ganism.e cn~e par les Nations Dnies,
grace il la patienct: I:t all;,\: enor:s pcrsistants des
deux parties.

Sir Benegal Rama RAU (India); May I first,
on behalf of my Government, express aplJT~ia­
tion of the very generous references mad\"; to tne
efforts of my Go\'ernme:lt to reach a sat:5£actory
compromis~ with regard to this very ddicult
problerr.. I shou:d also like to associate myself
with the tribute paid by the President to the mem~
bers of the Commission for the S11ccess they bave
had in the firs: and most difficult step toward·s the
establishment of peace between Jnd,ia and Pakistan. Everyone knows of the formidable difficulties with which tlley were faced, and :his great
acltieve:nent h;<s :"evived the faith of many -people
in the utility and effectiveness of the Security
Council and of the United Na.tions generally.

Sir Benegal Rama RAu (Inde) (traduit de
l'(mg!ais): Je voudrais tont d'aJbon1. exprimer la
grati:ude de mon Gouverneme:1t pour les termes
eJogiellx dalls lesquels ont ete rappeJes les efforts
a<':coll1plis par mon pays en Vl'le d'nttf'inclre Hne
solution .satjsfajs~nte d'tll1 Jrohleme t,es difficile.
J e voudrais aussi m'associel' a l'holTIl11age rer.du
par It Pre5ident <lLlX rnembns de la Commission
pour les heureux resultats qu'Ls ont obtenus clans
cette premiere etape - la pluo dimcile - en vue
de l'etablbsement de la paix entre l'Inde et le
Pakistan. ChaCUll sait les graves difficu[tes qn'ils
ont reeonhees. Lellr succes edatant fait renaitre
chez beaucoup la fui clans l'Jtitite e.t I'efficacite
clu Conseil de securite et, :i'llne Ihaniere ge~
ne-rale, de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.

India has also demonstrated its faith in the
United Nations by going very far to achieve this
result. I am sure that this effort to reach agreement by peacefu: methods will be an encouragement to all those who have attempted to reach
satisfactorr agreements in other spheres, in other
parts of t.1.e world_

En all ant tn~s loin pat1:' arriver ~ ce n!sultat,
l'Inde a fait preuve de sa fcl en l'Organisation
des Nations Unies. Je suis sur que cet effort en
vue d'atteindre un reglernent par des methodes
~acifiques constituera un enco::tragement pour
taus ceux qui s'efforcent d'arriver des accords
datls d'autres damaines et dans d'alltres partie!
du monde.
Je voudrais aussi profiter de cette Qccasion
pour remercier le President clu role qu'i] a per~

r should also like to take this opportunity, if I
may, to than~ be President personally for the

a

En exprimant notre satisfact!on et nos remerciements aux deLlx Gouvernemenls dont les
efforts en vue d'arriver a. un accord ant abouti
a1.1 n~Stl]tat satisf<J.isant qui vient de naus etre
communique, je voltdrais aUJSt exprimer les
re:llerciemer.ts du Conseil aux l11embres ce la
C(lffimiggion pour l'Iude et ~e Pakstan que naus
avom le plaisir de voir notre table <lujourd'hui.
Us s'acquittent tOLlt
leur honne'jr de la tache
difficile qui lellr a eti, ~ssignee. Je pen se Que les
membres du Conseil vO',ldront saisir cette occasion d'entendre le;; repl'(~ser.tants de l'Inde et du
Pakistan.

a

a

a

5
part he has played in this matter. I do not wish to
single out any particular member of the Security
Council, but I should like to mention the great
part played by the representative of China and
his efforts to reach a satisfactory agreement. The
consequences of all this are extremely important
not only from the point of view of India and
Pakistan, but also from the point of view of the
whole of Asia because the future of Asia depends, to a large extent, on the friendly relations
established between those two countries, and because, to some extent, those two countries are
great stabilizing forces in Asia today. They
inherited, a well-ordered system of government
from the British, and this administration has
played a great part in maintaining law and order
in the south of Asia.
I do not wish to make this an occasion for a
lengthy speech. I shall only conclude by presenting my best wishes to the Commission for the
further efforts they are likely to make at attempting to reach a satisfactory settlement of this
very difficult and complicated problem. On behalf of my Government, I can give the assurance that it will not only co-operate to the utmost
with the Commission itself towards a settlement
in Kashmir, but also with the United Nations
in securing peace everywhere, because it believes
that this- Organization offers the only hope for
peace for future generations, on a secure basis.

sonnellement joue en cette affaire. Sans vouloir
remercier nommement aucun des membres du
Conseil, je tiens cependant a mentionneJ' le role
considerable qu'a joue le representant de la
Chine et les efforts qu'il a faits un vue d'arriver
cl un accord. Les consequences de tout ce qui
s'est passe sont extremcment impol'tantes, n011
seulement pour l'Inde et pOur le Pakistan, mais
aussi pour l'Asie tout entiel'e, car l'avenir de
l'Asie depend en grande partic de l'e.tablissement
de relations amicales entre ces deux pays qui,
dans une cel'taine mesnre, representent attjourd'hui en Asic de grandes forces de sta-bilite.
Ils ont en effet herite des Britanniques un sys~
teme ordonne de gouvernement qui a beaucoup
contribue au maintien de la legalite et de l'ordre
en Asie meridionale.
Je ne vOlldrais pas a cette occasion pronollcer
un long cliscours. Je conclul'ai donc en adressant
tous roes vceux a la Commission pour que les
nottveattx efforts qu'elle potlrra faire en vue
d'aboutir a un reglement satisfaisant de ce probleme difficile et complique soient' couronnes de
succes. Je puis donner I'assurance que mon Gouvemement cooperera de SOn mieux, non seulement avec la Commission en vue d'un reglement
de l'affaire du Cachemire, mais encore avec 1'01'_
ganisation des Nations Unies pour assurer la
paix partout dans le monde. Mon pays considere
en effet que l'Organisation des Nations Unies
constitue le set11 espoir de garantir aUx generations futures le maintien d'une paix solicle.

Mr. SHAFFl (Pakistan): When I came to this
meeting, I was not aware that I was to be given
the privilege of speaking before the Security
Council.
I should like, however, to take this opportunity
to I<lssociate myself with the remarks of the
President and the representative of India. I believe that it is impossible to overestimate the
work ·which has been done by the Commission.
I believe that the Commission's work may quite
well be a milestone in the history of the United
Nations. My Government has always desired
and hoped most earnestly that this question
would, be settled on an amicable basis. I believe
that, thanks to the Commission's sterling work,
there is every reason to look forward with
optimism to the settlement of this whole dispute.
Mu.ch still remains to be 'done, of course, and
my Government hopes that the details of the
carrying out of the agreement will be worked
out so that the people of Kashmir may be firmly
convinced that a free, unfettered and impartial
plebiscite has been held. That is the earnest
desire of my Governrri'OOt. It is for the people
of Kashmir and! Jammu, through the auspices
of an impartial plebiscite, to 'deci-de for themselves in accordance with the democratic way of
life whether they wish to accede to India or to
Pakistan.
I think there remains little more to say except
to thank the Security Council for its forbearance in this matter. I know that the arguments
have on occasion dragged on almost interminably, and I think the patience of the Council
has sometimes been strained almost to the breaking point. I also know that, on occas.ions, the
work of the Commission has ibeen hard and
arduous; but its tenacity and good faith all round
have undoubtedly contribute-d largely toward
bringing us to the stage which we have now
Jt'eached.

M. SHAFn (Pakistan) (traduit de l'anglais):
En arrivant a la presente seance, je ne savais pas
que j'aurais l'avantage de prendre la parole
devant le Conseil de serurite.
] e voudrais neanmoins saisir cette occasion
pour m'associer aux propos du President et a
ceux du representant de l'Inde. Je crois qu'il est
difficile de surestimer l'importance des travaux
de la Commission. lis marquent une date dans
l'histoire de I'Organisation des Nations Unies.
Le desir et l'espoir profonds de man Gouvernement ont toujours ete que la question du Cachemire soit regMe
l'amiablc. Je suis cOllvaincu
qu'il :y a lieu de se montrer optimiste, grace aux
magmfiques efforts de la Commission, quant a. la
perspective du reglement de tout ce differend.
Evidemment, il reste beaucoup a faire encore,
et mon Gouvernement espcre que les details de
l'application de l'accord seront regles de telle
maniere que la population du Cachemire soit
convaincue que le ple'bisdte sem organise de
maniere absohtment libre et impartiale. Tel est le
vif. desir de ,mon Gouvernement. C'est a la populatlOn de 1Etat de Jammu et Cachemire de
~ecider elle-meme, selon des procedes democrat1ques et par un plebiscite impartial si eBe desire
acceder a nude ou au Pakistan. '

a

•
Je pense qu'il ne reste plus qu'a remercier le
Conseil de securite d~ la patience dont il a fait
preuve en cette affaire. Je sais que les discussions
ont quelquefois traine en longueur, et, cl. mon
avis, la patience du Conseil a ete eprouvee parfois
a l'extreme. Je sais aussi qu'en nombre d'occasions la tache dd la Commission a ete extreme~
ment ardue. Elle a neanmoins grandement contri?ue, par. la tenacite e~ sa loyaute, au resultat
qUI est mamtenant acqt1!s.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
After what the P~e5jder.t has said, with all of
which I agree most heartily, there is not very
much thnt 1 C~n ann. I am l;lad, howe.. . er, to
take this oppo:-tu,ity of expressing in a few
words, on behalf of my Government, the gx-atificatiOll tbat it feels in regard to the agreement
which has been :-eached between the Governments of India al:d Pakistan, through the good
offices o~ the Uuited Nations Commission, for
the cessatiD:l of hostilit:es in Kashmir a~rl: for
ar~angements to be made whic.h, we hope, will
lead :0 a satisfactorj settlement of the displltc
which has now been before the Security Co1.md
for o'rer twelve months. Every praise, it seems to
my- Goverrunent, is due to the Commission for
the painstaking work for which it has been
respensible and which has brought abeut the
hope.iul Situation with which the Council is now
confronted. The conficence which was reposed
in the Commission by the Security Council has
been shown to 'be fully jnstified.

Sir Alexander CAi)()GAN (Royaurr.e-Uni)
(lraduit de rallglais): Je souscris tres volontiers
It toutes les paroles du President, et je n'ai pas
y ajollter. Je suis cqer.dant
grand-chose
heureux d'avoir edte occasion d'e;xprimer brie.vement la satisfaction de mon Gouvernement de~
vant l'accord inte:-venu entre les Gouvernemer.ts
de l'hde et de Pakistan, grace a11:':: !Jons offices
de la Commission de l'Organisatioll des Nations
Unies, pour la c:essatien des hostilites dans le
Cachl'mi:-e et les arrangements qui Yont Hre p:-is
et qui, MuS l'esperons, aboutiront a tln regle~
ment satisfais.2nt ill! d1ferend qui preoccupe le
Conseil de securite depuis plus de douze mois.
Man Gouvernement estime qu'iI y a lieu d'ex~
pl"imer a la Commission nos sincere:- remerciements pour la falJor. dont eIle s'est acquittee de
la tache dif.ieile qui :ui a tte devolt:e, ee qui nous
a permis d'arriver a la situation satisfalsante
devant laquelle nous nous trouvons en ce moment. Les evenements ont pleinement justifie la
cc·nfiance que le Conseil de ,ecuI ite avait faite it
la Commissio:'!.

My Government welcomes the decision of the
Corrmission to return without delay to the
IndJian sub-continent to centinue its work there,

Mon GOLlV~rl1emcnt est he'.lTeux de voir que la
Commission a decide de retourner sans debi
dans le setts-continent indien afin d'y poursuivre
ses travaux.
'
:1

Trilbute is also certainly due to the Governments of India and !Jakistan for the spirit of compromise they have shown anc the desire of which
thf',y have given proof to abide by the prindples
of the CLaTter, which have been demonstrated
by the agreement now reached. To reach agree~
ment in reg~nl to this intractable problem has
called: for the exercise of the highest degree of
statesmanshb on both sides. I think we all
recognize the contribution tow:trc'l world peace
ilnd stallLity w~1ich is being made by the two
Governments in agreein'g to implement the propOSils drafted by :he Cummission, following its
discussions with ~ep~esentatives of India and
Pakistan. It seems to my Government that a
basis has now been e.:;;tablished which affords
hope tha: it will be possible, before long, to
decide the ft:ture of Kashmir in accordance with
the wishes of the :nha'bitants, thus obtaining the
objective which has throughout been sharedl by
both India and Pakistan. We look forward,
therefore, w:th high hopes to the full and speedy
implementation of the proposals adumbrated in
the report with which is now before us.

11 y a lieu egalement de fWciter les Gouvernements de j'Ir.dc et du Pakistan pottr l'espl'it de
compl'olllis dont ils Dot fait pretlve et pour le
desir qu'ils O'1t montre de respecter les principes
de la Cba~te. L'accard auqt;d on vient d'arrlve.ren est uoe preuve. POllr trouvel' une solution :\.
-ee probleme epineux, il a faJlu, de part et cl'autre,
les ?lus hautes qualitb politiques. Je suis SUl" que
nous reconnaissons tc,ute la contribt:tion que les
deux Gouvemements ont apportee a la paix et
la stabilite mondiales en acceptar:t de :nettre en
ceuvre les pro?ositkns que la Commission a
eIaborees a la suite de ses conversations avec le
rep~esentant de ]'Inde et du Pakistan. Mon Gouvenemenl e5tine quJune oose a ete etablie sur
:aquelle i1 sera po~sible, :f fatt l'esperer, de
reg:er sans trop larder l'avenir du Cachemire
3elon le Msir de ses habi:ants. On atteindrait
aimi ',m but vers lequel :'Inde et le Paki!>tan
n'O:lt pas cesse de tendre. A·.lssi esperons-nous
vivement que les propositions esquis3ees duns
le rappor: qui 1l0U:s a et6 soumis scront mises en
ceuvre rapidement et intl-:gralement.

:!.tlr. TSIAN'G (China): First of all, I wish to
thank the representative of India for his reference to my parI in the work of finding a solution
to the probterr. of Kashmir. Whatev~r I was
able to do was done for a two-fold purpose. In
the first place, I realized that an armed conflict
between fndia and Pakistan wou:d be disastrous
not o?ly' for the two parties directly cOl1ccr:1cd,
but a.so for a] thei~ neighbours. 511C11 a war
wo:-ud, indeed, poison the entire atmosphere of
AElan rei1tions. In the second place, 1 felt that
the dispute between India and Pakistan was a
te..."1 cf the tlsefulness and effectiveness of the
Security CO'.1ncil and the Vnited Nations.

M. TS:ANG (Chine) (traduit tie- l'al1g1ais) : Je
voudrais tout d'abord remerdcr le represe~taIlt
de l'Inde de ce qu'il a dit de IT,on role dans la
sohtion du pr<Jblerne du:'Cachemire. Tout ee que
j'a: pI] faire i'vait un dou'ble lmt. D'une part
j'estimais qu'un conAit arme entre l'Iude et
Pakistan aurait tte desastreux, non selllement
po'J.r les deux rarties dil'ecirment interessees
mais aussi pour tellS leurs voisins. Une gt.lerre d~
ce genre aurait en effet vicie les relations inter:latior.ale:o dans l'Asie tout entik:e. D'autre part,
Je pensalS que le differeJ.d entre I'Inde et lePakistan constituait ur:e pierre de touche pollr
eprouver l'utUte et ]'efficacite du Consl:il deseeur:te et de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.

Knowing, however, as 1 did that tht: men at
the head of the Indian and Paldstan Goyern!?lentii were among: be most progressive leadets
10 the world- today, I was never in doubt of 01,;r
ultimate success..

Ccpendant, cornrne je s~vais <:ue les dirig'eants
des Gouvernements; tant ce J'Inde que du Pakis.
t<l3,. s.ont panni .les ho,?mes 'p?litiques Ies plus
edalres de DC'S .:ours, JC n'a] _)umais doute du
succes Enal.

a

a.

I;

7
I wish to add that the members of the Commission deserve our thanks for the substantial
progress that they are able to report to us today.

Je vouduis :tjouter que nous devons deS
remerciements aux membres de la Commission
pour 1es progres importants dont its nOL1.Sont
fait part aujollr<1'hui.

I will conclude by saying that my delegation
and my Government will always regard it as a
privilege to help the mem'bers of the Commission
in whatever way we can.

Je conc1uerai enfin en <1isant que ma deh~gation
et mon Gouvern~ment mettront toujbllrs 1eur
point d'honnelu· :i aider les membres de la Corn~
mission.

Mr. JESSUP (United States of America): I
heartily endorse the statement which the Pre~i~
dent has made on behalf of the Security Council,
and also the statements which have been made
by the representatives of the United Kingdom
and China. Our views and sentiments on this
matter are the same, and our several expressions
of those sentiments must, indeed, be similar.

,

,

,I

,,
,,,
I

,"
I

•

""
I

declarations dlt President et des representants du
Roya:.lme-Uni et de la Chine. Nos sentiments .et
nos vues sur ceUe question sont 1es l1'u!llles que
les leurs, et, par consequent, nOUSlle pouvons
que leur donner UIle expression analogue.

In the opinion of my Government, the Governments of India and Pakistan have gained the
respect and admiration not only of this Council
but of the peoples of the United Nations by
their statesman1ike actiOn in accepting the proposals of the Commission and, in particular, in
promptly effecting cease-fire arrangements all
their own initiative, without awaiting formal
action by the Commission. By their actions, they
have shown their firm and constant support of
the principles embodied in the United Nations
Charter, which their representatives have again
reiterated this afternoon, and they have thus
given the world a convincing demonstration of
the manner in which progress can he made in
the settlement of international disputes by peaceful means.

Man Gouvernement estime que les Gouverne·
ments de l'Inde et du Pakistan meritent le res~
pect et l':tdmiration, non seulement du Consei1
de securitc, mais encore de taus les peuples des
Nations Unies, par l'attitude hautement politique
dont ils ant fait preuve en acceptant les propositions de la Commission et, phts p<trticulierement,
en prenant rapidement et de leur propre initiative des mesures en vue de fa ire cesser le feu
sans attend re que la Commission ait agi de ma·
nien: officielle. lis ont ainsi rnontre qu'ils sou~
tiennent avec fermete et constance les prineipes
de la Ch<1.rte des Natlons Unies, comme leurs
representants l'ont dit encore cet apres~midi. lis
or.t ainsi montre au monde de far;on ec1atante
comment on peut arriver a regler les differends
internationaux par des moyens pacifiques.

The Security Council's Commission should
also receive, as it has, the warm commendation
of members of this Council for the part it has
played in contributing to this happy result. An
auspicious start has been made to\vard' a peace~
fu1, friendly and just solution of the Kashmir
dispute. On the part of my Government, I can
say that we offer our sincere encouragement to
all concerned in attaining this objective in the
near future.

La Commlssion du Conseil de securite a droit
aussi aux remerdements chaleureux que 1es membres di.l Conseil n'ont pas manque de lt1i adresser,
pour le role qU'elle a jow~ dans l'heureuse issue
de ceUe affaire. Nous sommes sur la voie d'une
solution padfique, amiable et juste du differend
du Cachemire. Au nom de mon Gouvernement,
j'adresse 1es plus sinceres encouragements .a
tous ceux qui travailIent po!.!r que cet objectif
soit atteint dans un proche avenir.

Mr. DE LA TOURNELLE (France) (translated
trom French): I wish ·to associate myself with
the statements that have just been made by my
colleagues, as also with the thanks that they have
tendered to the United Nations Commission for
India and Pakistan.

M. DE: LA TOURNELLE (France) : Je m'associe
aux declarations que viennent de faire mes col·
Iegues, et je m'assoeie ega1ement aux rem~rde­
ments qu'ils ont :J.dresses a la Commission des
Nations Vnies pOLlr l'lnde et le Pakistan.

The Commi&sion was faced with a very difficult and li. VNy delicate task. It performed its
work with patience, diplomacy and ability.

Cctte Commission s'est trouvee devant une ta·
che tres difficile et tres dtlicate. EUe a agi avec
patience, avec diplomatie, avec adresse.

To tell the truth, the French Government had
never given up hope that a reasonable solution
could be found for the question of Kashmir, for
it was well aware of the outstanding qualities of
the remarkable statesmen who rule the destinies
of India and Pakistan.

A vrai dire, le Gouvernemel1t fran<;ais n'avait
jamais abandonne I'espoir d'une soLution raLsonnable de ceHe question du Cachemire, car it con~
nait parfaitement les (]ualites eminentes des
hommes d'Etats remarqu3ib1es qui president aux.
destinees de l' rnde et du Pakistan.

An impartial settlement of the Kashmir dispute will undoubtedly represent a great success
for the United Nations, while at the same time
strengthening the hopes of all those who still
believe in a peaceful human race.

Vne solution equitable du con flit du Cache·
mire constituera, sans aueun doute, un grand
succe.s pour l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
Elle renforcera en meme temps les espoirs de tau!
les hommes qui croient encore en une humantte
paeifique.

Mahmoud FA\VZI Bey (Egypt): Mr. Presi~
crent, you and the other speakers who have pre~
ceded me have most eloquently expressed the

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (tt'aduit de
l'anglais): Le President et les autres orateurs qui
m'ont precede ont exprime de la maniere la

j,
"

M. JESSUP (Etats-Unis d'Atnerique) (traduit.
de l'mlgln.is) : le m'associe de grand ceeur aux

8
feelings of the Egyptian delegation on this
matter. The work of the Security Council a~d
of 1he Seeudey Ccuncil'.'l Commission for IndIa
and Pakistan, and the statesmen-like attitude of
both the Governments of India and Pakistan are
all to tr.e c:redit of the structllre of the United
Nations and its aims of peace, ard also to the
credit of all concerned in this matter. This is
particularly gratifying to my delegation and to
the Egyptian Government, in view of the fact
that we. in a very clear and unequivocal manner,
endorse' and express the conceptions of democ~
racy of the Unitell Nations Charter, in partinllar the great principle of self-determination
which is one of the main pillars of our Organiza·
tion. Kothing could have been ,more gratifying
to my Govemmc:nt nnd my country.

plus eloquente 1es sentiments C.lle la delegation
de l'Egypte eprouve en la circonstam:e. L'reuvre
accomplie par le Canseil de securite, par la Commission du Conseil pour 1'Jnde et pour le Pakistan, I'attitude halltement politique des deux
GOLlvernements de l'lnde et du Pakistan sont
tout l'ho:tneur des methodes de travail de 1'01'ganisation des Nations Unies, de l'ideal de pailt
qu'elle se propose, tout I'honneur aussi de tous
c.eux qui ant agi en la matiere. Ma delegation
et mon Gouvernetnent s'en felicitent tout particulieremer.t parce que nous soutenons de la rna·
niere la plu5 franche et la plus formcJle la
conception de la democratie qui se degage de la
Charte des N<.tions Unies et, plus particulie_
rement, le grar.cl pr:ncipe du droit des pellples
it disposer d'el:x~memes, prineipe (ui constitue
l'une des pierres anglllaires de notre Organisation. Rien ne saurait plaire davantage it man
GOllyerne.-nent et a :non pays.

The PRESIDENT: I would like to say to the
Chnirman of tht: United Nations Commission
for India amI Pakistan and t.:l the representatives
0: India ani. Pakistan that their statements have
been very welcome and have given llS, as the
IT.embers of the Security Cotmd\ have said, grent
encouragement.

Le PRESIDEl:'T (traduit de l'anglais): Je vounrnis dire au President de ia Commission des
Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan et aux
representants de I'lnde et du Pakistan qLle nons
avons ete tres l1enreux d'entendre leurs dec:arations et que celles-ci nons ont apporte le plus
grar.d encouragement, COmme 1'ont declare 1es
membres du Conseil.
Je pene me Iaire !'interprete des vues du
Conseil en disant, tQmffie l'a suggere le representant du Royaur:J.e-Uni all President de la
COlIllllissioll pOllr j'Indc et le Pal{istan, que nous
voudrions voir la Commission rctourner dans le
sous-continent indien des qu'elle le potlrra, afin
d'y poursuivre 1es travam: qu'elle a deja menes si
loin.

I bejeve I correctly interpret be view of this
Coulicil in sayin.!: to the Chairman of the Commission for India and Pakistan, as was suggested
by the representative of the United Kingdom,
that wc wonld like the Commission to return to
the suh-continent of India, at its earliest con. . 'cnience, in order to continue the work which it
:blS already sO far advanced.
To the Governments of [ndia and Pakistan I
would say that we are confident that the future
negotiations with regard to the holding 0: the
plebiscite and the final settlement of the issue
win continue to be rnnrhci by those high principles of statesmanship and of c.esire for agreement which hilve been evident ill the steps
leading up to the present :lappy beginning.

a

a

Aux GOl1vernements de l'Inde et du Pakistan,
je Youdr"is dire que nous Jell: faisons c:onfiance
pour qtle les negociations qu'ils cnt~errennent en
vue de ~'organisation du plebiscite et du reglement final de ce prob1eme s'ill3pirent toujOUl"S de
hautes conceptions politl(jues et Ull souci d'entente co:nll1e ils s'en sont inspires dans les me..
.'lures qui ant abouti a la situation actuelle, heurct.x presnge des SllCCeS a ve:1ir.

If no member of the COl1ncil wishes to speak,
I now propose to adjourn this meeting 0:1 the
India-Pakistan question.

Si aucun mernbre dll Conseil ne demande la
parole, je vais proposer de 1e,'er cette seance qui
a ete co:tsacree la question de l'lnde et du Pa~
kistall.

I would like to take this opportunity of reminding- the members of the Security Council
of the meeting on hdonesia which is scheduled
for tomorrow, Friday, 14 Jnnuary' 1949, at
3 p.m.

Je profite cle cette occasion pour rappe1er aux
membres du Consei1 de securite qu'une seouct
consacree i la ql,lestion indonesienne est prevue
po:.lr demain, 14 janvie: 1949, it 15 heures.

It is understood, of course, that the Council.
in receiving the report of its Commission on
India and Pakistan, has t<iken note of it.

I1 Vil de soi que le Conseil. ayant rer;u le rap'
port de la Commission pour lTode et le Pakistan,
en a pris bonne note.
.

The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

La Jeallcc est l~vce a 16 h. 10.

a
