S

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council

Dietr.

GENERAL
S/19585
7 March 198I3
ORIGINAL1 ENGLISH

Algeria, Argentina, Nepal, Senegal, Yugoelavia and Zambia!

draft cesolut ion

The

Security

Council,

Recalling ite resolutions on the quest ion of South Africa, in particular
resolutions 392 (1976)) 471 (1977) and 473 (1980),

Recalling further its resolution 569 (1985) of 26 July 1985 in which it
determined that the imposition of the state of emergency in thirty-six districts of
the Republic of South Africa constitutes a grave deterioration of the situation in
that country,
Deeply concerned at the worsening of the situation in South Africa and at the
continuance and worsening of the human suffering resulting from the apartheid
system of the South African racist rbgime and its renewal, reinforcement and
extension of the state of emergency to cover the entire country,
Further concerned at the South African racist r&gime’s almost total censorship
of the media, in particular its ban on the coverage of events in the black
townships,
Outraged at the banning/restriction on 23 February 19d8 of seventeen
democratic mass organizations and eighteen individuals, including Archie Gumede and
Albert ina Sisulu, all organizations and individuals comitted to peaceful forms of
struggle,
Convinced that the banning/restriction of those democratic organizations
individuals, all conrnitted to peaceful forma of struggle, undermines the
possibilities of a peaceful resolution of the South African conflict,

and

Convinced further that the violence and repression by the South African racist
rdgime have greatly aggravated the situation in South Africa and will inevitably
lead to violent conflict and racial conflagration with serious international
repercussions,

88-65815 01422 (E)

/ . . .

S/19585
Engl i5h
Page 2

Convinced further that the Pretoria r&gime’e intransigent refueal to
co-operate with the international efforts in search of a peaceful solution to the
e5Calat ing Ccnfl ict in South Africa compels the internat ional comunity to impose,
a5 a first step, selective mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the charter of
the United Nations,
Actinq under Chapter VII of the Charter in d i s c h a r g e of its responsibilities
tor the maintenance of international peace and security,
its condermat ion of the aparthe id policy and practices of the
South African r gime and South Africa’s continued defiance of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations as well as its design5 to entrench further the
apar theid system,

===I

Reaffirminq that only the total eradication of apartheid
and the establishment
of a non-racial democratic society baeed on majority rule, through the full and
free exercise of adult suffrage by all the people in a united and unfragmented
South Africa, can lead to a just, equitable and lasting solution to the South
AfriCdn

SitNatiOn,

-Mindful- of its cesponsibilities
international peace and security:

under the Charter for the maintenance Of

1.
-Conclams- the continuing intensification of repression by the South
African racist r6gime such as the arbitrary ma58 arrest and detention, torture in
detention and murder of the leaders and activists of mass organizations, including
children, the near total muzzling of the press, the maintenance and expansion Of
the etate of emergency and, in par titular , the restriction of seventeen mass
organizations and eighteen individuals connnitted
to peaceful forms of Struggler
2.
Declare: that racist South Africa ‘8 intransigent refusal to corrply with
relevant decision5 of the Security Council and the resolutions of the General
Assembly constitute d direct challenge to the authority of the United Nation5 and a
violation of the principles of the Charter of the united Nations;
the

Determines that the policies and practices of apartheid pursued by the
Pretoria racist rhgime, which are the root cause of the grave and deteriorating
situation in South Africa and in southern Africa as a whole, constitute a serious
threat to international peace and security;

3.

4.
Decides, under Chapter VII of the Charter and in conformity with its
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, to impose
the following mandatory sanctions against South Africa, in accordance with
Article 41:

(a)

Cessation Jf further investment in, and financial loans to, South Africa;

(b)

Ban on the importation

(cl

An end to all promotion of and support for trad+?

of iron and steel1
with South Africa;

/. . .

S/19 585
Engl iah
Page 3
(d)
Prohibition of
South Africa!

the sale of kruggerands and all other coins minted in

(e) Cessation of all forms of military, police or intelligence co-operation
with the authorities of South Africa, in particular the sale of computer equipment1
(f) Cessation of the export and Sale of oil to South Africa;

Calls upon all Member States, in conformity with Article 25 of the
5.
Charter , to inglement the present resolutionr
6.
Requests the specialized agencies to ensure the ef feet ive implementation
of the present resolution;
7.
Urges States not metiers of the United Nations to act in accordance with
the provisions of the present resolution;
8.
Decides to establish, in accordance with rule 28 of its provisional rules
of procedure, a Connnittee
of the Security Council to monitor the implementation of
the present resolution;
9.
Call8 upon all States to report to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations on measures taken to implement the present resolutions
10.
Decides that these measures shall, in the first instance, remain in force
for a period of twelve months, after which the Security Council shall meet again to
determine whether the south African rdgime
has fully met the following requirements:

(a) Abolished apartheid1
(b) Rescinded the ban on all political parties and other mass derrrocratic
movements ;

(c)

Released

all

political

prisoners?

(d) Allowed the return of all exiles, without fear of arrest;
(e) Commenced meaningful dialogue with the genuine leaders of the majority of
the South African peoples
11. Further decides that should the Security Council determine that the South
African rhgirne has not fulfilled the above requirements it shall renew or increase,
as it deens necessary, the measures specified in paragraph 4 above;
12. Invites the Secretary-General to report to the Security Council on the
progress of the implementation of the present resolution and to submit his first
report not later than 7 March 1989.
