A /72/PV.88

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

88th plenary meeting

Thursday, 10 May 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 140 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/72/713/Add.5)
The President: I would like, in keeping with
established practice, to draw the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/72/713/Add.5, in
which the Secretary-General informs the President of
the General Assembly that since the issuance of the
document contained in A/72/713/Add.4, Yemen has
made the payment necessary to reduce its arrears below
the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
May I take it that the Assembly takes note of the
information contained in documents A/72/713/Add.5?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/72/L.51)
Draft amendment (A/72/L.53)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of France to introduce draft resolution
A/72/L.51.

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to introduce, on behalf of its 90 sponsors, draft
resolution A/72/L.51, entitled “Towards a Global Pact
for the Environment”.
The unprecedented degradation of the environment
is, we know, already causing hundreds of thousands
of deaths owing to global warming, water and air
pollution, and the degradation of biodiversity and soil.
Those environmental impacts affect primarily the most
vulnerable populations. If we do not act decisively, we
know we will be exposed to tragic consequences: the
depletion of natural resources, an exodus of people and
renewed conflicts.
The 1992 Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development established guidelines for the protection
of the environment and various multilateral tools have
been developed in several specific areas to address
environmental challenges. Faced with the environmental
emergency, the international community must take on
new responsibilities and move forward. The adoption
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the early entry into force of the Paris Agreement have
shown that it is possible to take concrete and ambitious
action on environmental issues. By developing a new
tool to strengthen our commitments to the environment,
we are rising to current and future challenges.
Draft resolution A/72/L.51, which we are
introducing today, would contribute to that common
effort. It would establish an open-ended working
group to identify gaps in international environmental
law and instruments and to assess the need for a new

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-14273 (E)

*1814273*

A/72/PV.88

10/05/2018

international instrument. The working group would
also make recommendations to the General Assembly
between now and mid-2019, with the possibility of
convening an intergovernmental conference. Finally,
the whole process would be supported by the United
Nations Environment Programme, with the assistance
of voluntary contributions.

Ms. Grignon (Kenya): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting to consider draft
resolution A/72/L.51, entitled “Towards a Global Pact
for the Environment”. I have taken the floor on behalf
of the delegation of Kenya and the Kenyan Government
to propose amendments to paragraph 5, as contained in
document A/72/L.53.

The draft resolution that we are introducing today
has been discussed at length. I would like to thank
our many sponsors and all representatives for their
commitment to this resolutely inclusive step that we are
taking. The draft resolution is the result of a compromise
and does not prejudge the future of the discussions in
the open-ended working group or pre-empt decisions
that would be taken by the General Assembly upon
recommendations of the working group. It aims to
generate discussions — discussions based on founding
principles and solid bases — such as those established
at the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development and the sectoral conventions, in particular
on climate, biodiversity, desertification, waste and
chemical products. It is our common responsibility to
raise our ambitions together to protect the planet and to
obtain the appropriate tools to do so.

In part (a), we propose deleting the word
“preferably”, and in part (b), we propose replacing
the words “an initial substantive session” with the
words “substantive sessions”. In proposing those
amendments, we wish to strongly reaffirm that Nairobi
is the environmental capital of the United Nations, and
that we strongly believe that all substantive sessions
of the open-ended working group are at the core of
the mandate and the functions of the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) and should be held
in Nairobi in order to maintain the integrity of both
UNEP and its secretariat.

As I emphasized, the draft resolution is the balanced
outcome of a very constructive negotiation. France
has also made considerable efforts, as the Assembly
knows, to reach an acceptable consensus, including
by making significant compromises on the text and
by taking everyone’s desires and concerns fully into
consideration. That is why we regret that a request to
change that balance was proposed at the last minute.
We therefore respectfully and amicably invite Kenya to
take those compromise efforts into consideration and
to withdraw its amendment. We also regret that a vote
has been requested on our text. Let us hope that the
best interests of the planet will prevail and that those
who have called for that vote will amicably reverse
their decision.
In conclusion, as I stated at the beginning of
this meeting, we invite all delegations to support the
procedural draft resolution “Towards a Global Pact
for the Environment”. Once again, I warmly thank
all delegations for their commitment, support and
positive vote.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya to introduce draft amendment
A/72/L.53.
2/9

Kenya supports the initiative to address
environmental challenges in all their manifestations,
and the proposed draft resolution is an important
initiative to that end. That is why we have proposed
amending paragraph 5 to make it acceptable and also
to ensure that all those who support the strengthening
of UNEP and the United Nations Office at Nairobi have
the opportunity to engage constructively.
Our proposal to have Nairobi as a venue for all
substantive sessions is based on a number of resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations. Those resolutions
and decisions include but are not limited to the decision
adopted by Heads of State and Government in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, during the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development, held from 20 to 22 June
2012, which is contained in the outcome document of the
Conference, entitled “The future we want” (resolution
66/288). That decision was adopted to strengthen the
headquarters functions of Nairobi and the United
Nations Environment Programme in accordance with
the following statement.
“We are committed to strengthening the role
of the United Nations Environment Programme
as the leading global environmental authority that
sets the global environmental agenda” (resolution
66/288, annex, para.88).
That decision allowed the full participation of all
193 States Members of the United Nations in the
UNEP Governing Council from February 2013 as
18-14273

10/05/2018

part of the commitments of the world leaders at the
Conference to improving the institutional framework
for sustainable development.
In addition, all the decisions and resolutions of the
United Nations Environment Assembly (UNEA) have
continued to reaffirm the integrity of UNEP and its
secretariat, and therefore of the need to strengthen them,
including by strengthening the host-country function
of Kenya as the only United Nations headquarters in
the global South. The most recent of those decisions
was adopted in 2017 by the UNEA Council at its third
meeting, as resolution UNEP/EA.3/L.28, which, in
paragraph 1,
“reiterates the importance of the Nairobi
headquarters location of the United Nations
Environmental Programme and reaffirms its
commitment to the effective consolidation
of headquarters functions in Nairobi and the
strengthening of UNEP’s regional presence”.
These important United Nations decisions and
resolutions must therefore be respected. That is why the
delegation of Kenya is inviting and urging all members
of UNEP, which is all of us gathered here today, to show
strong support for UNEP, UNEA and the secretariat by
voting in favour of the amendments that the Kenyan
delegation is proposing and thereafter supporting the
draft resolution.
The amendments are aimed at guaranteeing a strong
and vibrant UNEP. Any meeting that is held outside
Nairobi therefore undermines the ability of UNEP and
UNON to function and carry out the universal mandate
that members of the General Assembly gave UNEP in
this very Hall only six years ago. We therefore urge
the Assembly to stand with UNEP and UNEA and their
secretariat, and with Kenya. I ask members to vote for
our proposed amendments and to stand with us. Kenya
believes very strongly that the entire United Nations
fraternity has the obligation to address environmental
challenges, and that is best done by strengthening
UNEP, UNEA and UNON.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/72/L.51 and draft amendment
A/72/L.53. In connection with draft resolution
A/72/L.51, I give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The following statement

A/72/PV.88

is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
On behalf of the United Nations Environmental
Programme, I would like to present to the General
Assembly an oral statement related to the voluntary
contributions to cover the costs associated with draft
resolution A/72/L.51, entitled “Towards a Global Pact
for the Environment”. As the draft resolution mandates,
its implementation will be based on voluntary
contributions. As such, the ability to carry out the
activities requested will depend on the timely provision
of those contributions on a voluntary basis. Copies of
the statement that I have just read will also be made
available on the PaperSmart portal.
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote before the voting, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): This
explanation of vote pertains to draft resolution A/72/L.51
as a whole, not to the amendment just proposed.
The United States regrets that we have had to call
for a vote on this draft resolution and that we will have
to vote against it. There has so far been no transparent,
open discussion among Member States about the need
for or purpose of a new international environmental
instrument. The United States opposes a draft resolution
that in its title alone purports to prejudge movement
“Towards a Global Pact for the Environment”, when the
concept itself remains ambiguous, and when Member
States have not yet considered the merits of such a
proposal or how it would contribute to the existing
international environmental regime.
The United States engaged constructively in
the negotiations on this draft resolution. In fact, in a
spirit of compromise, we have been willing to support
the establishment of an open-ended working group
to examine whether there are gaps in the existing
environmental system and, if so, possible options for
addressing those gaps. However, the United States
cannot support the title or any language in the draft
resolution’s paragraph 2 that would prejudge the working
group’s discussions or presume, before particular
international environmental challenges have even been
identified, that a new international instrument would
be the most appropriate solution.

18-142733/9

A/72/PV.88

We also cannot accept the language in the seventh
preambular paragraph of the draft resolution indicating
that environmental challenges should be addressed
in a “comprehensive” manner. In fact, such language
ignores the fact that many of the most successful
environmental agreements, such as the Montreal
Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer or
the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, are narrowly tailored
to address specific environmental problems. Our
concerns on these points were not sufficiently addressed
or taken into account.
One of our fundamental interests throughout this
process has been to ensure that this proposal does not
disrupt or distract from the continuing implementation
of existing international environmental agreements,
and we believe that many delegations share our
concerns in that regard. As a result, going forward, we
understand paragraph 9 as recognizing that nothing in
this process or any outcome of it should affect the rights
and obligations of parties under existing agreements.
At the same time, given that some of the proponents
of a global pact have suggested that it should include
a re-examination of certain environmental principles,
such as the Rio principles referenced in the fourth
preambular paragraph, the United States cannot support
language reaffirming those principles in this context.
The United States has therefore called for a vote
on this draft resolution and will vote against it, and we
urge other Member States to do so as well. The United
States believes that consensus on the draft resolution
could have been achieved if appropriate consideration
had been given to Member States’ legitimate concerns.
We are unaware of any successful environmental
negotiations that have been initiated by vote over the
objections of Member States on a truncated schedule,
and we regret that more time was not allocated to
achieving agreement on a path forward or for Member
States to engage in productive debate. We will now look
ahead to a discussion with other Member States of the
substantive merits of this proposal in the open-ended
working group.
Mr. Kononuchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation intends to vote against
draft resolution A/72/L.51, entitled “Towards a Global
Pact for the Environment”, introduced by France.
We would like to draw the Assembly’s attention to
the process of putting together the draft resolution, which
4/9

10/05/2018

was not a constructive one. We and a number of other
delegations repeatedly made principled suggestions
about the texts, but they were persistently ignored.
The coordinators expressed no desire to seek mutually
acceptable wording for the text, and after the silence
procedure refused to conduct further negotiations. We
therefore still believe that achieving consensus on the
draft resolution is possible.
The Russian Federation strongly supports
environmental protection and sustainable development
at the national, regional and global levels, including
through the implementation of the relevant
international instruments, including the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, the Addis Ababa Action
Accord of the Third International Conference on
Financing for Development and other documents that
deal with specific issues. To date, there are more than
1,000 different instruments on the environment, which
cover various topics and geographical areas. They have
different legal statuses and are the outcome of a fragile
compromise among Member States.
On the basis of the above, the global discussion
on environmental issues should focus primarily
on implementing the existing instruments and on
supporting developing countries. The French initiative
should be carefully and broadly considered before
we can begin to discuss a global agreement. During
the consultations on the draft resolution submitted,
we thought it important to focus the efforts of the
ad hoc open-ended working group on considering
the possibility of improving implementation of the
existing instruments on the environment rather than on
establishing a new instrument.
We believe that the work of the open-ended working
group should be carried out in an intergovernmental
format, in particular since its outcome could be the
conclusion of a new intergovernmental document.
We are convinced that the draft resolution should not
pre-empt the outcome of the discussion that takes
place within the working group. We are ready to
constructively participate in the discussion of further
steps with regard to the French initiative.
Ms. Ponce (Philippines): The protection of the
environment is one of the highest policy priorities of
the Philippines — so much so that it is enshrined in
our Constitution. The Constitution’s Declaration of
Principles and State Policies proclaims that the State
shall protect and advance the right of the people to a
18-14273

10/05/2018

balanced and healthful ecology in accord with the
rhythm and harmony of nature.
It may be recalled that the integration of
environmental concerns was accomplished primarily
through the United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development, held in Rio in 1992, where two
major agreements were adopted — the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
Convention on Biological Diversity — while another
accord is still a work in progress, with the Forest
Principles already adopted. It may be further recalled that
an overarching agreement was also adopted in Agenda
21, which sets out the principles and the way forward
for mainstreaming the environment into socioeconomic
development planning and implementation. Going
further back, there was the United Nations Conference
on the Human Environment, held in Stockholm in 1972,
which placed human development, anchored in the
environment, at the centre of the economic development
of countries.
Therefore, there already exists an integrated
framework for the global community’s work on
the environment and its sustainable development,
which brings together the social, economic and
environmental spheres to support human development
in a sustainable manner. The current global framework
on the environment, more specifically the critical
environmental problems associated with climate
change, biodiversity loss, the pollution of our seas
and the proliferation of harmful chemicals and toxic
wastes, is the elaboration of agreed solutions through a
deductive approach, working out the operational details
in a continuous, albeit protracted manner.
What remains to be done is to deliver the
commitments, anchored on the Agenda 21 principle
of common but differentiated responsibilities. It is
recommended that any solution put forward be in that
context, not in the formulation of another consolidated
environment-centric agreement, which has the potential
of renegotiating already agreed principles and solutions.
While we recognize the value of France’s initiative
to have a global framework to address the protection
of the environment, it is important that the process
be transparent and consultative and that it take into
consideration the concerns of all Member States.
It is essential that Member States be able to conduct
extensive national inter-agency and stakeholder
consultations and studies to determine if, in their

A/72/PV.88

view, the existing environmental law framework and
instruments are sufficient or whether there is a need
for a new intergovernmental process. That cannot be
rushed and conducted over an abbreviated period.
It is also important that the solidarity of the Group
of 77 be respected. It is unfortunate that France did not
consult with the Chair of the Group of 77 to determine
if it would negotiate as a group on the draft resolution
prior to engaging bilaterally with its member States.
The decision to initiate a global intergovernmental
process for a major issue, such as a global pact for the
environment, must be taken on the basis of consensus,
not by voting. A call for a vote reflects a lack of
agreement among Member States and undermines the
multilateral process, as well as the political importance
and validity of the draft resolution (A/72/L.51) and
the initiative.
For that reason, the Philippines will vote against
the draft resolution.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.51, entitled
“Towards a global pact for the environment”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of
A/72/L.51: Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belize, the Comoros, the Dominican Republic, Fiji,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Liberia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritius, New Zealand, Palau, Papua New Guinea,
Poland, the Republic of Moldova, Samoa, San Marino,
Sweden, Ukraine and Uruguay.
The President: In accordance with rule 90 of the
Assembly’s rules of procedure, the Assembly will first
take a decision on the proposed draft amendment,
issued as document A/72/L.53.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft amendment, contained in document A/72/L.53?
The amendment was adopted.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested
on draft resolution A/72/L.51, as amended.

18-142735/9

A/72/PV.88

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
New Zealand, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen
Against:
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Philippines, Russian
Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Belarus, Malaysia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Saudi
Arabia, Tajikistan
Draft resolution A/72/L.51, as amended, was
adopted by 143 to 6, with 6 abstentions (resolution
72/277).
6/9

10/05/2018

[Subsequently, the delegation of the Islamic
Republic of Iran informed the Secretariat that it had
intended to abstain; the delegation of the Kingdom
of the Netherlands informed the Secretariat that it
had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote, I would remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Bulgaria,
who will speak on behalf of the European Union.
Mr. Panayotov (Bulgaria): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the European
Union and its member States.
We would like to take this opportunity to voice our
disappointment with one country’s decision to submit
amendments to paragraph 5 of resolution 72/277 at
this stage of the process. The issue of the location
of meetings of the open-ended working group was
discussed at length over a negotiation process that
lasted three months, with different countries or groups
of countries presenting their not very divergent views.
The formulation coined by the facilitators was aimed
at bridging differences, while not prejudging but also
not excluding the possibility of holding the working
group’s meetings in New York, Nairobi or elsewhere.
The European Union and its member States
commend the facilitators’ efforts in this regard. We
are now looking forward to constructive discussions
within the open-ended working group to advance this
valuable initiative, a global pact for the environment,
which seeks to address the challenges posed by
environmental degradation caused, to a large extent,
by human activity and which threatens our societies as
well as international stability.
Ms. Grignon (Kenya): On behalf of the people
and the Government of Kenya, I would like to take
this opportunity to express our deepest gratitude to all
the delegations that joined the consensus in support of
our proposed amendments. As has been stated, this is
the way that the business of the United Nations should
be conducted. We are also delighted that the majority
of delegations supported the adoption of resolution
72/277. It goes a long way towards demonstrating the
seriousness with which this matter has been taken.
It also demonstrates the seriousness with which
delegations address enumerated issues with which
18-14273

10/05/2018

the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
in Nairobi is engaged. We are honoured to see that
having UNEP in Nairobi provide secretariat services is
meaningful to the General Assembly. In fact, it is the
only way the open-ended working group will operate
with any effectiveness — by receiving special expertise
on the environment and Secretariat services relating
to the work that the working group proposes from the
secretariat at UNEP in Nairobi, whose integrity, as I
mentioned previously, must be maintained.
We further appreciate that this proposal from
Kenya, as a host country, was also adopted. We therefore
assure the entire United Nations family that my country
will continue to play its positive and crucial role as a
host to the only United Nations organ headquartered in
global South. As a host country, we continue to implore
all 193 States Members of the United Nations to
establish their presence in Nairobi. We believe that this
is a positive step towards ensuring full participation in
all meetings of UNEP, as envisaged in 2012 when the
General Assembly adopted resolution 67/213.
As we indicated in our earlier statement, Kenya
takes seriously all environmental and climate-change
challenges, and as a leading champion on environmental
matters we have actually demonstrated this course by
banning the use of plastic bags for the sake of securing
the environment, and by putting in place other legal
and institutional frameworks in order to ensure that
we achieve sustainable environmental management
and protection. Our position is anchored in the
ever-expanding environmental and climate-change
challenges in all parts of the global, be it in developed
or developing countries.
I take this opportunity to thank the delegation of
France for proposing the draft resolution and for the
hard work that was done to ensure that all of us work
towards a consensus on moving this process forward.
I also want to thank the Group of 77 and China for
embracing resolution 72/277 and negotiations on it as
a unified group, and on behalf of UNEP, the United
Nations Office at Nairobi, and Nairobi itself.
Mrs. Silva Maturana (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to say a few
words in explanation of the vote that my delegation has
just cast. This vote shows our respect for multilateralism
and is cast with the best intentions of making progress
on an issue that our country and our President have
always considered to be of prime importance: trying

A/72/PV.88

to build respect at all times for the integrity of the vital
systems and environmental functions of our planet.
The search for consensus solutions to the
environmental problems whose structural cause is
capitalism did not begin today, and it will continue
to be part of our agenda for a long time to come. The
resolution that we have adopted today (resolution
72/277) is just one more step on the long road that we
have already been travelling on, and it should allow
us to bring together efforts aimed at fighting against
the degradation of our environment. A failure to
adopt the resolution would have constituted a setback
in the negotiations that are being carried out in other
multilateral forums where our countries have decided
to carry out this dialogue since 1992.
I would like to highlight my delegation’s concern
about involving other stakeholders in the resolution.
Caring for and defending the integrity of our
environment must involve all citizens of the world.
However, accountability belongs to and actions must
always be carried out by our Governments. Along
this path and in order to avoid getting lost in minor
discussions, it is important to remember the principles
that have guided consensus, as well as scenarios we will
continue to defend in this context as the Plurinational
State of Bolivia and as a member of the Group of 77
and China.
First, a more just and democratic system can
be created only together and in correspondence and
solidarity with and for the benefit of our people.
Secondly, States have the sovereign right to
exploit their own resources, to identify their own
environmental policies and development priorities, and
to seek a balance between human rights and a dignified
and healthy life and the rights of Mother Earth.
Thirdly, any initiative aimed at addressing the
environmental and climate crisis should be based on
the principles already established in the Framework
Convention on Climate Change, such as common but
differentiated responsibilities, whereby the countries of
the North have to shoulder their historic responsibilities
for climate change, as well as the climate debt they owe
to countries of the South.
Fourthly, a global pact for the environment will
have meaning only if it includes the interests of all
States. We must therefore redouble our efforts to
achieve consensus. Obtrusive or hasty attitudes will not

18-142737/9

A/72/PV.88

inspire confidence in the process, nor does the position
of certain countries that are withdrawing from and do
not respect the agreements they have entered into with
the international community and the planet itself. Those
principles guide us in every sovereign decision that we
make, and we will continue to defend them at every
stage of the process, beginning with this resolution.
Mrs. Shurbaji (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country’s delegation would like to express
its position vis-à-vis the initiative to adopt a global pact
for the environment, and vis-à-vis resolution 72/277,
entitled “Towards a Global Pact for the Environment”.
At the outset, the Syrian Arab Republic emphasizes
the importance of fostering and activating international
instruments and conventions on the environment and
addressing the loopholes and problems that impede
their implementation. However, we do not believe that
one document will achieve that goal or that creating a
global pact for the environment will provide the optimal
solution to activate instruments and conventions that
are different in scope and have different memberships
and legal nature.
The concept of international environmental law
is not yet agreed upon internationally, especially with
regard to its legally non-binding nature. Member
States abide by those environmental instruments in
accordance with their circumstances and national
priorities. Any attempt to address the current
international environmental system therefore requires
the General Assembly to adopt clear language that
emphasizes national sovereignty over natural resources
and that any proposed commitments should take into
consideration current international instruments and
national policies.
Finally, the establishment of an open-ended
working group should take place in the light of a
number of conditions, most important of which is
the establishment of an intergovernmental working
group, allowing other stakeholders to participate in
it but ensuring that decision-making is reserved to
the Governments of Member States. It is imperative
to underscore that the main objective in establishing
a working group must be to address the loopholes in
international environmental law and instruments,
including by submitting recommendations to the
General Assembly with the aim of convening an
international conference for the adoption of the global
pact. This is inconsistent with the title of the resolution,
8/9

10/05/2018

which calls for a global pact for the environment as a
final goal.
In conclusion, we must focus on achieving
sustainable development in its three dimensions:
economic, social and environmental. This should be
done when we seek to study and identify loopholes in
the current system and international instruments and
conventions related to the environment. Achieving
the goals and objectives of sustainable development to
which we aspire is the basis for finding the appropriate
means without giving up the principle of the shared and
differentiated responsibilities of Member States in this
regard. Therefore, and based on the above, my country’s
delegation voted against the resolution.
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China supports the international community in
enhancing dialogue and cooperation and addressing
environmental protection and other sustainable
development issues through multilateral platforms.
China commends and expresses its appreciation
for the French initiative, entitled “Towards a Global
Pact for the Environment”. China is of the view that
the development of environment-related international
instruments concerns international environmental law
and the fundamental interests of all States. The process
should therefore be driven by Member States and based
on extensive consultations so as to achieve the broadest
possible consensus.
The General Assembly and its ad hoc open-ended
working group should be guided by the principle
of consensus and the intergovernmental nature
of the working group must be maintained. When
deepening international cooperation on environmental
governance, the interests of all parties should be taken
into consideration in a comprehensive manner.
First, the consideration of environmental issues
should remain within the framework of sustainable
development for the benefit of greater coordination and
harmonization between environmental protection and
economic and social development.
Secondly, the principle of common but differentiated
responsibility should be upheld, and developing
countries should be helped to steadily improve
their environmental governance and sustainable
development capabilities.
Thirdly, the principle of national sovereignty
over environmental resources should be adhered to
18-14273

10/05/2018

as a prerequisite for international cooperation on the
environment and a right bestowed upon States by the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
general international law.
Fourthly, developing countries must be fully
involved and their concerns must be fully respected.
In the pursuit of economic development and better
livelihood, developing countries have a genuine need to
enhance environmental protection and governance, and
therefore should become indispensable participants in
international environmental governance.
Mr. Momeni (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, our delegation supported a fully Member
State-driven process and, as some speakers have
mentioned, a process based on respect for the sovereign
rights of countries and the principle of common but
differentiated responsibility. Furthermore, we support
the existing processes and we believe that there are

A/72/PV.88

enough existing processes. We are concerned that the
new processes damage the current processes.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I just
want to warmly thank the Member States for their
constructive spirit and support, which enabled us to
achieve today’s excellent result of 143 votes in favour of
resolution 72/277. We are particularly encouraged by the
support of approximately 100 sponsors. We are pleased
to follow up with discussions with all delegations in
the open-ended working group in this same open and
inclusive spirit. The Assembly can count on France’s
dedicated commitment to that end, in order to come
together for environmental protection with a view to
protecting the environment and our planet.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 14.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

18-142739/9
