United Nations

S/PV.6757

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6757th meeting
Monday, 23 April 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Laher
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-30484 (E)

*1230484*

S/PV.6757

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Australia, Bangladesh, Brazil,
Canada, Cuba, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Egypt, Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Lebanon, Malaysia,
Nicaragua, Norway, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab
Emirates and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to
participate in this meeting.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 19 April 2012 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/2012/247 and
which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in accordance
with its previous practice, the Security Council
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations to participate in the meeting of
the Security Council which will be held on
Monday, 23 April 2012, on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in this meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
It is so decided.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate in
this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Abdou Salam
Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European

2

Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.
Mr. Pascoe: Achieving a full and sustained
cessation of violence and seeking a peaceful resolution
of the crisis in Syria is at the centre of our efforts in the
Middle East. The Council took decisive action on
Saturday by authorizing the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria in response to the
proposal of the Secretary-General, who strongly
welcomed the unanimous adoption of resolution 2043
(2012). The Joint Special Envoy and the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations will
brief tomorrow on the good offices efforts and the
deployment of the observers. I will therefore limit my
comments to a few critical points before turning to the
Israeli-Palestinian issue.
We are at a pivotal moment in Syria. The
cessation of armed violence remains incomplete. Too
many lives have been lost. Human rights violations are
still being perpetrated with impunity. It is our hope that
the deployment of observers will help to stop the
killing and consolidate the calm. The objective,
however, is clearly not to freeze the situation but to
create the conditions for a serious and credible political
process. The Joint Special Envoy has called on both the
Government and the opposition to engage in such a
process as a matter of utmost priority. It is essential
that the Government of Syria fully and immediately
implement its obligations to stop using heavy weapons
and to pull back military forces from population
centres. Action on the other aspects of the six-point
plan is no less important. Measures taken by the Syrian
authorities to date, including on the release of
arbitrarily detained persons and respect for the right to
demonstrate peacefully, are clearly insufficient. Both
would be critical elements to creating the conditions
for a political solution through peaceful dialogue.
Ending the suffering of the people most affected
by the fighting also continues to be a top priority of our
collective efforts. The second meeting of the Syria
Humanitarian Forum took place on 20 April in Geneva.
This important mechanism, chaired by the United
Nations with the co-facilitation of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, the European Union and the
League of Arab States, gathered some 350 participants

12-30484

S/PV.6757

from Member States, United Nations agencies, the
International Committee of the Red Cross, the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies, and international non-governmental
organizations. Syrian Government representatives
recognized that there are serious humanitarian needs.
However, little progress has been made so far on
allowing the full and unimpeded access and increased
capacity of agencies on the ground required to ensure
the timely provision of humanitarian assistance. We
urge the Government to take all necessary steps to
facilitate the humanitarian response, as 1 million
people are in need. We welcome in this regard the
generous mobilization of donors’ support at the Syria
Humanitarian Forum meeting.
Let me now turn to the Middle East peace
process. For the United Nations, achieving peace
between Israelis and Palestinians is an undiminished
priority. The Secretary-General was pleased to join his
Quartet partners in Washington, D.C., on 11 April, in
order to reflect on developments over the past six
months and forge a way forward that builds on the
Quartet statement of 23 September 2011. Quartet
principals heard a briefing from Jordanian Foreign
Minister Nasser Judeh on ongoing Jordanian efforts to
promote exploratory talks. After a pause, negotiators
met again in Amman in early April and agreed to an
exchange of letters outlining their positions. Both
President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu have
since continued to reiterate their desire to negotiate.
Although the environment remains fragile, any
opportunity to pursue dialogue towards a resumption of
meaningful negotiations must be welcomed and
supported.
As previously agreed between the parties, on
17 April a senior Palestinian delegation met with Prime
Minister Netanyahu in Jerusalem to deliver a letter
from President Abbas. Prime Minister Netanyahu has
indicated his intention to respond in writing. A joint
statement following the meeting noted the commitment
of Israel and the Palestinian Authority to achieving
peace. It is our hope that this exchange of letters can
provide an opening for further dialogue.
At the same time, the Quartet recognized the
urgent need for tangible signs of progress on the
ground. It particularly underscored the need for
continued international support for the Palestinian
Authority’s important institution-building efforts. It
further drew attention to the need for $1.1 billion in

12-30484

assistance to meet the Palestinian Authority’s 2012
recurrent financing requirements. The Quartet urged
the speedy conclusion of efforts to resolve outstanding
issues related to tax and customs revenue collection. It
further singled out the need to improve development
for Area C in the West Bank as central to the viability
of a future Palestinian State. Palestinians require access
to a fair planning and zoning regime so they do not
have to resort to building unauthorized structures that
lead to unjustified demolitions, which often impact the
most vulnerable people. Access to Area C will also
enable much-needed urban development, particularly
in areas adjacent to established cities.
Reminding both parties of their obligations under
the Road Map, the Quartet reiterated its call on them to
avoid actions that undermine trust. Absent a political
horizon, the fragility of the situation on the ground
raises serious concerns. On 30 March, on the occasion
of Land Day, large demonstrations were held in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, as well as in
Gaza, Lebanon, Jordan and, to a smaller extent, Egypt
and Syria. Clashes between demonstrators and the
Israel Defense Forces (IDF) resulted in one Palestinian
being killed and some 180 wounded. The IDF used
crowd-control measures aimed at minimizing the
number of casualties, which otherwise would have
been higher. Palestinian security forces in the West
Bank and Gaza also took measures to avoid bloodshed,
and in Lebanon the Lebanese authorities took measures
to prevent tension and violence in the immediate
vicinity of the Blue Line. Nevertheless, we remain
mindful that, in the current tenuous environment, there
is always the risk of an eruption of violence.
This risk was further illustrated by the security
incidents observed this month. Clashes between
demonstrators and the IDF resulted in four Palestinian
deaths and 293 injuries, including among 30 children.
The IDF conducted 314 operations in the occupied
West Bank, during which one Palestinian was killed
and 248 Palestinians, including 12 children, were
injured. Two IDF soldiers were also injured. Two
hundred and nine Palestinians were arrested. On
18 April, the Israeli military suspended a senior
military officer who had assaulted a foreign activist in
the West Bank and a commando soldier who killed a
Palestinian during a training session in a West Bank
village. On 2 April, Israeli security forces raided a
Palestinian media centre in East Jerusalem, seizing
equipment and files. On two occasions, on 2 and

3

S/PV.6757

19 April, Israeli citizens were attacked in East
Jerusalem — reportedly, by a Palestinian armed with
an axe, in the first instance; neither sustained lifethreatening injuries.
The Quartet has taken note of the significant
progress on security achieved by the Palestinian
Authority in the West Bank. Palestinian security forces
have continued their efforts to maintain law and order
in the West Bank. However, there were a few incidents.
On 15 April, one Palestinian militant was killed, and
several others were injured, in a shoot-out with
Palestinian security forces conducting an arrest raid
near Jenin. With respect to the transparent enforcement
of law and order by Palestinian Authority security
forces in the West Bank, we are particularly concerned
about reports about an increase in arrests or
intimidation of Palestinian journalists and bloggers for
expressing their views.
The Israeli Government has announced tenders
for more than 1,000 housing units in the occupied
Palestinian territory, 870 of which are in the East
Jerusalem settlement of Har Homa, with the remainder
in a settlement in the West Bank. Those actions
undermine efforts to achieve a two-State solution and
are contrary to international law.
As a result of a court case brought by an Israeli
settler association, two Palestinian households of
refugee families were evicted from their homes in the
heart of the Palestinian neighbourhood of Beit Hanina,
in East Jerusalem. In total, 54 Palestinian structures,
including 14 residences, were demolished in the West
Bank, leading to the displacement of 117 Palestinians,
including 63 children.
The Quartet is concerned about the ongoing
settler violence in the West Bank and called on Israel to
take effective measures, including bringing the
perpetrators of such acts to justice. On 4 April, Israeli
security forces evacuated 12 settler families who had
taken up residence in a house in Hebron.
The Secretary-General follows closely the
situation of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli detention
centres. Some 320 remain under administrative
detention. On 1 April, the case of prisoner Hana
Shalabi came to an end when she agreed to be deported
to Gaza, after a 43-day hunger strike. However, on
17 April, demonstrations in Gaza and the West Bank
took place to commemorate Palestinian Prisoners Day,
and 1,200 Palestinian prisoners reportedly started an

4

open-ended hunger strike to protest the conditions of
Palestinian prisoners.
Turning to Gaza, the Quartet, while reaffirming
its previous positions, stated that the situation in and
around Gaza will remain unsustainable so long as it is
not reunited with the West Bank under the legitimate
Palestinian Authority adhering to the commitments of
the
Palestine
Liberation
Organization.
The
reconciliation process has yet to see any progress since
the Doha declaration of 6 February. The Quartet further
underscored the importance of continued steps to
address the needs of Gaza’s residents, and welcomed
the Israeli Government’s approval at the meeting of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians on priority
United Nations infrastructure projects in Gaza.
This month, a total of 13 rockets, including 1
Grad rocket and 11 mortars, were fired from Gaza into
Israel, while the IDF conducted 3 incursions and 3
airstrikes into Gaza. Clashes in Gaza resulted in the
death of two Palestinian civilians and one militant.
Thirty-nine civilians and two militants were injured.
One Palestinian was killed in tunnel-related activities.
Two Palestinians were killed by IDF troops on 1 and
3 April, respectively, when approaching the security
fence. One was allegedly armed and trying to plant
explosives, but the second was an unarmed 17-year-old
boy. Indiscriminate rocket attacks from Gaza into
Israel must cease and Israeli forces must show
maximum restraint.
On 7 April, Hamas de facto authorities executed
three prisoners, two of them charged with criminal
cases and one accused of collaboration with Israel. The
execution was carried out without the approval of
President Abbas, as required by Palestinian basic law.
Palestinian
and
international
human
rights
organizations have strongly condemned the continued
Hamas policy of execution in Gaza. The United
Nations continues to call for the cessation of all
military trials by Palestinian authorities.
In another development, on 5 March two Grad
rockets were reportedly fired from the Sinai peninsula
towards the Israeli city of Eilat. One rocket landed near
a residential area, causing minor damage.
The Secretary-General welcomed the recent
meeting and joint public commitments of Israelis and
Palestinians. What is important now is to transform
that fragile opening into an opportunity to

12-30484

S/PV.6757

incrementally promote dialogue while ensuring
continued international support for the Palestinian
Authority’s institution-building efforts.

stewardship of the Council in the month of March. I
also express our appreciation for the important briefing
to the Council today given by Mr. Lynn Pascoe.

Let me briefly turn to the situation in Lebanon.
On 4 April, Mr. Samir Geagea, the leader of the
Lebanese forces, escaped an apparent assassination
attempt when two bullets were fired at him in the
garden of his residence, narrowly missing their target.
The Lebanese authorities are investigating that attack
on the life of one of its major political figures.

In spite of relentless Israeli assaults on the rights,
land and very existence of the Palestinian people, they
remain committed to peace and have not forsaken their
legitimate national aspirations, including for the
realization of their inalienable right to selfdetermination in their homeland. That was reconfirmed
in the letter conveyed on 17 April by President
Mahmoud Abbas to Prime Minister Netanyahu. It is a
reaffirmation of our genuine commitment to the path of
peace and a direct call on Israel, the occupying Power,
to cease its illegal expansionism and oppression of the
Palestinian people, respect international law and not
miss this historic opportunity for peace.

The situation along Lebanon’s borders with Syria
remains of concern. On 9 April, a cameraman for the
Lebanese television network Al-Jadeed was killed in
the Lebanese border region of Wadi Khaled by gunfire
emanating from the Syrian side. President Sleiman,
Prime Minister Mikati and representatives across the
entire political spectrum in Lebanon condemned the
incident. The Lebanese authorities have launched an
inquiry into the incident and have requested that Syrian
authorities undertake their own investigation.
The United Nations continues to coordinate
closely with the Government of Lebanon on the
provision of assistance to the 9,700 Syrian refugees
registered in northern Lebanon, as well as on matters
of protection and the determination of their status.
Special Coordinator Plumbly toured the area on
17 April and met with local political and security
representatives and with Syrian refugees. In the eastern
Lebanese Bekaa Valley, the latest assessment of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees is that approximately 7,500 Syrian refugees
are receiving assistance.
The overall situation in the area of operations of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon has
remained generally quiet and stable. Air violations by
the Israeli Defense Forces have continued on an almost
daily basis.
The President: I thank Mr. Pascoe for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Mansour: On behalf of Palestine, I
congratulate you, Madam President, as well as your
country, the United States of America, on your
presidency of the Security Council this month. We are
fully confident in your leadership. I also express
appreciation to the United Kingdom for its skilled

12-30484

In word and deed, the Palestinian leadership has
upheld its obligations and adhered to the historic
compromise consecrated in the 1988 Palestinian
declaration of independence and the Palestine
Liberation Organization’s participation in the Middle
East peace process since its inception, more than two
decades ago, with the aim of achieving the two-State
solution based on the pre-1967 borders and on
comprehensive peace. Astoundingly, that commitment
has prevailed in spite of Israel’s systematic aggression,
colonization and human rights violations, by which it
continues to cause immense suffering to the Palestinian
people and to obstruct the peace process, undermine
the Palestinian Authority and destroy the principles and
objectives of the two-State solution.
Moreover, despite the failure to hold Israel
accountable and to fulfil the legal and moral
obligations towards Palestine, it is clear that the
international community has also not forsaken the
noble goal of peace for Palestine and Israel and the
wider region. That is attested to, inter alia, by the
countless initiatives and consistent calls for ending the
Israeli occupation and for achieving Palestine’s
independence by Governments and international and
regional organizations, including the United Nations,
the League of Arab States, the Non-Aligned
Movement, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
the European Union, the African Union, the IndiaBrazil-South Africa trilateral mechanism, the Summit
of South American-Arab Countries and others. Of
course, this also includes the efforts of the Quartet and
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
the International Assistance to Palestinians, including

5

S/PV.6757

the recent Brussels meeting and the 11 April Quartet
statement (see SG/2182), despite that it falls short of
expectations given the responsibilities undertaken by
the Quartet.
It is also reflected in the provision of
humanitarian aid and financial assistance to Palestine.
And it is certainly reflected in the strong expressions of
solidarity by peace-loving people from all over the
globe who continue in ways large and small to support
our people. Here, we condemn again Israel’s excessive
force and incitement against Palestinian civilians
protesting the occupation, as well as against
international activists peacefully supporting Palestine,
ranging from the killing of an American citizen, Rachel
Corrie, to the criminal attack on the Gaza humanitarian
flotilla, in which nine Turkish civilians were murdered,
to the latest incident of brutality by an Israeli
commander against a young Danish peace activist and
several other activists.
All such support reaffirms the international
commitment to our just cause and nourishes our
resilience. That is why, despite our intense despair and
frustration, we have not given up on the goal of the
independence of a sovereign, viable, contiguous,
democratic State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side by side in peace and security
with Israel, based on the pre-1967 borders and a just,
agreed solution to the Palestine refugee problem. Yet,
we are all aware that hope cannot be sustained in a
vacuum. Without a credible political horizon, our
hopes and convictions are being eroded. The continuity
of this horizon is being obstructed by Israel’s refusal to
respect the longstanding parameters of the peace
process, enshrined in the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map, and Israel’s brazen
impunity, which makes peace seem impossible.
Belief in the two-State solution is diminishing,
particularly as Israel continues its illegal settlement
activities all over the occupied Palestinian territory,
including occupied East Jerusalem, leading us to a
point where many now openly question the
attainability of that solution and where the
consideration of alternative solutions is on the rise. The
failure to bring a halt to Israel’s settlement campaign,
which would enable us to overcome the impasse and
resume direct negotiations, threatens to unravel all that
has been achieved to date and to usher in an era of
even greater instability and uncertainty.

6

In the period since our debate in January (see
S/PV.6706), and even in just the few days since the
delivery of President Mahmoud Abbas’s letter, Israel
has forged ahead non-stop with its illegal colonization
campaign, confiscating land, building settlements and
the wall, demolishing homes and infrastructure, and
evicting Palestinian families. Israeli officials continue
to make provocative declarations regarding settlement
expansion, apparently vying with each other for the
largest land grabs, along with flagrant attempts to
entrench illegal settlement outposts on Palestinian
land, including attempts by the Israeli Prime Minister
himself.
We have drawn the Security Council’s attention
to such illegal actions in the recent period in and
around the cities of Bethlehem, East Jerusalem and
Al-Khalil, as well as to horrific acts committed against
Palestinians by Israeli settlers with the full support of
the Israeli Government. It is by now well-known that
the Palestinian presence in many of those areas,
especially in East Jerusalem, the Christian community
in the Bethlehem area and the Bedouin community in
the Jordan Valley, is being gravely threatened;
livelihoods, particularly in agriculture, are being
devastated; and entire communities, such as those in
Al-Khalil, are living under the constant terror of
extremist settlers. Regrettably, however, our appeals
have been to no avail, and the Council remains unable
to uphold its duties to stop Israel’s aggression, which is
further destabilizing the situation and literally
destroying the two-State solution.
The international community cannot remain on
the sidelines. The Security Council’s Charter duties are
clear, as are the responsibilities of United Nations
Member States and the obligations of the high
contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Serious, practical measures must be undertaken to
compel Israel to halt its illegal settlement activities and
all other related unlawful policies in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and to
begin genuinely moving towards ending this
illegitimate, belligerent 45-year-old occupation.
Israel must stop expanding its massive network of
settlements and the wall, stop its deceitful attempts
regarding the establishment of illegal settlement
outposts, and stop its displacement of Palestinians,
notably in the areas of the West Bank commonly
referred to as Area C. It must be pointed out that, while
the designation of Area C under the Oslo Accords was,

12-30484

S/PV.6757

like the Accords themselves, intended as a temporary
measure, it has instead become frozen in time by the
occupying Power for its own obvious illegal gain.
There, Israel continues to gravely harm the Palestinian
presence and Palestinian development, rabidly
pursuing illegal measures to alter the demographic
composition, character and status of that vast area of
land in order to ease its de facto annexation, which
must be completely rejected.
Tensions have also risen in the recent period
owing to intensification of the Palestinian prisoner
crisis. Thousands of Palestinian civilians, including
children, are have been inhumanely imprisoned by the
occupying Power, which routinely violates their human
rights and subjects them to severe humiliation and
torture. Among the prisoners, hundreds have been held
under “administrative detention” for months and years
without charge or trial, with several Palestinians
undertaking hunger strikes in protest of that illegal
practice, with several of them on hunger strike for over
one month. Moreover, on 17 April, a day of solidarity
observed as Palestinian Prisoners Day, approximately
1,600 Palestinians in Israeli prisons joined the hunger
strike in a peaceful, non-violent protest against their
captivity and the deplorable conditions under which
they are being held.
We call on the international community to
immediately address that crisis. It must be demanded
that Israel respect its obligations under the Fourth
Geneva Convention and under human rights law. It
cannot be permitted to continue its daily arrests — with
at least 2,000 Palestinians arrested since the prisoner
exchange in October alone, including some released in
the exchange — and abusive treatment of Palestinian
prisoners, with no recourse for the victims of this
policy, which is destroying the hearts, minds and spirits
of so many of our citizens and destroying our society’s
fabric. We call for an end to that illegal Israeli practice
and for the release of all Palestinian prisoners.
We have also, in the recent period, drawn the
Council’s attention to Israel’s escalation of attacks
against the Gaza Strip, wherein the occupying Power
has carried out a series of military strikes against
civilian areas, including extrajudicial killings, which in
the course of a few days in early March led to the
killing of at least 18 Palestinians, among them
children, and the wounding of dozens of other
civilians. Israeli military operations have also included
assaults against Palestinians commemorating Land Day

12-30484

on 30 March, in which the occupying forces fired tear
gas, stun grenades and live ammunition, killing a
young man and wounding more than 300. Such acts of
aggression continue to traumatize the Palestinian
people, particularly in Gaza, where the civilian
population continues to suffer vastly from the
devastating impact of the Israeli blockade and the
criminal Israeli military aggression of 2008-2009 —
for which, to date, there has been regrettably, no
accountability and no justice, which our people and
leadership continue to demand.
Israel’s settlement campaign — the main obstacle
to the peace process — as well as the blockade of
Gaza, the imprisonment of Palestinians and all other
forms of collective punishment against our people must
be ceased, in order to avert the escalation of tensions
and a further deterioration of the situation. The
Security Council must find the political will to act. An
unequivocal demand must be made for Israel, as the
occupying Power and as a State Member of the United
Nations, to abide by its legal obligations under the
Charter, the Fourth Geneva Convention and United
Nations resolutions. It is time to end the selective
application of the law and the shameful pretexts, which
have only fed Israeli impunity. Should Israel choose to
ignore this appeal — instead entrenching the
occupation and continuing to oppress the Palestinian
people — the international community has a
responsibility to act to bring an end to this unlawful
situation.
In that context, we stress the importance of the
proposed Security Council visit to the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Such a
visit, long-overdue, would reaffirm the Council’s role
in securing peace and enhancing its engagement and
credibility. Moreover, it would allow Council members
to assess first-hand the reality on the ground under
Israel’s occupation, thereby better informing their
understanding of the various dimensions of the conflict
and of the efforts needed to overcome the obstacles to
direct negotiations and to salvage the two-State
solution along pre-1967 borders. We urge Council
members to make a positive decision soon on the
matter.
Furthermore, we reiterate our call on the
depositary State, Switzerland, to take the necessary
measures to convene a conference of the high
contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention to
determine means to ensure respect of the Convention in

7

S/PV.6757

the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. We stress the value of such a conference for
upholding the rule of law, compelling compliance by
Israel and reaffirming the primacy of international
humanitarian law for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, including under foreign occupation.
I conclude by reiterating that the Palestinian
leadership remains committed to its international
obligations and the pursuit of peace, justice and the
fulfilment of the rights and national aspirations of the
Palestinian people in accordance with international
legality.
It is time for Israel to respect the law and finally
respond to the historic, genuine compromise made by
the Palestinian people and the Arab States, as enshrined
in the Arab Peace Initiative, now in its tenth year, and
to respond to the hand that continues to be extended for
peace. In word and deed, Israel must prove that it is
serious about ending its military occupation of
Palestinian land since 1967 and reaching a
comprehensive peace that will allow the Palestinian
people to live in freedom in their State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, achieve justice,
including for the Palestine refugees, and allow Israel
and Palestine to peacefully coexist and thrive side by
side, as well as with all our neighbours in the region,
ensuring a future of freedom, dignity and security for
all of our children.
Should Israel once again respond with
intransigence and impunity, undermining all of our
efforts and deepening the impasse, the Palestinian
people and their leadership will not give up, but will
continue to pursue all peaceful, non-violent, legitimate
political, diplomatic and legal avenues in the
international arena to ensure the restoration of the
Palestinian people’s inalienable rights and the ultimate
achievement of peace and justice. We will not cease
our appeals to the international community to uphold
its responsibilities in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Let me begin by thanking
you personally, Madam President, for your outstanding
leadership of the Security Council this month.
Churchill once said that in the time it takes a lie
to get halfway around the world, the truth is still
getting its pants on. In the barren deserts of the Middle

8

East, myths find fertile ground to grow wild. Facts
often remain buried in the sand. The myths forged in
our region travel abroad — and can find their way,
surprisingly, even into this Chamber. I would like to
use today’s debate as an opportunity to address just a
few of the myths that have become a permanent
hindrance to our discussion of the Middle East here at
the United Nations.
Myth number one is that the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is the central conflict in the Middle East. If
you solve that conflict, you have solved all the other
conflicts in the region. Make no mistake; it is
important for Israel and the Palestinians to find a
resolution to our long-standing conflict for its own
merits. Yet the truth is that conflicts in Syria, Yemen,
Egypt, Bahrain and many other parts of the Middle
East have absolutely nothing to do with Israel.
It is obvious that resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict will not stop the persecution of minorities
across the region, end the subjugation of women or
heal sectarian divides. Obsessing over Israel has not
stopped Al-Assad’s tanks from flattening entire
communities. On the contrary, it has only distracted
attention from his crimes. Even this morning’s debate
has lost any sense of proportion. Thousands are being
killed in Syria, hundreds in Yemen and dozens in Iraq.
Yet, this debate once again is repeatedly and
obsessively focused on the legitimate actions of the
Government of the only democracy in the Middle East.
Dedicating the majority of this debate to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, month after month, has not
stopped the Iranian regime’s centrifuges from spinning.
Iran’s ambitions for nuclear weapons are the single
greatest threat to the Middle East and the entire world.
The Iranian nuclear programme continues to advance at
the speed of an express train. The international
community’s efforts to stop it are moving at the pace of
the local train, pausing and stopping at every station
for some nations to get on and off. The danger of
inaction is clear. We cannot allow the diplomatic
channel to provide another avenue for the Iranian
regime to stall for more time, as it inches closer and
closer to a nuclear weapon.
Myth number two is that there is a humanitarian
crisis in the Gaza Strip. In fact, numerous international
organizations have said clearly that there is no
humanitarian crisis in Gaza, including the deputy head
of the Red Cross office in the area. Gaza’s real gross

12-30484

S/PV.6757

domestic product grew by more than 25 per cent during
the first three quarters of 2011. Exports are expanding.
International humanitarian projects are moving forward
at a rapid pace. There is not a single civilian good that
cannot enter Gaza today. Yet, as aid flows into the area,
missiles fly out. That is the crisis in Gaza, and that is
what keeps Gaza from realizing its real potential.
It is a simple equation. If it is calm in Israel, it
will be calm in Gaza. But the people of Gaza will face
hardship as long as terrorists use them as human
shields to rain rockets down on Israeli cities. Each
rocket in Gaza is armed with a warhead capable of
causing a political earthquake that would extend well
beyond Israel’s borders. It will take only one rocket
landing in the wrong place at the wrong time to change
the equation on the ground. If that happens, Israel’s
leaders will be forced to respond in a completely
different manner. It is time for everyone in the
Chamber to finally wake up to that dangerous reality.
The Security Council has not condemned a single
rocket attack from Gaza. History’s lessons are clear.
Today’s silence is tomorrow’s tragedy.
Myth number three is that settlements are the
primary obstacle to peace. How many times have we
heard that argument in this Chamber? Just this month,
the Human Rights Council proposed yet another factfinding mission to Israel. It will explore — surprise,
surprise — Israeli settlements.
Today I would like to save the Human Rights
Council and the international community some time
and energy. The facts have already been found. They
are plain for all to see. The fact is that, from 1948 to
1967, the West Bank was part of Jordan and Gaza was
part of Egypt. The Arab world did not lift a finger to
create a Palestinian State, and it sought Israel’s
annihilation when not a single settlement stood
anywhere in the West Bank or Gaza. The fact is that in
2005, when I was Director General of Israel’s Foreign
Service, we took every settlement out of Gaza and got
only rockets on our cities in return. The fact is that the
Israeli Government put in place an unprecedented
10-month moratorium on settlements. The Palestinian
leadership used that gesture as an opportunity to take
Israel and the international community on another ride
to nowhere. For nine of those 10 months, it rejected the
moratorium as insufficient, and then demanded that we
extend it. As former United States Special Envoy
George Mitchell said, “What had been less than

12-30484

worthless a few months earlier became indispensable
to continue negotiations” to the Palestinians.
The primary obstacle to peace is not settlements.
The primary obstacle to peace is the so-called claim of
return and the Palestinians’ refusal to recognize Israel’s
right to exist as the nation State of the Jewish people.
We will never hear Palestinian leaders say “two States
for two peoples”. We will not hear them say “two
States for two peoples” because today the Palestinian
leadership is calling for an independent Palestinian
State, but insists that its people return to the Jewish
State. That would mean the destruction of Israel.
Some might say, “Oh Ambassador, but the
Palestinians know that they will have to give up that
claim; that is what they whisper quietly at the
negotiating table”. The Palestinian leadership has never
said publicly — either to the Palestinian people, to the
Arab world, to the international community, or to
anyone else — that it will give up the so-called claim
of return. Since the Palestinian leadership refuses to
tell the Palestinian people the truth, the international
community has the responsibility and duty to tell them
the truth. The international community has a duty to
stand up and say that the so-called claim of return is a
non-starter.
Instead of telling the Palestinian people the truth,
much of the international community stands idle as the
Arab world tries to erase the Jewish people’s historical
connection to the land of Israel. Across the Arab world,
and even at this table, we hear claims that Israel is
“Judaizing Jerusalem”. To my mind, those accusations
come about 3,000 years too late. It is like accusing the
National Basketball Association of Americanizing
basketball.
Like many nations around this table, the Jewish
people have a proud, age-old legacy of kings and
queens. In our case, however, the tradition goes back a
few years earlier. Since King David laid the
cornerstone of his palace in the tenth century BC,
Jerusalem has served as the heart of our faith.
In debate after debate, speakers sit in this
Chamber and say that Israel is committing ethnic
cleansing in Jerusalem, even though the percentage of
Arab residents in the city has grown from 26 per cent
to 35 per cent since 1967.
The holiest sites in Jerusalem, the eternal capital
of the Jewish people, were closed only to Jews from

9

S/PV.6757

1948 until 1967. Everyone could come to see those
sites except Jews. There was absolutely no freedom of
worship. The world did not say a word about the
situation in Jerusalem at that time. Since Israel unified
the city, it has thrived under the values of tolerance and
freedom. For the first time in centuries, sacred places
that were once sealed off along religious lines are now
permanently open for worship by all peoples. That is a
principle grounded in our values, our actions and our
laws.
There is another great truth that the Organization
has completely overlooked for the past 64 years. In all
of the pages that the United Nations has written about
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in all of its reports and
fact-finding commissions, and in all the hours
dedicated to debate about the Middle East, there is one
great untold story. Or, to be more specific, there are
more than 850,000 untold stories.
More than 850,000 Jews have been uprooted from
their homes in Arab countries during the past 64 years.
Those were vibrant communities dating back 2,500
years. On the banks of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers,
Babylonian Jewry produced many of Judaism’s holiest
books and thrived for two millenniums. In the great
synagogues and libraries of Cairo, Jews preserved the
intellectual and scientific treasures of antiquity into the
Renaissance. From Aleppo to Aden to Alexandria, Jews
stood out as some of the greatest artists, musicians,
businessmen, and writers. All those communities were
wiped out. Age-old family businesses and properties
were confiscated. Jewish quarters were destroyed.
Pogroms left synagogues looted, graveyards desecrated
and thousands dead.
The pages that the United Nations has written
about the Palestinian refugees could fill up soccer
stadiums, but not a drop of ink has been spilled about
the Jewish refugees. Out of over 1,088 United Nations
resolutions on the Middle East, one will not find a
single syllable regarding the displacement of Jewish
refugees. There have been more than 172 resolutions
exclusively devoted to Palestinian refugees, but not
one dedicated to Jewish refugees. The Palestinian
refugees have their own United Nations agency, their
own information programme, and their own department
within the United Nations. None exists for the Jewish
refugees. The expression “double standard” does not
even begin to describe that gap. That discrepancy is
very convenient for some in this Chamber, but it is not
right.

10

The time has come for the United Nations to end
its complicity in trying to erase the stories of 850,000
people from history. The time has also come to speak
openly in these halls about the Arab world’s role in
maintaining the Palestinians as refugees for more than
six decades. Jews from Arab countries came to refugee
camps in Israel, which eventually gave birth to thriving
towns and cities. Refugee camps in Arab countries
gave birth to more Palestinian refugees. Israel
welcomed its Jewish refugees with citizenship and
unlocked their vast potential. As they rose to the
highest levels of society, our refugees lifted the State of
Israel to new heights.
Let us imagine if Arab countries had done the
same with their Palestinian refugees. Instead, they have
cynically perpetuated their status as refugees,
generation after generation. Across the Arab world,
Palestinians have been denied citizenship, rights and
opportunities. Those are facts that must be neither
forgotten nor overlooked as we look to moving forward
on the path to peace.
I have saved the most obvious myth for last —
the myth that peace between Israelis and Palestinians
can somehow be achieved by bypassing direct
negotiations. History has shown that peace and
negotiations are inseparable. Direct negotiations are
the only tool, the only way and the only path to
creating two States for two peoples. Last January in
Amman, Israel offered a clear proposal for restarting
direct negotiations. We presented the Palestinian
delegation with negotiating positions on every major
issue separating the parties.
That proposal, filled with Israel’s vision for
peace, continues to gather dust as Palestinian leaders
continue to pile up new pre-conditions for sitting down
with Israel. They are everywhere except at the
negotiating table. It is time for them to give up
unilateral efforts to internationalize the conflict and to
take up the real path to peace.
This week, we will observe the two most
significant public holidays in Israel: our Day of
Remembrance and our Day of Independence. On
Wednesday, sirens will sound across Israel. For two
minutes, everything will come to a halt. People will
stop in their tracks, cars will pull over to the side of
highways, and the entire country will pause to
remember the more than 22,000 Israelis who have been

12-30484

S/PV.6757

killed by wars and terrorism in our nation’s short
history in our region.
On Thursday, we will celebrate the rebirth of the
Jewish nation and our 64 years as a free people in our
ancient homeland. Against persistent threats and
overwhelming odds, Israel has not only survived but
thrived. I walk the halls of the Organization tall and
proud of my extraordinary nation of just 7 million
people, which has produced 10 Nobel Prize laureates,
sends satellites up into space, puts electric cars on the
road and develops the technology needed to run
everything from cell phones to solar panels to medical
devices.
We intentionally commemorate these two days
one after the other. As we, the Israeli people, celebrate
our independence, we carry the heavy weight of great
sacrifice and suffering. The lesson we take from these
days is clear. We can never turn a blind eye to the
dangers around us. We cannot pretend that we live in a
stable region filled with Jeffersonian democracies. But
there is another lesson that will fill the hearts of
Israelis this week. We can never, ever give up the hope
of lasting peace. The price of conflict is too high. The
evil of war is too great. That is the fundamental truth
that guides our leaders.
In the dangerous uncertainty of a turbulent
Middle East, the Security Council has never had a
greater responsibility to separate myth from truth and
fact from fiction. The clarity of candour has never been
more valuable. The need for honest disclosure has
never been clearer. It is time for the Council to sweep
out the cobwebs of old illusions and to plant the seeds
for a truly open debate on the Middle East. The
challenges before us demand nothing less.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs for his briefing. I would also like
to thank the Permanent Observer of Palestine and the
Permanent Representative of Israel for their statements.
The Council’s consideration today of the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
once more gives our delegations an opportunity to
address the events that are unfolding in that region,
events that elicit more fears than hopes, despite the
efforts of the United Nations and the international

12-30484

community. We will limit our remarks in this debate to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the situations in
Yemen and Syria.
With regard to Syria, while we can welcome the
fact that in the space of a week the Security Council
has succeeded in adopting two resolutions (2042
(2012) and 2043 (2012)), on sending a supervision
mission to that country, that does not make the
situation on the ground any less precarious. Togo
remains concerned by the fact that the parties’
declarations of good intentions are not always followed
by actions that reflect respect for the commitments
they have made, in this case to implementing the sixpoint plan of the Joint Special Envoy of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States, Mr. Kofi
Annan.
The Council is nonetheless doing all it can to get
them to do so and to throw all its weight behind a
settlement of this crisis, which has, unfortunately, left
thousands dead, destroyed major parts of the country’s
infrastructure and imperilled national unity. The
establishment, two days ago through resolution 2043
(2012) of the United Nations Supervision Mission in
Syria (UNSMIS), is manifest proof of those efforts. In
the final analysis, we continue to hope that the
presence of observers on the ground will promote the
speedy implementation of the Joint Special Envoy’s
proposals, even if we see violations of the ceasefire
every day. Togo once again urges every element of the
Syrian Government and opposition to work to bring an
end to the violence and to agree to sit down at the
negotiation table in order to map out together a new
future for their country with the international
community’s support. We believe that Mr. Annan’s
mission offers Syria a unique opportunity to return to
peace. We urge the country’s political class to work to
that end.
On the question of Yemen, we are pleased to note
that the situation there has seen a period of calm since
the holding on 21 February of the presidential election.
The success of that election is a credit to the Yemeni
people and a genuine sign of their willingness to end
the crisis situation that prevailed there and to work
towards finding peace in a fraternal and inclusive
spirit.
While in its presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/8)
of 29 March the Security Council expressed its concern at
the deterioration in cooperation between the political

11

S/PV.6757

actors in the country and about the dangers that poses for
transition, it is nonetheless encouraging to note that a
month later the country has seen no major regrettable
developments. Togo welcomes this situation and urges
the Yemeni people to spare no effort in committing their
country to the road to peace, security and prosperity.
My country also encourages the new leaders to
work together with the opposition and representatives
of the various interest groups to bring peace to the
country. In that context, the international community
and the United Nations should continue to support the
legitimate authorities in their fight against the armed
terrorist groups that are proliferating in several regions
of Yemen and that threaten the country’s unity and
territorial integrity.
Such support is all the more urgent in view of the
fact that famine and malnutrition continue to ravage
the country. Given that food insecurity, Togo can only
encourage the humanitarian organizations that are
already aiding those who are most helpless in the face
of the conditions of insecurity that obtain in the
country to continue their work, and to invite countries
that possess the means and capacity to support that
work in the most appropriate manner possible. My
country also believes that it is imperative that the
international community help the Government of
Yemen to initiate projects aimed at helping young
people in order to ensure that this important segment of
the population does not fall into despair, violence or
the quest for easy money.
Turning to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, we are
compelled to conclude that there has been no
significant progress made in several months. The only
positive note on the military front last month was the
ceasefire agreement between the Islamic Jihad and
Israel that halted the cycle of violence in the Gaza
Strip. On the political front, after the suspension of the
series of direct meetings between Israel and Palestine
begun last January under Jordan’s auspices, it is
encouraging to note that the two parties have once
more committed to returning to negotiations. The new
exploratory meeting of the two countries’ authorities,
held in Amman on 4 April after the January discussions
had produced no concrete results, is also evidence of
Jordan’s continued efforts to relaunch the negotiations
that, as if we needed reminding, have been deadlocked
since September 2010.

12

Furthermore, the meeting of the Foreign
Ministers of the Quartet and the Secretary-General,
which took place on 11 April in Washington, D.C, in
the presence of Special Envoy Tony Blair and Jordan’s
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Nasser Judeh, is also
an example of this willingness to restart direct talks
between the two parties. Togo believes that the Quartet
should put pressure on the parties to return to direct
negotiations so that the issues that separate them can
be resolved in favour of a definitive settlement of the
conflict.
Peace in the Middle East depends on a resolution
of the Palestinian question. The international
community should continue to work unflaggingly to
seek appropriate solutions to the conflict and to support
every initiative made in that direction. My country,
which maintains good relations with the Government
of Israel and the Palestinian Authority, encourages both
to commit intensely to direct negotiations, which are
the only route, ultimately, to the creation of a viable
Palestinian State living side by side with the State of
Israel within clearly defined and internationally
recognized borders. Togo also calls on the entire
Palestinian political class, and in particular the most
radical groups, to transcend their rigid positions and to
work together towards direct negotiations with the
State of Israel.
After several decades of conflict that have left
thousands dead on both sides, it is disturbing to note
that the time for peace is being perpetually and
indefinitely postponed. The United Nations and the
international community have the heavy responsibility
of working towards that peace between Palestine and
Israel, and, beyond that, throughout the Middle East.
However, they cannot reach that goal unless all parties
directly concerned commit to working in good faith to
promote peace and security for their peoples and the
nations of the region.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): At the outset, I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his very
thorough briefing, as well as the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for their statements.
Portugal aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.
Over the past year, Palestinians have watched the
international community lend its full support to the
fulfilment of the legitimate aspirations of their brethren

12-30484

S/PV.6757

in several Arab countries, while daily life in the
occupied Palestinian territory has become increasingly
harsh under Israel’s continued and reinforced
occupation 20 years on from Oslo. We cannot stress
enough the urgency of solving the Palestinian question,
the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, through the
establishment of a viable and contiguous Palestinian
State on the basis of the internationally endorsed
parameters.
In the light of that, Portugal welcomes the
initiative by President Abbas to send a letter to the
Prime Minister of Israel as a demonstration of his
goodwill and commitment to a just, peaceful and
negotiated settlement. We look forward to Prime
Minister Netanyahu’s response and hope that that
exchange of letters will foster an environment
conducive to the swift resumption of direct talks
between the parties based on the 23 September Quartet
statement (see SG/2178). We welcome the Quartet’s
11 April renewed call to the parties to meet those
objectives (see SG/2182).
Portugal has always stood firmly behind the
efforts of the Quartet. We also very much agree that all
core issues can only be finally settled through direct
negotiations. We continue to believe that the
23 September Quartet statement can provide an
adequate framework for discussions on all core issues
with a view to achieving a final settlement within a
strict time frame. We also very much appreciate
Jordan’s efforts in that regard. For those efforts to
succeed, the parties must commit seriously to
negotiations, show good faith and refrain from
provocative actions that undermine confidence in each
other and in the negotiation process.
We regret that Israel continues blatantly to ignore
and defy all pleas that it fulfil its obligations. We once
again urge the Israeli authorities to immediately cease
all settlement activity, demolitions and evictions in the
West Bank, including in East Jerusalem. As they are
well aware, all those actions are illegal under
international law. Furthermore, they are quickly
rendering physically impossible any peaceful
agreement based on a two-State solution.
We strongly condemn the approval of the new
construction in a range of settlements, as well as the
recent evictions of Palestinian families, including
refugees, from their homes in Beit Hanina, for the
purpose of paving the way for the first Jewish

12-30484

residential presence and a new settlement in the midst
of yet another traditional Palestinian neighbourhood in
East Jerusalem.
We welcome the decision by the Israeli Supreme
Court sustaining the dismantlement of the Migron
outpost by 1 August and the evacuation of the Ulpana
neighbourhood in the settlement of Beit El by 1 May.
We hope that the Israeli Government will abide fully
by the Supreme Court’s rulings. We also expect it to
cease all plans and attempts to retroactively legalize
outposts. Under international law, all settlement
activity is illegal, including outposts, as is Israel’s
appropriation of occupied territory, regardless of
whether it is private or public.
In Gaza the situation remains one of grave
concern and, despite some welcome progress, Israel
needs to do much more to enable the reconstruction of
destroyed and damaged infrastructure and promote the
economic recovery of Gaza’s economy. The situation in
and around the Gaza Strip remains fragile and
unsustainable. All parties must refrain from actions that
exacerbate tensions and threaten calm and security. For
its part, Hamas, as the de facto authority in Gaza, must
end all rocket attacks against Israel, which we
vehemently condemn. As for Israel, it must be
understood that its unquestionable right to security
cannot come at the cost of unnecessary human
suffering in Gaza.
The Palestinian Authority has worked diligently
to prepare for statehood. Just last month, the United
Nations, the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund reconfirmed for the third year in a row
the State-readiness of the Palestinian institutions and
stressed the need to sustain and build upon the
Palestinian Authority’s important institution-building
efforts. To that end, urgent efforts, mainly by Israel, are
needed to reverse the economic and fiscal crisis of the
Palestinian Authority. Palestinians must have access to
their resources, including in Area C, and to export
markets. The clearance review mechanism must
become more efficient and transparent and must ensure
the reliable and predictable transfer of revenues to the
Palestinian Authority. We hope that such concrete
advances will soon materialize, and we recall that each
and every one of those requirements constitutes an
international obligation Israel has long subscribed to.
Another key aspect of a sustainable peaceful
settlement to the conflict is that of Israel’s security,

13

S/PV.6757

which is a matter that Palestinians, Israel’s neighbours
and the international community must seriously
commit
to,
including
through
international
mechanisms. One thing is certain — the only way to
ensure Israel’s long-term security is to end the
occupation, settle all core issues and claims between
Palestinians and Israelis and fully normalize
diplomatic, political and economic relations between
Israel and the Arab and Muslim world.
We recall, in that regard, the Arab Peace
Initiative, which has just marked its tenth anniversary.
Its premises and elements remain as valid today as they
were a decade ago. We call upon Israel and the Arabs,
with the support of the Quartet’s efforts on the IsraeliPalestinian track, to seriously engage on the other
dimensions of the Arab-Israeli conflict. The full
implementation of the Arab Peace Initiative would
enable Israel’s integration into its regional
environment, thus enabling a stable, peaceful and
prosperous future for all in the Middle East.
Last Saturday, the Security Council authorized
the establishment of the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria (UNSMIS) to monitor a cessation of
armed violence in all its forms by all parties and to
monitor and support the full implementation of the
Joint Special Envoy’s six-point proposal (see
resolution 2043 (2012) and S/PV.6756). It did so,
notwithstanding its awareness of the many risks and
challenges entailed, and sent a strong and united
message of support to the Joint Special Envoy and his
six-point proposal, mindful of the fact that it presents a
last chance for a peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis.
We once again urge the Syrian authorities to
immediately and visibly implement all their
commitments under the six-point proposal and ensure
the effective operation of UNSMIS. We also reiterate
our calls to all parties to cease all violence in all its
forms, cooperate fully with the Mission and the Joint
Special Envoy and engage in a Syrian-led political
transition that meets the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for
the briefing and update that he presented today. As we
come together in today’s monthly debate, the
Colombian delegation once again would like to express
its conviction regarding the need and importance of
continuing to support all those actions that could lead

14

to the establishment of a lasting peace in the Middle
East and contribute to dialogue and rapprochement
between the parties, based on the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Accordingly, we back the actions of the Quartet
aimed at the implementation of the 23 September 2011
plan, which highlights, as reiterated at the 12 March
meeting in New York and the 11 April meeting in
Washington, D.C., the significance and encouragement
the Quartet finds in the fact that new plans for dialogue
among the parties have been discussed, as have been
ways in which those initiatives could be supported. The
creation of a viable Palestinian State, living in peace
side by side with Israel with clearly defined, secure and
internationally recognized borders must therefore be
the fruit of direct negotiations between the parties,
ensuring coexistence between these two peoples.
The parties should continue in their efforts
towards rapprochement, working constructively in a
spirit of mutual trust, as dialogue is the only possible
and effective road towards the prompt renewal of a
negotiation process that ensures stable and lasting
peace. We invite the representative of the Quartet to
continue its active and intense work to achieve this
goal.
We note progress made by the Palestinian
Authority in the West Bank. However, we believe that
more efforts should be made to preserve law and order
to fight against all forms of extremism and to put an
end to provocation. We are concerned over the fragile
situation in Gaza. Rocket attacks launched from Gaza
must stop, as they affect the security and coexistence
of both peoples.
Israel for its part should take effective measures
to stop the violence of the settlers, including efforts to
bring those responsible for those acts to justice.
My country underscores the progress made by the
Palestinian Authority in the preparation of their
institutions with the goal of establishing a State. We
back the actions of the international community aimed
at bolstering capacity-building of Palestinian
authorities to ensure the viability of an independent
and sovereign State that provides for the well-being of
its people.
We believe that, in order to attain a lasting peace,
the parties should abstain from unilateral measures that
go against international law, harm civilians or endanger

12-30484

S/PV.6757

them. The international community, for its part, should
ensure that the parties take effective measures that
ensure respect for and enjoyment of human rights and
the fundamental freedoms of the population.

Palestinian-Israeli, and in general an Arab-Israeli,
settlement. Unless these issues are resolved, it will
remain impossible to imagine any dramatic
improvement in the situation in the Middle East.

Regarding the situation in Syria, it is clear that
violence in all its forms and repression have not come
to an end. There are still attacks and incidents that are
violations of the 12 April ceasefire. Colombia voted in
favour of the establishment of the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria, which contributes to
additional efforts on the part of the Security Council.
We believe that the second unanimous decision by the
Security Council shows the Council’s firm
determination to resolve the crisis in Syria through the
full support for and implementation of the Joint Special
Envoy’s six-point plan, that is to say, the plan of
Mr. Kofi Annan.

In that regard, one cannot overstate the risks of
what has been seen of late, namely, a flagging in the
attention paid to the theme on the international and
regional levels, particularly in a situation when on the
ground we can see the deliberate creation of new
realities and the pursuit of policies based on fait
accompli. It is clear that there has been an inexorable
radicalization of approaches, which could lead to an
ever-growing spiral of violence from both sides. That
is unacceptable.

As I said when the Council adopted resolution
2043 (2012), we hope that an expanded presence on the
ground will enable constant supervision and evaluation
of the compliance with the six-point plan, to which the
Syrian Government opposition have committed. The
Secretary-General should inform the Council on any
obstacle hindering the effective discharge of the
UNSMIS mandate.
My delegation believes that the Joint Special
Envoy’s six-point plan is the ideal response in that it
seeks to put an immediate end to the violence, ensure
humanitarian access and facilitate a political transition,
led by Syria itself, towards a democratic and pluralistic
political system, through the creation of the conditions
needed to initiate a broad political dialogue between
the Syrian Government and the full spectrum of the
Syrian opposition.
The efforts of the Joint Special Envoy are fully
worthy of our backing and appreciation. It is crucial
that the Council and the Joint Special Envoy work
together. We must maintain an attitude marked by
cautious optimism, given the precariousness of the
situation, and we must also hope that the positive signs
can be consolidated. We must continue to urge the
Syrian authorities and the opposition to abide by the
ceasefire, so that it will be possible to work within the
framework of a political dialogue.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The widespread transformational processes
taking place in the Middle East region in no way
diminish the fundamental importance of the issues of a

12-30484

The situation can be tangibly defused only by the
resumption of a direct dialogue between Israelis and
Palestinians.
Unfortunately,
their
fundamental
positions to date do not converge. A serious step
towards the resumption of genuine talks is offered by
the exchange of letters between President Abbas and
Prime Minister Netanyahu.
It is important that the Palestinian leader has once
again expressed his commitment to the principle of two
States and his readiness to carry out substantive talks
on a universally recognized internationally legal basis.
We expect a responsible reaction from Israel. The
negotiation process requires robust international
accompaniment. A positive element in that regard is the
continuation of painstaking regular work of the
Quartet.
It is important that its statements, including the
latest on the outcome of the ministerial meeting in
Washington, D.C., of 11 April, firmly calls on the sides
to meet their obligations under the Road Map, to avoid
actions that might undermine confidence and to focus
on positive efforts that could strengthen and improve
the climate for resuming direct talks on the basis of the
Quartet statement of 23 September 2011.
In that context, the Quartet has supported the
implementation of a range of important socioeconomic programmes in the occupied territories and
the establishment of a smoothly operating mechanism
by which the Israelis can transfer customs and tax fees
owed to the Palestinians.
A particular role in accompaniment of the Middle
East peace process is by regional players as well,
above all Jordan and Egypt. The League of Arab States

15

S/PV.6757

has been enhancing its influence on developments, and
it is reassuring that the theme of the Middle East was
given priority in the decisions taken at the summit of
the League in Baghdad on 29 March, which clearly laid
out the interdependence of all tracks related to the
Middle East settlement, including the situation in the
occupied Syrian Golan Heights and Lebanon.
It is important to make the most effective
possible use of that useful regional leverage,
particularly in efforts to promote intra-Palestinian
reconciliation, without which it is impossible to
conceive of any prospects for a sustainable settlement.
Russia is also making its own contributions in
that area. There is a plan to hold a second
intra-Palestinian meeting in Moscow in mid-May,
during which we intend to continue work to encourage
Hamas and Fatah to achieve national reconciliation,
based on the Doha Agreements. The stalemate in the
Middle East peace process calls for active actions from
the Security Council as well. In that regard, we would
like to recall that the idea of sending to the region a
mission of the Council continues to be relevant.
If implemented, that would be a timely and
effective step on the part of the Council and would
serve as a stimulus for the parties to narrow their
differences and resume substantive talks on the
universally recognized international legal basis,
including the well-known resolutions of the Security
Council of the United Nations, the Madrid Principles,
the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
An indicator that the Security Council can
constructively work on the complex Middle East
situations is the unanimous adoption of resolutions
2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) on the development of a
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria. We
anticipate that its activities will contribute to restoring
peace and calm and to launching an inclusive Syrianled political process without interference from outside
in Syria, a country that plays a key role in regional
affairs.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate your having organized this session,
Madam President, and we thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for
his opening remarks. We also thank the representative
of Israel and the observer of Palestine for their
statements.

16

Given that the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine, is a topic on our
agenda each month, one could argue that it is becoming
increasingly difficult to say something original by
comparison to what was said in the preceding meeting
or the one before that. On the other hand, the landscape
has evolved so rapidly in the past few years and with
such conflicting trends and manifestations that we have
come to accept that we are justified in frequently
revisiting this topic. The fact that we have met on two
occasions over the weekend in the past 10 days to
consider the case of Syria is proof of that.
Indeed, Syria is very much on our minds when
we consider the Middle East today. But of course, we
cannot consider that country in an isolated manner. The
so-called Arab Spring, which is looking ever less like
the image of spring, has revealed the tendency for
events in any single country to rapidly spill over to its
neighbours. It has also shown its capacity to divide the
international community and even the League of Arab
States, not only on the interpretation of events, but also
on how to react to situations that clearly threaten to
spin out of control.
In a way, the reality in the Middle East today
surpasses any possible attempt at fiction. It includes
several ingredients: grassroots movements rebelling
against authoritarian Governments in the old mold,
while the latter use methods of repression that are
vestiges of the past; the threat of ancestral rivalries of
an ethnic or religious nature that not only run counter
to contemporary values such as tolerance, coexistence
and solidarity, but also have the potential to rapidly
spread throughout the region; and, on the positive side,
the awakening of the League of Arab States, which
assessed early on the importance of what was at stake
and found in its movement the capacity to respond —
albeit weakly — to the challenge. When we add to
these elements the often sidelined demand of the
Palestinian people for a homeland and the spectre of a
new danger in the region in the near future with the
possible introduction of weapons of mass destruction,
the potentially explosive nature of events in that part of
the world can be clearly understood.
Who could doubt that these are tangible threats to
international peace and security? Who could doubt that
this matter falls under the mandate of the Council? And
who could doubt that the complex landscape also offers
multiple opportunities for the Council to exercise that
mandate in a positive manner, contributing, together

12-30484

S/PV.6757

with the stakeholders in the region, to finding ways to
overcome the crises — including through the two-State
solution, leading to the creation of the State of
Palestine — and achieving the vision of a more
prosperous, more democratic and more inclusive
region, free of the current serious tensions that afflict
it?
Naturally, neither my delegation nor, I suspect,
any delegation sitting around this table has holistic
solutions to address such deeply rooted tensions in a
highly heterogeneous region where each country is a
special case. However, united, and in particular by
partnering with the League of Arab States, we can
make our small contribution to, first, ensuring that the
existing crises do not blow up in our faces, and,
secondly, offering ideas and perhaps concrete
mechanisms that will assist the countries directly
involved in finding their own way.
Guatemala has presented its detailed position on
the various subjects related to the Middle East: the
situation between Israel and Palestine, the situation
between Israel and its other neighbours, the situation in
Lebanon, and the situation in half a dozen other
sovereign States. It is unnecessary to repeat our
specific position on each of these matters on every
occasion. That is why we have focused our remarks
today along more general lines. However, I conclude
by reaffirming what I said at the beginning. We accept
that the agenda item of the situation in the Middle East
clearly justifies our constant follow-up.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): Allow me to
commence by expressing our gratitude to the United
States for having organized this open debate on the
situation the Middle East. I take this opportunity to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his briefing and the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements.
The situation in the Middle East demands
constant
international
attention
and
in-depth
participation in addressing the perennial problems and
challenges that engulf it. As a highly complex region in
many respects, including in terms of geography,
geopolitics, ethnic intermingling and simmering ethnonational conflicts, the Middle East has remained at the
hub of the international agenda for decades.
The wave of changes that have swept the region
since the spring of 2011 have become yet another

12-30484

potent factor that has absorbed international attention
and portended the desire of Middle Eastern societies
for political and societal transformation processes
encapsulating the ideas of democracy, equal
representation, greater freedom and wider political
participation.
We all agree on the potential benefits to be
brought about by the process of democratic transition
in the Middle Eastern countries. However, one should
not dismiss the idea that every transition is
accompanied by hardships and trials. Therefore,
patience, diligence, resolve and political dexterity will
be the best tools in making the democratic
transformation process as smooth as possible and in
excluding erroneous judgments and policies regarding
the region’s prospective development.
Turning to more specific issues, we would like to
note the progress in the Middle East peace process that
was demonstrated by the recent interactions between
the Israeli and Palestinian sides on 17 April in
Jerusalem, after a prolonged hiatus in peace
negotiations. In this respect, we would like to welcome
the exchange of letters between the parties initiated on
this very date, and express the hope that the sides will
avail themselves of this positive momentum for
resuming negotiations.
In this respect, Azerbaijan appreciates the
consistent efforts of Jordan to revive the dialogue and
resume the negotiations. We would also like to note the
importance of the Quartet meeting held in Washington,
D.C., on 11 April, in keeping the Middle East peace
process high on the international agenda, and express
our hope that our collective efforts will finally lead to
the resolution of this lingering conflict.
Among a number of political, humanitarian and
security challenges, we cannot but express again our
deep concern about continued illegal settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Needless to say, apart from their impact on the rights,
freedoms and everyday lives of Palestinians,
settlements cause serious damage to the peace process
and, more dangerously, threaten a two-State solution
and the emergence of a viable Palestinian State.
The situation involving the serious violation of
international humanitarian and human rights law
cannot go unheeded by the Security Council. In
performing its primary responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security, the Council must react

17

S/PV.6757

adequately in order to put an end to illegal practices
and policies and ensure that human rights and
fundamental freedoms are observed and respected. It is
also important to take full advantage of ethnic,
religious and cultural diversity by promoting
intercommunal dialogue and reconciliation while
categorically
rejecting
and
invalidating
any
manifestation of ethnic and religious intolerance.
The situation in Syria still occupies the top
position on the list of international security issues. We
are encouraged by the fact that, as a result of the
tireless efforts of the Joint Special Envoy of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States on Syria,
Mr. Kofi Annan, the sides concerned have committed
to ending the bloodshed and observing a ceasefire after
lasting violent clashes. Needless to say, reports
testifying to sporadic violations of the ceasefire are
worrisome, but we still believe that such instances will
remain isolated cases without further spillover to
threaten the current fragile trust.
The adoption of the resolutions authorizing the
dispatch of the advance team to Syria (resolution 2042
(2012)) and, later, of the deployment of the full United
Nations Supervision Mission in Syria (resolution 2043
(2012)) was an expression of a unified Security
Council position on this highly crucial matter. Hopes
are high that the security environment in Syria will be
propitious enough for the Mission to carry out its task
of monitoring and supporting the full implementation
of the Special Envoy’s six-point proposal.
In conclusion, we would like to voice the hope
that, with more political will, rigorous work and
concerted efforts, peace and security will no longer be
rare commodities in the Middle East.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me, on behalf of my delegation, to
thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing today on
developments in the Middle East, which we can all
agree are explosive and dangerous to the security and
stability of that sensitive zone of the world. His
briefing highlighted the need for the Council to
shoulder its responsibility to salvage peace in the
region and the added value of its visit to the occupied
Palestinian territories.
Settlement building is the most serious threat to
the entire peace process. The most recent development
in that regard was the decision taken by the Israeli
Government in the first week of this month to build

18

more than 1,000 housing units in the occupied
territories. In that connection, representatives of the
Quartet, meeting in Washington, D.C., this month,
expressed concern at the settlement activity, settler
provocations and continued violence, and called on the
two parties to make efforts to resume negotiations in
order to find a solution to the conflict. They also called
on the international community to support and assist
the Palestinian authorities in overcoming the financial
crisis resulting from Israeli practices.
In that regard, the Human Rights Council has
authorized a fact-finding mission on the impact of
settlements on the human rights situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories. East Jerusalem is the
main target of the Israeli authorities’ settlement policy
of obliterating its features and altering its
demographic, religious and cultural composition. The
policy is implemented by pressuring the Palestinian
residents of East Jerusalem to emigrate by constructing
bypass roads, settling Israelis in their confiscated
homes and expanding settlements, all in order to isolate
East Jerusalem from the rest of the Palestinian
territories.
In that connection, I wish to quote a letter sent by
His Majesty King Mohammed VI on 3 April, in his
capacity as the Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee, to
the five permanent members of the Security Council
and the Quartet. His Majesty wrote:
“All such unilateral illegal actions and other
violations of the rights of the Palestinian people
run counter to international law and international
humanitarian law. This scheme will increase
tension in the occupied Palestinian territories and
have further repercussions that will endanger the
entire region.”
His Majesty urges the Secretary-General and the
five permanent members of the Council to take every
measure to compel Israel to cease its actions and
practices that run counter to international agreements
and instruments. The Palestinians have demonstrated
time and again that they are committed to negotiations
and the peace process to end the conflict between Israel
and Palestine.
The recent summit of the League of Arab States,
held in Bagdad in March, reaffirmed that fair and
comprehensive peace is the strategic option under the
Arab Peace Initiative, as affirmed at various Arab
summits since 2002. Accordingly, we believe that the

12-30484

S/PV.6757

initiative taken by President Abbas to write to Prime
Minister Netanyahu on the revival of the negotiation
process, which has been in limbo for years, will serve
to revive the peace process and to enable the
Palestinians to establish their independent and viable
State on the Palestinian territories, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. In this context, we encourage the
Palestinian parties to embark on the path to
reconciliation in order to end division, in accordance
with the Doha Declaration.
The economic situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories is deteriorating rapidly under
Israeli occupation. In a recent report, the World Bank
sounded the alarm that the Palestinian budget deficit is
more than $1 billion. The situation of hundreds of
Palestinian prisoners, including peaceful activists and
activists, is precarious. They endure isolation and
arbitrary detention and are prevented from seeing their
families and from continuing their educations.
Arab leaders have endorsed the resolution
adopted by the Arab League on 23 September 2011, to
support the inclusion of Palestine as a full-fledged
Member of the United Nations, along the 4 June 1967
borders, with Jerusalem as its capital. Palestine’s
membership, which would be in line with the vision of
President Obama to achieve peace based on the twoState solution, is notable in particular given that most
countries in the world have recognized the State of
Palestine on the basis of reports by international
organizations that Palestinian authorities and
institutions are capable of administering the affairs of
an independent Palestinian State.
At the same time, we call for the implementation
of the relevant international resolutions, instruments
and initiatives regarding a solution to the Palestinian
question. We also call on Israeli to withdraw from all
occupied Palestinian and Arab territories, including the
occupied Golan and the remaining Lebanese territories.
We believe that establishing a comprehensive and just
peace in the Middle East is the only way to guarantee
security, stability and prosperity in the entire Middle
East.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa
expresses its appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his briefing to the Council. We also
thank the Permanent Observer of Palestine and the
Permanent Representative of Israel for their statements.

12-30484

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered later today by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The past 18 months have seen dramatic
developments in North Africa and the Middle East.
Those developments have been brought about by the
unwavering will of people to demand their legitimate
rights. What is clear from what we have witnessed is
that the status quo that has allowed the rights of people
to remain unfulfilled for decades cannot continue.
In that light, the longstanding Palestinian-Israeli
conflict must be resolved. We cannot have a sixdecade-long conflict continue and allow generations of
people from both sides to be denied the opportunity to
live in peace and security and within internationally
recognized, secure borders.
South Africa remains disappointed that, since
23 September 2011, when the Quartet committed itself
to assist the parties to make progress in the peace
process, tangible progress is yet to be registered.
Instead, despite commendable efforts by some
important stakeholders, such as the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, there has been stagnation on the
political track. Additionally, the security and
humanitarian situation has worsened, particularly in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. The most dramatic negative development
has been the continued building of illegal settlements
by Israel, which undermines the very foundation of a
viable, independent Palestinian State to exist alongside
the State of Israel.
We note the statement issued by the Middle East
Quartet in Washington, D.C. on 11 April (see
SG/2182). While we appreciate the efforts of the
Quartet to revive the political process and assist the
Palestinians with their institution-building efforts, we
once again raise the questions that we asked in the
Chamber at our debate three months ago (see
S/PV.6706). Is it not time to assess the effectiveness of
the Quartet model? What more can the Security
Council do to help the parties resume negotiations and
find lasting peace?
The Quartet continues to meet periodically, yet it
has not shown the political will to follow through on its
decisions. Its road map, which is almost 10 years old,
has not been complied with, nor has its most recent
request for the parties to begin direct negotiations

19

S/PV.6757

immediately and without preconditions, or
submission of proposals on borders and security.

the

The role of the Security Council in addressing
this matter should be reinvigorated. The Council is
responsible for international peace and security, and it
cannot absolve itself of responsibility on this crucial
matter. Ignoring this conflict affects the Council’s
credibility. My delegation believes that a visit to the
region by the Council would be beneficial.
Additionally, we should consider the views of
relevant regional organizations on this matter. The
international community has been willing to take into
account the views of relevant regional organizations,
such as the League of Arab States (LAS), in other
conflicts in the region. In that vein, the views of the
LAS should also be taken into account in resolving the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, which has directly affected
so many of its members.
We commend Palestinian President Mahmoud
Abbas for having taken the initiative to write to Israeli
Prime Minister Netanyahu, in an attempt to resume
credible negotiations. If the opportunity for restarting
credible, direct negotiations is not seized, the viability
of a two-State solution will slowly fade away.
What is of concern, however, is that despite
attempts to resuscitate the negotiations, the prospect
for direct talks seems low, as the Israeli Government
continues with its actions that militate against a
peaceful resolution of the conflict. Aside from the
ongoing illegal settlement construction, it persists with
home demolitions, illegal excavations of religious sites
and restrictions on access and movement on the
Palestinian people, while also maintaining its hold on
Gaza and not preventing settlers from attacking
Palestinian persons and their property.
In January, the Council was able to agree to
receive a briefing from Under-Secretary-General
Valerie Amos on the humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, which served as
confirmation of the deteriorating situation in all of its
respects. Since then, the situation has not improved.
We look forward to receiving further briefings from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
regarding the situation.
The recent escalation of tensions in Gaza is of
particular concern. Its impact on the children of both
sides should be underscored. On 12 March, UNICEF

20

issued a statement in which it expressed deep concern
about the impact on children of the recent escalation of
violence in the Gaza Strip and Israel. A rocket fired
into Israel last month hit a school, which, fortunately,
was empty. The Israeli attacks into Gaza have left some
children not as fortunate. UNICEF has reported on the
death and injury of Palestinian children as a result of
those attacks. It has stated that, over the past year, 20
Palestinian and 5 Israeli children were killed, and
another 448 Palestinian and 2 Israeli children were
injured because of the fighting.
As the Council has shown commitment in
addressing issues related to children in armed conflict,
perhaps we should consider including that matter on
the agenda of the Working Group of the Security
Council on Children and Armed Conflict.
Finally, regarding the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, South Africa welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2043 (2012) by the Council,
providing for the deployment of the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria (UNSMIS). We urge all
sides to ensure the effective operation of UNSMIS by
facilitating its work and guaranteeing the safety of its
personnel.
We welcome the news that the advance team has
been able to visit key hotspots of the conflict,
including Homs, and that they have observed calm and
a halt to major hostilities. The deployment of the
advance team has already proved to be a calming
influence, as violence has decreased during their
presence. That marked decrease in violence should now
be sustained.
The deployment of UNSMIS will be important to
ensure that the six-point proposal of Joint Special
Envoy Kofi Annan is implemented, and will likewise
play a crucial role with regard to the goal of ensuring
that all sides commit to a peaceful dialogue in order to
promote an all-inclusive process of negotiations that
leads to a political outcome that responds to the
legitimate aspirations of all Syrian people.
It is equally important that all members of the
international community give the resolution and the
Annan proposal the chance to succeed, and uphold and
respect the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria and the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

12-30484

S/PV.6757

In conclusion, we reiterate that the current
developments in the Arab world undoubtedly have a
bearing on the future of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
and the broader Arab-Israeli conflict. In attempting to
resolve and address the challenges in the Middle East,
we should not lose sight of our efforts aimed at a
holistic resolution to the Middle East crisis, including
the Israeli-Palestinian, -Lebanese and -Syrian tracks.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing on the
situation in the Middle East, as well as the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for their statements. France associates itself
with the statement to be made by the head of the
European Union delegation.
With respect to the peace process, the reports are
disappointing. The current stalemate in the process
daily jeopardizes the two-State solution, while
supported by the international community, owing to the
accelerated pace of Israeli settlements, which threatens
the viability of a Palestinian State. Morally and
politically unacceptable and rooted in plunder and
violence, settlement is a basic violation of international
law. In that context, we condemned the provocations
represented by the issue of new calls for offers for the
construction of more than 1,100 homes by the Israeli
authorities. Moreover, the settlers, perpetrators of
unacceptable violence against the Palestinian people,
should be held accountable for their acts before the
law, which happens only too rarely.
It is therefore deplorable that the Council has not
condemned such actions and that it simply states the
law and recalls the principles that underpin the twoState solution when that finds itself threatened. That is
the case today, which concerns an increasing number of
Palestinians and Israelis.
Doing nothing also risks an outburst of regional
violence, which further fuels tension. These past three
months, Israel has been the target of a great number of
rocket attacks. We condemn them unreservedly. In
Gaza, a radical political change on the part of Israel is
needed in order to lift the blockade, in accordance with
resolution 1860 (2009), without compromising Israel’s
security interests, and to put an end to Hamas’ control
of the population of Gaza.
France truly believes that the meeting of a
Palestinian delegation with the Israeli Prime Minister
is a step in the right direction. We hope that that

12-30484

exchange will facilitate a renewal of dialogue between
Israelis and Palestinians. The aim remains the
relaunching of effective negotiations on the basis of
clear and balanced parameters.
However, we cannot avoid in-depth reflection on
how the international community can support the peace
process, which is not satisfactory today. Only a followup mechanism that includes all actors involved, in
particular the regional players, on the basis of agreed
parameters and a realistic time frame, to which the
parties are accountable for their acts, will enable the
parties to return to the path of credible negotiations.
Such an observation does not release the parties from
their responsibilities, but is to draw lessons from their
inability to themselves undertake the path of painful
compromise, which will be difficult for both parties, as
well as to encourage the only realistic path towards a
vanishing solution.
Substantive confidence-building measures must
be introduced in order to restore the necessary trust
between the two parties. Actors critical to the peace,
namely, the Palestinian Authority and its President,
Mr. Abbas, must be supported.
The recent meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee reaffirmed that the Palestinians are ready to
establish their State and to administer it credibly. It
also underscored the untenable financial position of the
Palestinian Authority, which may no longer be able to
pay its civil servants’ salaries if donors do not
mobilize. Moreover, Israel must implement the summer
2011 technical agreement in order to improve the
collection of duties and taxes due to the Palestinian
Authority, which is the best way to raise Palestinian
revenue. Israel must remove constraints imposed on
Palestinian economic development, in particular in
Area C and Gaza, which help to maintain the
dependant Palestinian economy.
Supporting President Abbas in his undertaking for
Palestinian reconciliation is also crucial as there can be
no lasting solution while the Palestinian territories
remain divided. We are ready to work with any
Palestinian Government that commits to non-violence
and a two-State solution and that accepts the
agreements and obligations reached under the Palestine
Liberation Organization, including Israel’s right to
exist.
Allow me to touch on the position in Syria. The
situation on the ground continues to give rise to the

21

S/PV.6757

greatest concern. As last Thursday’s letter of the
Secretary-General to the Council (S/2012/238) spells
out, Damascus has once again failed to meet its
commitments. The areas of Homs and Idlib, still
subject to bombings and attacks since last week, are
still paying a heavy price for the ongoing repression.
The Syrian authorities have not implemented the
immediate measures to which they committed with the
Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States on the Syrian Crisis. The Syrian
army has only misled us in terms of its withdrawal.
The heavy-weapons fire and the bombings continue.
In adopting resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043
(2012), the Council demanded Damascus immediately
and verifiably implement such measures to end the
violence. Damascus can no longer defy a decision of
the international community.
The Council has shouldered its responsibilities by
accepting the Secretary-General’s request to deploy an
observer mission of 300 persons to monitor the end to
all violence by all parties and the full implementation
of the six-point proposal of the Joint Special Envoy.
Such deployment is not without risk. No obstruction of
the observers’ work and no threat to their security will
be tolerated by the Council, which, if necessary, should
consider coercive measures if called for.
The Council’s power to help resolve crises is also
a condition of the credibility of its action to maintain
regional stability. The Council therefore cannot accept
violations of the sovereignty of Syria’s neighbouring
countries, namely, Turkey and Lebanon. France would
like to express its appreciation of the welcome
provided by those two States to Syrian citizens seeking
refuge far from the violence, in accordance with the
relevant international law on refugees and displaced
persons. In such a fragile regional context, we welcome
the commitment of the Lebanese authorities to working
with all parts of society to preserve Lebanon’s stability.
We commend their commitment to meeting all their
international obligations, including with respect to the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon.
The Council must stand ready to respond
resolutely if the requirements of resolutions 2042
(2012) and 2043 (2012) are not met by the Damascus
authorities. However, the urgency of acting in Syria
should not allow the international community to
overlook the need to preserve the two-State solution of
Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace. The

22

Middle East will achieve long-term stability only if the
international community can meet the legitimate
aspirations voiced in Palestine for a State and in Israel
for its security. It is a matter of the Council’s
credibility in helping the emergence of a credible
framework for negotiations in that regard.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his briefing. I have also listened carefully to
the statements made by the Permanent Observer of
Palestine and the representative of Israel.
The situation in the Middle East remains complex
and fragile. The peace process is still at an impasse,
which is very worrisome and disconcerting. The
Israeli-Palestinian issue remains at the centre of the
Middle East process and therefore requires the ongoing
attention and assistance of the international
community. China has always advocated the settling of
disputes between Israel and Palestine on the basis of
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the principle
of Land for Peace, the Arab Peace Initiative, the
Middle East Road Map and other agreements with a
view to ultimately establishing an independent State of
Palestine living in peace side by side with Israel.
China welcomes and supports every effort to
overcome the impasse in the talks and in restarting
negotiations. We welcome the recent efforts made by
both Israel and Palestine to resume the peace talks at
an early date, which we hope will soon yield positive
results.
China hopes that the Quartet will continue to
contribute to the peace talks between Israel and
Palestine. China believes that the Security Council
should play a greater role in the resolution of the
question of the Middle East.
Israel’s settlement activities represent the main
obstacle to the resumption of peace talks. China has
consistently opposed Israel’s construction of Jewish
settlements on occupied Palestinian territories. We urge
Israel to cease immediately its settlement activities and
to cooperate with international efforts towards peace,
so as to create conditions conducive to the resumption
of peace talks.
At present, the security and humanitarian
situation in the occupied territories, including the Gaza
Strip, remains grave. The relevant United Nations
resolutions must be implemented. We hope that Israel

12-30484

S/PV.6757

will lift completely its blockade against the Gaza Strip,
so that the people of Gaza can resume their normal
lives in conditions of dignity, with space for
development. The international community must
provide greater assistance and support to the
Palestinian people.

the resolution adopted by the Human Rights Council
establishing an independent international fact-finding
mission to investigate the implications of Israeli
settlements for the rights of Palestinians in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem.

The talks on the Syria-Israel track and on the
Lebanon-Israel track represent an important and
integral part of the Middle East peace process. A
comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question
is indissociable from progress on those two tracks.
China fully supports the just aspirations of Syria and
Lebanon to safeguard their national sovereignty and
territorial integrity and to recover their occupied
territories.

We are also encouraged to note that the
Secretary-General visited the region in February,
affording him the opportunity to experience first-hand
the plight of a nation living under occupation in
appalling conditions. It was a timely initiative that, we
hope, will help to refocus the attention of the
international community on this festering dispute, for
the dragon’s teeth are planted in the fertile soil of
wrongs unrighted, of disputes left to fester for years.

China supports the Arab States’ strategic choice
to seek a comprehensive and lasting peace in the
region. China is in favour of the Security Council’s
playing a greater role in advancing the Middle East
peace process. China is ready to continue to play a
constructive role in seeking the early realization of a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East.

Flying in the face of the international
community’s will, Israel continues to implement
policies in defiance of international law and to work
towards undermining the basis of the two-State
solution. Its efforts to redraw the map of Palestine
through the continuation of illegal settlement activity,
the continued persecution of Palestinians and its
reluctance to accept the 1967 borders as the basis for
negotiations is taking the region to a state akin to a
powder keg.

It is China’s consistent view that the crisis in
Syria can be settled only through a Syrian-led political
process on the basis of respect for the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria
and for the choices and will of the Syrian people. We
call upon all factions in Syria and on the international
community to cooperate with and support the efforts of
the Joint Special Envoy, Mr. Annan, to fully implement
the six-point plan.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for having convened today’s debate.
We align ourselves with the statements to be
delivered by the Permanent Representatives of Egypt
and Kazakhstan on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, respectively.
Pakistan continues to support the inalienable right
to self-determination of the people of Palestine. The
continued denial of that right poses the risk of a
conflagration in which the whole region could be
embroiled.
The Security Council continues to evade its
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security, at the peril of its own credibility. We welcome

12-30484

We reiterate that continued inaction on the part of
the international community is not an option. We
strongly condemn the announcement made by Israel on
4 April concerning new tenders for the construction of
more than 1,100 settlement homes in East Jerusalem.
Similarly, the so-called Mayor of Jerusalem has also
announced plans to establish a new settlement that
would effectively divide East Jerusalem. Such acts are
systematically reducing the space for the establishment
of a viable Palestinian State and constitute a major
roadblock to peace.
Special Coordinator Robert Serry, in his briefing
to the Council on 27 March 2012 (see S/PV.6742),
painted a gloomy picture for prospects of restarting
direct negotiations. He also said that without a road
map, the State-building efforts of the Palestinian
Authority were also at risk.
The Middle East Quartet, which met in
Washington, D.C., on 11 April 2012, has reaffirmed its
commitment to all elements of its road map of
23 September 2011. However, it is disconcerting to
note that its statement focuses more on the financial
viability of the Palestinian Authority than on settlement

23

S/PV.6757

activity or providing a road map for the resumption of
the peace process. It has also failed to apportion blame
to Israel for actions that have stalled the peace process.
The Security Council should put its weight
behind the creation of conditions conducive to
restarting the peace process and holding Israel
accountable for its continued defiance. We would also
remind the Council that the Palestinian Authority has
invited it to undertake a mission to the occupied
Palestinian territories, including the West Bank. We
will continue to engage with other members of the
Council in trying to bring the visit to fruition.
While the international community continues to
highlight illegal detentions in other parts of the region,
more than 4,700 Palestinians languish in inhumane
conditions in Israeli prisons. The international
community should heed the plight of the 1,200
prisoners currently on a hunger strike to protest
arbitrary detentions and force the occupying Power to
mend its ways.
We once again request the high contracting
parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention to demand the
implementation of the Convention in the Palestinian
territory, especially regarding Palestinian prisoners.
Israel’s continued blockade of Gaza is diminishing
further the already nominal economic prospects for the
residents of the area. We therefore once again call for
the full implementation of Security Council resolution
1860 (2009).
We appreciate and strongly support the
Palestinian Authority’s progress in building State
institutions. The paper it presented to the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians entitled
“Equitable development: moving forward despite the
occupation” provides details of the progress made
despite seemingly insurmountable odds.
Palestine has undoubtedly proved that it is ready
to take its rightful place among the comity of nations.
Pakistan supported its bid for UNESCO membership
last year and stands committed to supporting its full
United Nations membership.
Pakistan supports lasting peace for all inhabitants
of the Middle East. The broad framework for that
peace is already laid down elaborately in a number of
Security Council resolutions, the Quartet road map, the

24

Madrid terms of reference and the Arab Peace
Initiative.
Political will on the part of the international
community — a sine qua non for the implementation of
those documents — is conspicuous by its absence. For
lasting peace in the Middle East, progress on the SyriaIsrael and Lebanon-Israel conflicts is imperative as
well. We continue to insist on the full withdrawal of
Israel from occupied Lebanese land and from the
Syrian Golan, in compliance with the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions.
We are concerned and disappointed that the
question of the Syrian Golan, which is an integral
element of the Council’s consideration of this agenda
item, has not found mention in the Secretariat’s
briefing to the Council. The region is in turmoil, and
the Arab Spring cannot and will not bloom fully if the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people are not
fulfilled.
Benign neglect, inaction, complicity with
oppression and apathy will only discredit the advocates
of peace and strengthen the narrative of extremists.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing
and express appreciation for the contributions to
today’s debate made by the observer of Palestinian and
the representative of Israel.
Before I turn to the Israeli-Palestinian issue, I
would like to reiterate the United Kingdom’s deep
concern about the crisis in Syria, which is entering its
fourteenth month. On 21 April, the Security Council,
through its unanimous adoption of resolution 2043
(2012), took the important step of authorizing the
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria,
consisting of 300 unarmed military observers, with an
additional substantive civilian component. It did so
despite the failure of the regime to meet its
commitments under resolution 2042 (2012) and the
absence of a sustained cessation of violence.
The Mission that we have authorized and
Mr. Kofi Annan’s six-point proposal offer the last
opportunity for the Syrian regime to reverse course and
allow a peaceful solution to the crisis. It is essential
that the Syrian Government now meet its commitments
on troop movements and heavy weapons, and ensure
the conditions that will allow the Mission to operate
effectively, such as unhindered freedom of movement

12-30484

S/PV.6757

and access. The Council will be receiving regular and
frequent reports, starting tomorrow. The failure of the
regime to meet its commitments, or any attempt to
hinder the work of the Mission, must be met with real
and robust consequences.
Much of the international community’s attention
is rightly focused on the crisis in Syria, but we must
not forget the ongoing plight of the Palestinian people,
who have struggled for too long for their rights and
dignity. Our shared goal remains a two-State solution.
We all firmly believe that negotiations towards such a
solution are the best way forward, and that any such
negotiations should be based on the 1967 lines, with
equivalent land swaps, a just solution for refugees,
security arrangements that respect Palestinian
sovereignty and protect Israeli security, and Jerusalem
as a joint capital of both States. We remain fully
committed to that goal, and welcome the Quartet
statement released on 11 April (see SG/2182).
Despite
an
almost
universally
shared
understanding of the objective and the parameters of
the solution, there remains a depressing lack of
progress. With every day that passes, the very notion of
the two-State solution is undermined. I have three
points to make on the way forward.
First, in the immediate term, we must collectively
guard against further threats to the two-State solution
and act to prevent deterioration on the ground. We
were therefore disappointed by the announcement on
4 April of renewed Israeli settlement activity. As the
occupying Power of the Palestinian territories, the
Israeli Government has an absolute requirement to
uphold international law and fulfil its commitments.
We and our European Union partners are clear that
systematic, illegal Israeli settlement activity poses the
most significant and live threat to the viability of the
two-State solution. We condemn the decision to publish
tenders for 872 units in the Israeli settlement of Har
Homa, across the Green Line in East Jerusalem. The
Israeli Government’s policy is illegal under
international law, counterproductive, destabilizing and
provocative.
Although we welcome the difficult decision taken
earlier this year by the Israeli Government to evacuate
the single-house settlement of Beit HaMachpele in
Hebron, what is required of the Israeli Government is of
a significantly greater order of magnitude. The United
Kingdom urges the Israeli Government to desist from

12-30484

further settlement announcements, to revoke previous
announcements, and to remove — not legalize —
illegal outposts from across the West Bank, as required
under international law and the Road Map. If it fails to
do so, it will further damage the prospects for a twoState solution and undermine the long-term security that
this would deliver to Israelis and Palestinians alike.
Similarly, Palestinians must also play their part in
ensuring conditions conducive to a peaceful settlement.
Rocket fire from Gaza — such as that which led to the
crisis last month that left eight Israelis injured, 26
Palestinians dead and dozens more injured, and caused
widespread disruption to normal life — must stop.
Secondly, over the longer term, we must continue
our full support to the Palestinian Authority. The
United Kingdom will continue to be one of the
principal supporters of the Palestinians’ State-building
efforts, assisting them in tackling poverty, building
institutions and boosting their economy. We welcome
the focus of the Quartet’s statement on Area C.
Increasing Palestinians’ autonomy in Area C and
throughout the West Bank is necessary to move the
Palestinian economy away from aid dependency and
towards self-sustainability.
Thirdly, a sustainable solution requires a
sustainable approach to Gaza. Gaza should have a
thriving economy, yet it is one of the highest per capita
recipients of aid in the world. Israel must ease the
movement and access restrictions that make life so
difficult for the people of Gaza and are doing ongoing
damage to its economy. Such restrictions do not help
the peace process. We understand Israel’s security
concerns, but if any peace deal is to be sustainable,
Gaza must be economically viable.
There is no doubt that a lasting peace between
Israelis and Palestinians would bring enormous
benefits to both of them and to the region. We will
continue to urge both sides to show the political
leadership and courage needed to make progress
towards that goal.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe
for
his
comprehensive
briefing
on
developments in the Middle East, particularly on the
Palestinian question, during the past month. I would
also like to thank the Permanent Representative of
Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their useful statements.

25

S/PV.6757

The Middle East peace process is undoubtedly
passing through one of the most difficult times since
the signing of the Oslo accord. The continuing
stalemate in the peace process is undermining the gains
made so far. In fact, dramatic developments in West
Asia and North Africa since the beginning of 2011
appear to have pushed the Palestinian issue onto the
back burner. Ironically, this is happening at a time
when the international community is supporting the
democratic aspirations of other peoples in the region.
If the present stalemate is allowed to continue
and Palestinian aspirations continue to be denied, we
run the risk of seeing a sharp deterioration in the
situation. The lack of trust between the parties,
primarily due to the intensification of Israeli settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories, needs
to be seriously and urgently addressed. In that regard,
we call for a renewed commitment on the part of Israel
and the Palestinian Authority to the accepted principles
for the settlement of the Palestinian issue, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, the Oslo accords, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet principles.
The parties should take urgent steps to
recommence negotiations for realizing the aspirations
of the Palestinian people to having a State of their own,
living side by side and at peace with Israel. In this
regard, the complete cessation of settlement activities
is of the utmost importance. At the same time, all
violence against civilians, irrespective of its source and
cause, must stop. The international community,
particularly the Quartet, must redouble its efforts to
bring the parties to the negotiating table. We hope that
the meeting that took place between the Palestinian and
Israeli negotiators on 17 April will facilitate their
efforts towards the commencement of direct talks.
As I have said, if there is one issue that has
become the major hindrance to the peace process, it is
Israel’s illegal settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories. Several reports, including those
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, have clearly shown that the intensification of
these activities is not compatible with the two-State
solution. In fact, it is destroying the very possibility of
the two-State solution. Settlement activities have also
exacerbated the humanitarian problems of the
Palestinian people in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. They have led to violence and an
aggravation of tension between the Israeli settlers and

26

the Palestinian population. We therefore reiterate our
call for Israel to stop all settlement activities.
Indiscriminate violence not only puts the lives of
civilians in real danger, it also leads to a vicious cycle
of violence. We condemn all such attacks, which cause
harm to the civilian population and damage civilian
infrastructure, and call for their full cessation.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza due to the
continuing blockade and restrictions on exports is
constantly aggravating the livelihoods of the civilian
population. As has been brought out in several reports
by United Nations agencies, poverty and aid
dependency have increased. Demands for emergency
services, such as health, water, sanitation, education
and temporary shelter, have overstretched the resources
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). While
we welcome some steps in easing restrictions and the
blockade, much more is required to be done urgently.
There is also a need to enhance the level of
humanitarian assistance for civilians in Gaza and the
West Bank. That should be done through the
established channels. At the same time, the capacity of
those channels should be increased. On its part, India is
continuing its development cooperation with Palestine
through untied direct budgetary support — $10 million
for the past two years — as well as through the training
of personnel in various areas, an annual $1 million
contribution to UNRWA and projects under the IndiaBrazil-South Africa Fund.
The formation of a unity Government and the
implementation of the reconciliation agreement among
Palestinian factions, signed last May, are important for
strengthening the administrative and security
achievements made by the Palestinian Authority in
spite of several financial crises. It will not only bring
all Palestinian factions together, but also ensure the
establishment of a single authority for the whole of the
Palestinian territories. Early action on that front will
help in reaching political common ground — essential
for future democratic processes in Palestine.
The Palestinian question remains at the core of
the Arab-Israeli conflict. The resolution of this issue
should be a priority for the international community.
India has been steadfast in its support for the
Palestinian people’s struggle for a sovereign,
independent, viable and united State of Palestine with
East Jerusalem as its capital and living within secure

12-30484

S/PV.6757

and recognized borders, side by side and at peace with
Israel, as per the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road
map.
For the achievement of that dream, India will
continue to support all efforts, including those of the
Quartet. At the same time, for a comprehensive
settlement of Arab-Israeli problems, it is also important
not to lose sight of other Arab lands under Israeli
occupation.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later on behalf of the European Union.
Germany welcomes and supports the Quartet
statement of 11 April (see SG/2182) in all its aspects.
The statement expresses important expectations, and
we call on both sides to heed the Quartet’s calls. There
must be an effective follow-up on the issues mentioned
in the statement — first and foremost by the parties but
of course also by the Quartet itself.
The Arab Spring has fundamentally changed the
Arab world, with deep implications on how the rest of
the world interacts with the peoples of the region. It is
the result of a yearning for individual freedom,
political participation and personal well-being. Those
ambitions can be fulfilled only in peace and security.
Progress in solving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
therefore key. Israel and Palestine are both an integral
part of the region. Both Israelis and Palestinians want
to live in freedom, dignity and security.
We understand the difficult and complex security
situation in which Israel finds itself. We strongly
condemn rocket attacks on Israel from Gaza and
elsewhere. Germany recognizes Israel’s right to protect
its citizens against attacks. At the same time, we look
to Israel to exercise that right judiciously.
We firmly believe that lasting security and
prosperity for Israelis and Palestinians, as well as for
the wider region, can be achieved only by taking bold
steps towards peace. In that vein, it is time to return to
direct negotiations now. We call on both sides to make
their actions meet their declared readiness to achieve
peace. Instead of looking for pretexts or excuses to
evade negotiations, both parties should look for what is
needed to bring about the right context of mutual trust
for a resumption of direct talks. The recently initiated

12-30484

exchange of letters should be used in a constructive
way by both sides as an opportunity to return to
meaningful talks.
However, we are increasingly concerned about
the physical viability of a two-State solution.
Continued settlement activity threatens to undermine
the fundamental conditions of a future contiguous
Palestinian State by creating facts on the ground that
will make final status negotiations ever more difficult.
A two-State solution is the best way to achieve lasting
security for Israel. We therefore took positive note of
the fact that no new settlement announcements or
tenders were published during the Amman talks.
However, we deplore the recent publication of
tenders for more than 1,000 housing units in East
Jerusalem and the West Bank, plans to establish a new
settlement in East Jerusalem and recent plans to
retroactively approve outposts that were erected in
contravention of Israeli law. Such approval would
amount to the establishment of new settlements in the
West Bank.
Our position has not changed. All settlements are
illegal under international law and constitute an
obstacle to peace. We call on the Israeli Government to
cease all settlement activities in order to preserve the
possibility of a two-State solution. The Israeli
Government should leave no room for doubt as to its
full commitment to negotiations and to reaching a just
and fair solution to the conflict.
As pointed out by the Quartet, the social and
economic development of Area C is of critical
importance for the viability of a future Palestinian
State. We call on both sides to cooperate in order to
ensure overall progress and development in Area C,
including transparent procedures for planning and
building, consistent with Israel’s obligations under
humanitarian law.
Finally, Germany welcomes efforts by the parties
to resolve outstanding issues related to tax and customs
revenue collection and urges their conclusion as soon
as possible. Stabilizing the fiscal situation of the
Palestinian Authority is key to preserving an important
achievement of Palestinian State-building, including in
the area of security. As a major donor, Germany fully
expects Israel to live up to its obligations.
Allow me now to say a few words on Syria.

27

S/PV.6757

The unanimous adoption of resolution 2043
(2012), establishing the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria, was an important, far-reaching step.
The deployment of observers under the right conditions
could positively influence dynamics on the ground. At
the same time, we must be aware of the risks that the
Mission faces. It is important that the observers have
the necessary security and that they can operate freely
and in the right conditions to effectively implement
their mandate.
Meanwhile, the authorities in Damascus continue
their attacks on the population, they continue to shell
population centres with artillery and they have not
withdrawn their troops and tanks to their barracks.
Today, new reports about attacks in Hama are coming
in. Other forms of violence continue unabated. Until
now, humanitarian assistance has not reached the areas
affected by the fighting. The freedom of association
and the right to demonstrate peacefully are not
guaranteed. Trials before military courts against
civilians for having exercised their right of expression
are continuing.
Germany insists on the full implementation of
Mr. Kofi Annan’s six points without delay. We will
evaluate carefully the situation on the ground. We look
forward to the assessments to be provided by the
Secretary-General and the Joint Special Envoy.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing.
Earlier this month, in Washington, D.C.,
Secretary of State Clinton hosted the most recent
meeting of the Quartet. At that meeting, the Quartet
principals welcomed plans for dialogue among the
parties and discussed ways to support them. We have
worked closely with our international partners,
including the Quartet, to support the parties as they
take steps to re-engage and rebuild communications.
We should all support that effort, help to create a
conducive climate and avoid any initiatives that
distract from the pursuit of peace.
On 17 April, we saw the beginning of a dialogue,
when senior Palestinian officials delivered the first
letter in an exchange with Israeli Prime Minister
Netanyahu. In a joint statement issued following the
meeting, the parties said, “Both sides hope the

28

exchange of letters will help find a way to advance
peace”. The United States shares that hope and views
the exchange as a positive step that builds on the
Jordanian-hosted talks and the statements issued by the
Quartet since last September.
At its most recent meeting, the Quartet also
focused on the importance of fostering continued
international support for the Palestinian Authority’s
important institution-building efforts. In order to
realize a future where Palestinians live in a sovereign
State of their own, we must vigorously support the
difficult steps needed to build the institutions and
capacities of a future Palestinian State. We welcome
the actions taken by the parties to resolve the
outstanding issues related to tax and revenue collection
and urge their prompt conclusion. While the parties
address these difficult issues, the international
community must continue to play a vital role in support
of their efforts.
The United States echoes the Quartet’s call for
continued international support for institution-building
by the Palestinian Authority, including for
contributions towards the $1.1 billion required to meet
the Palestinian Authority’s 2012 recurrent financing
requirements. That funding is essential to preserve and
build upon the Palestinian Authority’s institutional
gains and to expand economic opportunities for the
Palestinian people.
As we look to improve the financial situation on
one side, we must do our utmost to promote an
atmosphere of cooperation on both sides. International
partners should urge the parties to refrain from
provocative and unhelpful actions, including in
Jerusalem, that undermine trust, cause delay or threaten
to derail prospects for a negotiated settlement. Lasting
peace between Israelis and Palestinians requires both
parties to take meaningful steps.
Provocative actions, including rocket fire from
Gaza, should be unanimously condemned. Such attacks
are unacceptable and serve as a constant reminder of
the serious threat posed to civilians by the illegal
trafficking of weapons to Gaza. The Palestinians must
continue efforts on security cooperation, strengthening
public institutions and ending incitement. Any
Palestinian Government must accept the principles
established by the Quartet, which are the building
blocks of an independent Palestinian State: renouncing
violence, recognizing Israel and accepting previous

12-30484

S/PV.6757

agreements. We likewise urge Israel to continue and to
step up its efforts to deter, confront and prosecute antiPalestinian violence and extremist hate crimes.
Let me also reiterate that we do not accept the
legitimacy of continued Israeli settlement activity. We
continue to oppose any effort to legalize outposts. The
fate of existing settlements must be dealt with by the
parties along with the other permanent status issues.
I will now turn to the situation in Syria, where the
threat to international peace and security is both urgent
and grave. The scale of the Al-Assad regime’s
murderous campaign is shocking, with 10,000 Syrians
killed and tens of thousands injured and imprisoned,
widespread torture and an ever-worsening crisis of
displaced persons and refugees. The conflict is also
destabilizing Syria’s neighbours. In Jordan, Turkey and
Lebanon, there are already tens of thousands of Syrian
refugees. Turkey and Lebanon have recently seen
deadly violence spill across their borders.
The United States continues to support the
international humanitarian response to the crisis in
Syria, providing more than $33 million in assistance,
much of it channelled through United Nations agencies
and programmes. We will continue to support those in
greatest need.
Two days ago, the Council authorized the United
Nations Supervision Mission in Syria charged with
monitoring compliance with the full set of
commitments and obligations laid out in Joint Special
Envoy Kofi Annan’s six-point plan. We welcome the
positive statements from various Syrian opposition
figures and groups about this new Mission,
understanding how desperate the Syrian people are for
assistance and, ultimately, for political change.
Syrians have said that they hope this mission can
help restrain the regime’s brutality and that it will help
them uphold their rights to express themselves freely,
but we are all sober in our expectations. The regime’s
long track record is one of dependable deceit and
deception. The United Nations Mission is therefore
unusually risky and dangerous. The Syrian regime
should make no mistake. We will be watching its
actions day and night. We will work to ensure that
there will be consequences should the Syrian regime
continue to ignore this Council’s decisions, press ahead
with its murderous rampage and flout the will of the
international community.

12-30484

Let me conclude by reiterating the United States’
appreciation to the United Nations personnel, both
military and civilian, who will comprise this new
mission. The United States urges the Government of
Syria to seize this chance for a peaceful political
solution to the crisis before it is too late.
I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I congratulate you,
Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the month of April. We trust your
leadership and we are confident in your wisdom. I
would also like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his
comprehensive briefing.
Let me first assure you that Lebanon remains
totally committed to the full implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) and, in this regard, commends
the role of United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
As for the situation in Syria, Lebanon continues
to stand by its principled position of support for Syria’s
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity and for the
right of its people to live in freedom, safety and
security. Accordingly, Lebanon has been supportive of
the mission entrusted to the League of Arab Nations
and United Nations Joint Special Envoy, Mr. Kofi
Annan.
Turning to the Arab-Israeli conflict now, let me
underline that, in spite of its shortcomings, which are
numerous, the latest Quartet statement issued 11 April
(see SG/2182) should be commended for having
reminded both parties of their obligations under the
Road Map. However, since the statement did not spell
out what those obligations are, let me recall that, with
regard to settlements, the Road Map provides that the
“Government of Israel immediately dismantles
settlement outposts erected since March 2001” and that
“consistent with the Mitchell report, the Government
of Israel freezes all settlement activity, including the
natural growth of settlements”. Furthermore, in its

29

S/PV.6757

latest statement, and in line with its 23 September
statement, the Quartet called upon the parties to refrain
from provocative actions, if negotiations are to be
effective.

vicinity of Israeli settlements throughout the West
Bank have become targets of settler activities, which
has eliminated or put at risk access to the springs and
their use by Palestinians.

I shall not go over the long list of newly erected
so-called outposts, or of ongoing settlement activities.
However, let me draw the Council’s attention to the
latest facts. On 4 April, Israel issued tenders for the
construction of 1,121 new settlement units in occupied
Arab lands: 872 new houses in Jabal Abu Ghneim,
renamed now Har Homa, in East Jerusalem; 180 in
Givat Zeev, just to the north of Jerusalem in the West
Bank; and 69 in Katzrin, in the occupied Syrian Golan
Heights.

A survey carried out by OCHA in the course of
2011 identified a total of 56 such springs, the large
majority of which are located in Area C, on land
parcels recorded by the Israeli Civil Administration as
privately owned by Palestinians. According to the
report, 30 of the springs were found to be under full
settler control, with no Palestinian access to them. In
22 of the 30 cases, Palestinians have been deterred
from accessing the springs by acts of intimidation,
threats and violence perpetrated by Israeli settlers. As
for the remaining eight springs under full settler
control, Palestinian access has, in four cases, been
prevented by physical obstacles, including fencing off
the spring areas, leading to a de facto annexation to the
settlement, and in the other four by isolating the areas
from the rest of the West Bank by the wall and their
subsequent designation as closed military zones.

As for outposts, according to the Israeli daily
Haaretz of this past Thursday, 19 April, Israeli settlers
have built 20 new houses on privately owned
Palestinian land, in the outpost known as Ulpana in
Beit El settlement. In addition, despite orders from the
Civil Administration of the Israeli Defense Ministry
issued in 2011 to stop construction in the Mitspeh
Kramim outpost, new houses have been completed and
are now occupied by Israeli settlers. The settlers simply
ignore the order, and the Israeli army obviously
ignored the ongoing construction. Haaretz also
reported that following the recommendation of
Defence Minister Barak, the Israeli Prime Minister,
Mr. Netanyahu, will be asking his Cabinet to vote on a
plan to “legalize” the status of three West Bank
outposts — Bruchin, Sansana and Rechalim.
Allow me to repeat the two questions I asked
during our last open debate on the Middle East (see
S/PV.6706). Are not such activities clearly inconsistent
with the road map obligations? Are they not clearly
provocative? These are not rhetorical questions. In fact,
we strongly believe that the Council should respond to
those questions. By not doing so the Council will
regrettably yet again fail to stand up to its obligation to
meet its responsibilities in the maintenance of peace
and security in our part of the world.
I also draw attention to the latest report, issued a
month ago on 12 March by the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
in the occupied Palestinian territory under the title
“How Dispossession Happens.” In addressing the
humanitarian impact of the takeover of Palestinian
water springs by Israeli settlers, the report shows how
in recent years a growing number of springs in the

30

According to the OCHA report, the other 26
springs are at risk of settler takeover, including regular
patrolling by the security coordinators of settlements.
Some springs have been turned into tourist attractions
for settlers. The OCHA report leaves no doubt about
how
“the takeover and development of springs by
settlers have multiple ramifications on the daily
lives of Palestinians living in affected areas,
including the erosion of their agricultural
livelihoods”.
The report adds that, despite their declining yield,
“the springs have remained the single largest
water source for irrigation and a significant
source for watering livestock. Albeit to a lesser
extent, springs are also a source of water for
domestic consumption. Households not connected
to the water network, or those supplied on an
irregular basis, rely on them as a coping
mechanism to meet domestic needs, particularly
during the summer.”
Such Israeli practices are in clear violation of
international law, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. In that regard, I need
not remind the Council of General Assembly resolution
64/292, on the human right to water and sanitation. In

12-30484

S/PV.6757

paragraph 1, the resolution “recognizes the right to safe
and clean drinking water and sanitation as a human
right that is essential for the full enjoyment of life and
all human rights”.
The Security Council should condemn in the
strongest terms such Israeli practices and uphold the
indisputable right of the Palestinians to the water in
their own land. By not doing so the Council will
regrettably also fail to stand up for its obligation to
meet its responsibilities in the maintenance of peace
and security in our part of the world.
Let me conclude by saying that inasmuch as we
consider the road map statement commendable in
calling for all parties to abide by their road map
obligations, we also find it profoundly inappropriate
that it uses such a term as “a future Palestinian State”.
The State of Palestine is not an entity to come into
being in the future. It exists at the present time. As a
matter of fact, the State of Palestine has been
recognized as such by a large majority of the States
Members of the United Nations. As a State it is a full
member of UNESCO. But the State of Palestine is an
occupied State. Hence it would not be enough for the
Council to recommend to the General Assembly the
admission of the State of Palestine to the United
Nations. It is also the Council’s duty to ensure an end
to the occupation of the State of Palestine.
Accordingly, the question of Palestinian
statehood can in no way be subjected to the outcome of
negotiations between the Palestinians and the Israelis.
Otherwise, Israel, the occupying Power, would be
granted a right of veto over the right to selfdetermination of the Palestinian people — a right that
was recognized by the General Assembly as inalienable
in 1974 in its resolution 3236 (XXXIX).
We all know that, ever since the idea of an
inalienable right made its first appearance in a political
document — none other than the 4 July 1776
Declaration of Independence of the United States of
America — it has been clear that what is meant by an
inalienable right is a right that can be neither
surrendered nor negotiated. In line with the words of
the chief author of the Declaration of Independence,
Thomas Jefferson, who wrote that nothing is
unchangeable but the inherent and inalienable rights of
man, we can safely assert that, in the case of Palestinian
self-determination, nothing is non-negotiable except
their inherent and inalienable right to a State.

12-30484

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the honour to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the 120
countries members of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM). I will start by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Lynn Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing to
the Council today.
The Non-Aligned Movement remains firm in its
conviction
that
the
international
community,
particularly the Security Council, must act urgently,
resolutely and collectively to fulfil its longstanding
commitment to, and responsibility for, the realization
of the two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and a just solution to the question of Palestine
in all its aspects on the basis of international law and
the well-established terms of reference of the peace
process, including the resolutions of the Security
Council. It is evident that the global consensus to
realize the independence of the State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, is long overdue, and that
its continued postponement will only put that noble
goal further out of reach. NAM therefore reiterates that
serious international action in a timely manner is
required, as the window of opportunity for achieving
the two-State solution based on the 4 June 1967
borders is rapidly closing. Failure to seize this
opportunity will likely usher in yet another era of
uncertainty, instability and continuing conflict, which
must be averted at all costs.
NAM regrets that all efforts exerted to date by
international and regional parties, including by the
Quartet during its 11 April meeting, as well as the
valuable efforts by Jordan to revive negotiations
between the two sides, have been unable to achieve any
progress. That is due to deliberate obstruction by
Israel, the occupying Power, and is rooted in that
country’s refusal to respect and adhere to the wellknown parameters of the peace process, as well as its
insistence on continuing illegally and aggressively to
change facts on the ground, in total contradiction to the
objective and principles of the two-State solution.
Such actions prove the fallacy of Israel’s claims
that it accepts the solution, that it accepts the Quartet
statement and the road map, and that it actually seeks
to end this conflict. Quite to the contrary, Israel’s
illegal measures in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, in particular its massive

31

S/PV.6757

illegal settlement campaign, are entrenching its nearly
45-year military occupation and prolonging the conflict
as well as the injustice being endured by the
Palestinian people. In that regard, NAM welcomes
Palestinian efforts to resume credible negotiations
based on the letter of 17 April addressed to the Israeli
Prime Minister by President Abbas, and calls on Israel
to respond positively to that effort.
The Non-Aligned Movement recalls that the final
status negotiations, which began with great hopes in
September 2010, under the auspices of President
Barack Obama, with the participation of the Quartet,
Egypt and Jordan. Those negotiations, which were
aimed at concluding an agreement within one year,
collapsed just a few weeks later due to Israel’s refusal
to renew its moratorium on settlement activities, cease
its illegal settlement campaign and abide by the
internationally endorsed parameters for negotiations
based on relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
road map. Even while claiming to cooperate with the
Quartet, Israel has continued daily to grossly violate its
road map obligation to cease all settlement activities,
including those stemming from so-called natural
growth, and to dismantle all settlement outposts.
Israel’s credibility as a peace partner thus remains
in serious doubt, as peace efforts continue to be
undermined. Even more dangerously, the two-State
solution based on the 4 June 1967 borders — the most
viable solution at the core of a comprehensive peace
settlement — is being gravely threatened, with
discussion of alternative solutions gaining prevalence.
NAM condemns Israel’s illegal settlement
activities in all their manifestations, along with all
other illegal practices that country continues to carry
out in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and calls for their full and immediate
cessation. NAM stresses that all unlawful attempts to
alter the demographic composition, character and
status of the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, is rejected and unrecognized by the
international community. We call on the Security
Council to implement its relevant resolutions and for
serious efforts to hold Israel accountable for its
violations of international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law, as well as to compel it to end its
military occupation of the Palestinian territory and all
other Arab territories going back to 1967.

32

In the light of the very difficult conditions on the
ground, NAM again calls for the implementation of the
recommendations made to the Council on 18 January
by Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator, with regard to the humanitarian situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory. Specific measures
are necessary, in particular to address the grave impact
of Israel’s settlement policies on the Palestinian people
and their land, including violent actions by Israeli
settlers against Palestinian civilians, including
children, and property. Israel’s illegal colonization of
the occupied land, displacement of the Palestinian
civilian population and imposition of collective
punishment are deepening the humanitarian suffering
and despair of the Palestinian people, while further
fragmenting the territory and its contiguity. That
situation is dramatically raising tensions and instability
and must be a cause for concern to the Council in line
with its Charter duty for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
In that regard, recent provocative Israeli
announcements regarding the establishment of
thousands of new settlement units, particularly in and
around occupied East Jerusalem, along with the
continued demolition of Palestinian homes and devious
attempts by the Israeli Government to legitimize its
illegitimate settlement schemes, require an urgent
reaction by the international community, including the
Security Council, if the two-State solution is to be
salvaged.
The Non-Aligned Movement therefore reiterates
its call for the Security Council to act and demand that
Israel, the occupying Power, abide by its legal
obligations. Illogical pretexts for illegal actions,
arrogant disregard for the law, and blatant impunity
must not be tolerated. The clear conclusion is that the
occupying Power is deliberately obstructing the
attainment of regional, and consequently global, peace
and security. That therefore requires credible action by
the Council, consistent with its Charter duties.
Israel must not remain the exception to every rule
of international law, while at the same time posing as a
democratic and law-abiding Member of the United
Nations. It must be required and compelled to abide by
all of its obligations under the Fourth Geneva
Convention, relevant United Nations resolutions and
the road map. That is the true key to advancing the
resumption of direct negotiations towards an urgently

12-30484

S/PV.6757

needed peaceful settlement based on the two-State
solution to the conflict.
NAM remains concerned by the critical
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, and calls once
again for the full and immediate lifting of the illegal
Israeli blockade in compliance with international
humanitarian law,
which prohibits collective
punishment of a civilian population under occupation,
as well with resolution 1860 (2009) and other relevant
United Nations resolutions.
NAM also seizes this opportunity to express its
support for Palestinian reconciliation efforts, which
continue to be shepherded by Egypt, and hopes that
Palestinian unity will soon be restored in the interest of
the legitimate national aspirations of the Palestinian
people. NAM looks forward to this achievement and to
the holding of Palestinian legislative and presidential
elections in the coming period.
NAM is hopeful that 2012 will finally be the year
that brings peace and justice to the Palestinian people,
including refugees, and that finally brings an end to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict in all respects. The Council
must therefore demand that Israel, the occupying
Power, respect all its legal obligations. It must also
assist the parties by setting forth clear parameters, as
enshrined in its own resolutions, for peace negotiations
within a specified time frame that will actually bring to
fruition the two-State solution on the basis of the
4 June 1967 borders, thus achieving the independence
of the State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living side by side in peace and security with
Israel and all its neighbours.
The larger United Nations membership also has a
crucial role to play in upholding international law and
United Nations resolutions in order to promote a
peaceful settlement. NAM continues to believe that
concrete efforts by the General Assembly, as well as by
the high contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention to ensure respect for the Convention in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, would be a vital contribution. Accordingly,
on 16 January, as mandated by the Movement, the
Chair of the Coordinating Bureau addressed another
letter to the Permanent Representative of Switzerland,
in that country’s capacity as depositary of the Geneva
Conventions, requesting the undertaking of measures
to convene a conference of the high contracting parties
as soon as possible for this purpose, in conformity with

12-30484

relevant United Nations resolutions. NAM welcomes
the positive intentions expressed by Switzerland in its
letter of 22 March, and hopes that those efforts will be
translated into actions in that regard as soon as
possible.
At a time when the two-State solution is being
severely weakened, and should be strengthened, we
recall the application submitted by Palestine on
23 September 2011 for admission to membership of the
United Nations. We look forward to action by the
Security Council that recognizes the legitimate and
historical rights of the Palestinian people and
contributes to peace efforts. We are indeed at a critical
juncture and must collectively do all we can to prevent
further destabilization and the continuation of this
tragic, destructive conflict, promoting peace, justice
and security instead.
Turning to Lebanon, NAM condemns Israel’s
ongoing violations of that country’s sovereignty and its
recurrent serious breaches of resolution 1701 (2006).
The Movement calls on all parties concerned to comply
fully with that resolution in order to end the current
instability and avoid a resurgence of hostilities.
Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions that Israel, the occupying Power, has taken
or may take to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, as
well as any measures to impose its jurisdiction and
administration there, are null and void and have no
legal effect. The Non-Aligned Movement demands that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967, in compliance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): As Chair of the Arab Group for this month, I
would like to thank Mr. Pascoe for his update.
The monthly briefings that the Secretariat
provides to the Security Council on the latest
developments in the Palestinian and Arab territories
under occupation since 1967 reflect, in one way or
another, the gravity of the legal, humanitarian and
political violations committed by Israel, the occupying
Power, against the Palestinian people. They include its

33

S/PV.6757

continued and systemic expansion of illegal settlement
activities deep in the West Bank and East Jerusalem
and surroundings areas, the expulsion of the Arab
population from their homes and the continuing
confiscation of private and public land and property, all
of which undermine the elements of the Palestinian
State and its National Authority.
The Arab Group reiterates its condemnation of all
those grave actions and practices by Israel, which are
the direct cause of the failure of every regional and
international effort made to date to resume peace
negotiations, and which have also fomented anger,
tension and instability in the region as a whole. The
Arab Group is deeply concerned at the international
community’s continuing inability to end such
violations and aggressive measures on Israel’s part.
This has encouraged Israel to continue its provocative
policies concerning the establishment of new
settlements and the expansion of existing ones as part
of its efforts to consolidate its occupation of
Palestinian land, in particular in East Jerusalem, with
the aim of drastically changing that city’s
demographic, historical and religious nature and Arab
character ahead of the results of the negotiations.
The Arab Group regards such Israeli practices as
null and void and contrary to the principles of the
Charter and the provisions of international law, the
relevant international resolutions and the road map.
Today, we therefore demand that the international
community in general, and the Security Council in
particular, assume its full responsibility for the task of
forcing Israel to immediately cease its dangerous
policies, through, among other acts, immediate
cancellation of all illegal decisions and unilateral
measures it has taken in this regard.
We also call on Israel to immediately halt all its
settlement activities, with a view to laying the
groundwork for urgent and unconditional peace
negotiations designed to reach a just and lasting
resolution of the Palestinian question based on a twoState solution and in accordance with the Arab Peace
Initiative and the road map.
We are deeply concerned at the continuing dire
humanitarian and economic situation of the Palestinian
people as a result of the Israeli occupation and
blockades. We call on Israel to immediately lift its
closure of the Gaza crossings, in compliance with
resolution 1860 (2009), as well as to remove all

34

military barriers in Palestinian towns and villages,
which limit trade and the movement of Palestinian
citizens. By the same token, we demand that Israel end
its repeated attempts to withhold customs and tariff
revenues due to the Palestinian Authority.
We hope that the international community will
increase its economic, financial and humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian people, and we urge donor
countries to fulfil their share of the commitments to
contribute $1 billion to the annual budget of the
Palestinian Authority for 2012, based on the
calculations made by the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians at its March meeting in Brussels, in order
to enable the Palestinian Authority to bring its growing
fiscal deficit under control and fulfil its responsibilities
to the Palestinian people.
On the humanitarian front, we call on Israel to
immediately and unconditionally release all Palestinian
prisoners living in difficult and illegal conditions in
Israel’s prisons and detention centres.
We reiterate our total condemnation and rejection
of the continued Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan.
We consider all measures taken by its occupiers, which
should be ended, to be null and void.
We also deplore Israel’s relentless violations of
Lebanese sovereignty by land, sea and air, and ask that
the international community compel Israel to abide by
its obligations as set out in resolution 1701 (2006), in
particular with regard to implementing its military
withdrawal from the Lebanese territory it still
occupies.
With regard to the crisis in Syria, the Arab Group
supports resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012), as
well as the efforts of Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan
to resolve the crisis peacefully, in accordance with his
mandate and the relevant decisions of the Arab League,
which include a political road map for the Syrian crisis
based on the Arab Peace Initiative.
In that regard, we reiterate our support for the
resolutions adopted at the recent summit of the League
of Arab States in Baghdad, which condemned the
Syrian Government’s serious violations of Syrian
civilians’ human rights and called on it to immediately
end all killing and acts of violence; to protect civilians;
to ensure their freedom to demonstrate peacefully; to
immediately release all those detained during such

12-30484

S/PV.6757

events; to withdraw its military forces and other armed
presence from all cities and villages and to allow
immediate access to Arab and international relief
organizations.
We hope that the parties concerned in Syria will
assume their national responsibilities and comply
strictly and transparently with their commitments and
pledges, as set out in the Joint Special Envoy’s sixpoint plan to resolve the situation, with a view to
ending the bloodshed of the Syrian people, allowing
them to achieve their legitimate aspirations, and
restoring security and stability throughout the country.

12-30484

In conclusion, we hope that the Security Council,
as part of its responsibilities in this area, will adopt the
critical measures required to revive the efforts needed
to achieve comprehensive, just and lasting peace and
security in the Middle East.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, with the concurrence of the
members of the Council, I intend to suspend the
meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.30 p.m.

35
