S/PV.7259

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7259th meeting

Monday, 8 September 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power/Mr. Dunn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Bante
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Asselborn
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2014/339)

14-52810 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1452810*

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first public meeting of
the Security Council for the month of September 2014,
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute,
on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Sir Mark
Lyall Grant, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, for
his service as President of the Council for the month
of August. I know that I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Lyall Grant and his great team for the terrific diplomatic
skill with which they conducted the Council’s business
last month.
I should also like to extend, on behalf of the
Council, a warm welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations, His
Excellency Mr. François Delattre. We look forward to
collaborating closely with him.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2014/339)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Estonia, Germany, Guatemala,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Mexico,
Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, New Zealand,
Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Somalia, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine,
Uruguay and Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict; Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF; Mr. Forest Whitaker, Special
2/77

08/09/2014

Envoy for Peace and Reconciliation of UNESCO; and
Ms. Sandra Uwiringiyimana.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Ahmed Fathalla, Permanent Observer of the League
of Arab States, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/339, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.
I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.
Ms. Zerrougui: I come to the Council today with a
heavy heart for the children affected by armed conflict
around the world. Although we continue to see progress
in better protecting children, new crises are rapidly
overshadowing these gains. Some of these crises are
covered in the report before the Council (S/2014/339),
while others have begun or intensified since the report
was submitted. The Council has been briefed on Syria
repeatedly, and the situation there remains grave for
children. Members have also recently travelled to South
Sudan and Somalia and witnessed for themselves the
conditions there. Children in these and other conflicts
are paying a high price.
The events that are unfolding in Iraq have led to
increased grave violations committed by all parties to
the conflict. I am appalled by the total disregard for
human life shown by the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) during its rapid expansion within Syria
and from Syria into Iraq. The images that we see through
media reporting of indiscriminate and brutal killings
of civilians, including children, leave us speechless
and horrified. Although the highly unstable security
situation in the region slows our monitoring, we know
that up to 700 children have been killed or maimed
in Iraq since the beginning of the year, including in
summary executions. I remain deeply concerned over
recent reports of ISIL targeting minorities, including
children and women, in the growing area under its
control in Syria and Iraq. ISIL has tasked boys as
young as 13 to carry weapons, guard strategic locations

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

or arrest civilians. Other children are used as suicide
bombers.
Sadly, we have also received reports of militias
allied to the Iraqi Government using children in the
fight against ISIL, and the whereabouts of numerous
children jailed on security charges by the Government
are currently unknown following militias storming
these facilities in July.
ISIL is not the only perpetrator of child rights
violations; rather, it is part of a broader regional
challenge that includes Boko Haram’s expansion of its
area of operation. Boko Haram has been listed this year
for the killing and maiming of children and attacks on
schools and hospitals, and the United Nations is currently
setting up the monitoring and reporting mechanism to
better gather and verify information concerning grave
violations against children in northern Nigeria.
Targeted attacks on schools, students and teachers
by Boko Haram led to the deaths of at least 100
schoolchildren and 70 teachers in 2013. Health workers,
including polio vaccinators in the north-east, have also
been targeted. The abduction of the girls from Chibok
in April horrified the entire world. Over 200 girls are
still in the hands of Boko Haram, and I call on the
Government of Nigeria and its partners to take any
and all measures to bring the girls back. We are now
receiving reports that Boko Haram has recruited and
used boys and girls as young as 12 years of age in its
attacks, including in raids on schools. I am also worried
by reports about grave violations perpetrated by armed
elements allegedly associated with Government forces
in northern Nigeria. I look forward to the Government’s
announced investigation into these incidents, as
perpetrators, no matter who they are, must be held
accountable for their acts.
I would be remiss if I did not address the horrific
toll that the conflict in Gaza has taken on children. We
have seen intense fighting that has far exceeded the
casualties of the previous escalations in 2008-2009 and
2012, combined. I am horrified by the fact that, since the
beginning of July, more than 500 Palestinian children
have been killed and at least 3,106 injured or maimed
by Israeli forces — two-thirds of them under the age of
12 and one-third have been permanently disabled. At
least 244 schools, including 75 schools belonging to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), have been shelled
by Israel’s armed forces, and one school was used as
a military base by the Israel Defense Forces. As the
14-52810

S/PV.7259

school year has started and 110,000 people remain
displaced, many in school facilities, access to education
for the children of Gaza is severely affected and will
remain limited for the foreseeable future. To add to this
tragedy, medical personnel were also killed during the
shelling, and half of Gaza’s hospitals were damaged,
preventing children from obtaining urgent medical
care.
There are victims on both sides, and I am equally
disheartened by the killing of one Israeli child and the
injury of six others since the beginning of July as a
result of rockets fired by Hamas. The indiscriminate
firing of rockets against civilian areas also resulted in
the damage of three schools in Israel. In addition, the use
of three vacant UNRWA schools by Palestinian armed
groups as weapons stores in Gaza is unacceptable.
We cannot afford impunity in the face of such grave
violations of international law, which in some cases
may amount to war crimes. The events in Gaza must
be thoroughly investigated and identified perpetrators
from all parties to the conflict must be held accountable.
I cannot stress enough the urgent need to work towards a
lasting peace. A ceasefire is only a temporary measure,
and we have been here before. The international
community must put its weight behind addressing the
root causes of this conflict. As the Secretary-General
himself has said, we cannot afford to have another
cycle of violence. People in the State of Palestine and
Israel deserve a durable peace that respects the rights
of all parties and places high value on the rights of the
children.
Many other situations witnessed grave violations
against children in 2013 and face similar challenges
today. Instability and rising tensions in Libya,
Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, Mali and
South Sudan continue to threaten the well-being of
the weakest and require our outmost efforts to protect
them. The intensification of activities by armed groups
gives rise to military responses that sometimes mirror
the tactics of the groups being fought, including the
use of methods of warfare with little or no respect for
civilians. We must remind Governments, which are
sometimes under extreme pressure, of their obligations
under international humanitarian law in the conduct of
operations and under international human rights law at
all times.
The fight against impunity remains one of the
key aspects of our efforts not only to react to but to
prevent grave violations against children. We must
3/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

make better use of the tools at our disposal in ensuring
that perpetrators face prosecution — by including
them in sanctions regimes, by redoubling our efforts in
enhancing national capacities in the judicial sector and
by strengthening the framework of international justice,
including referring perpetrators to the International
Criminal Court.
To raise attention and address those harrowing
challenges facing children in conflict, the Security
Council has given my Office, the broader United
Nations, concerned Governments and partners the tools
to reduce violations or end them entirely. Chief among
those tools are Security Council-mandated action
plans with State and non-State parties that recruit and
use children, kill or maim children, attack schools
and hospitals or perpetrate sexual violence against
children. Of course, the implementation of those action
plans would not be possible without the efforts of all
our partners, including UNICEF, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department
of Political Affairs DPA and their child-protection
advisers on the ground.
Six months ago, I launched the global campaign
Children, Not Soldiers, jointly with UNICEF, to work
towards the goal of no children in Government forces
by the end of 2016. In that time, the campaign has
received an almost overwhelming amount of support,
first and foremost from the countries concerned
and from the Security Council, which endorsed the
campaign in resolution 2143 (2014), but also from
regional organizations, non-governmental organization
partners and Member States. I am particularly happy to
welcome Forest Whitaker, UNESCO Special Envoy for
Peace and Reconciliation, who has joined our efforts
under the Children, Not Soldiers campaign. I want to
extend my gratitude to all.
The Government of Chad, with the full support
of the United Nations, has already fulfilled all the
requirements under its action plan to end and prevent
the recruitment of children in its armed forces, and has
been delisted from this year’s report of the SecretaryGeneral. In May, Yemen became the seventh country
concerned by the campaign to sign an action plan with
the United Nations. During my visit in June, South
Sudan recommitted to the action plan signed in June
2012. Progress was also achieved in Somalia. During
my recent visit, Somali authorities showed strong
will to move forward on the implementation of the
country’s action plan. Important progress continues in

4/77

08/09/2014

Afghanistan, Myanmar and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The vast majority of the parties listed are non-State
actors. To date we have concluded an equal number of
action plans with State and non-State actors. Non-State
actors continue to approach my Office and our partners
on the ground to conclude action plans to end violations
against children. A recent example is the commitment
to end child recruitment communicated to my Office
and to the Council by the Free Syrian Army in Syria.
Riek Machar of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army
in Opposition also signed a commitment with me in
May. We are witnessing progress with non-State armed
groups in Darfur, and I am hopeful that we will be able
to conclude the compliance activities of our action
plan with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front in the
Philippines as soon as possible. I am encouraged by
such progress. The Council’s constant encouragement
in that regard is a boon to our efforts.
I cannot overemphasize the importance for
specific attention on the plight of child victims of
armed conflict in peace processes and agreements.
Children are the future of a society. Longstanding
peace will never be achieved without giving children
the means, skills and education to rebuild a society
and institutions torn by armed conflict. Although the
primordial aim of a cessation of hostilities must be
a swift end to fighting — and children are often the
first to profit — the more substantial stages of peace
negotiations can be challenging when it comes to grave
child-rights violations. We must do more to include
special provisions in peace agreements for children
affected by conflict.
Today’s armed conflicts increasingly involve
schools and health facilities in the direct line of fire.
The Security Council recognizes that important aspect
in its resolutions 1998 (2011) and 2143 (2014). To
implement the tools provided to us in those resolutions,
I have jointly published the Guidance Note on Attacks
against Schools and Hospitals, together with UNICEF,
UNESCO and the World Health Organization. With
that guidance, our field practitioners will be better
equipped to monitor and report, engage in advocacy
and work with parties to conflict to end and prevent
attacks on schools and hospitals.
A key strategy of my mandate as Special
Representative has been to deepen my engagement with
regional organizations. My Office has a longstanding
relationship and has developed a series of guidelines in
14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

conjunction with the European Union. I have continued
to actively engage with the African Union. I am happy
to note that, in addition to the partnership agreement
signed last year, the African Union has just announced
the establishment of a special envoy on children and
armed conflict. With the escalation of conflict and its
impact on children across the Arab world, I have sought
to strengthen ties with the League of Arab States, and
we are developing a cooperation agreement to enhance
our common work. My Office also continues to engage
with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to further
mainstream child-protection standards among the
forces of its member States and partners.
No one in the Chamber today who has read the
Secretary-General’s report and heard of the latest
developments in the conflicts before the Council can
consider children as a “collateral” issue. Indeed, we
now know that, in a large majority of conflicts around
the world, children are targeted and used deliberately.
Conflict confronts them in their homes, at school,
in hospitals and when they seek to run away. That is
why we, and the world with us, expect so much of the
Security Council, and why the Council can, and must,
place children at the centre of each and every peace and
security action it takes — from peace agreements to
mission mandates to accountability for crimes. I count
on the Council. But, more important, the child victims
around the world count on the Security Council.
The President: I thank Ms. Zerrougi for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Once again this
year, perhaps more than ever, the trend continues and
the evidence is clear: children are among the first
victims of armed conflict. Take for example the spiral
of violence since December that has affected the Central
African Republic and South Sudan, with a devastating
impact on the population, especially children, that we
are still to assess. More than 8,000 children in Central
Africa are now in the hands of all sorts of armed groups,
including the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), which is
raging in the south-east of the country. In South Sudan,
we have witnessed a dramatic setback and an alarming
increase in the recruitment of children by armed groups
of all stripes. The continuing conflict in the heart of
Darfur and the growing insecurity in northern Mali
affect primarily women and children, who lack access
to the necessary protection and assistance. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we continue to see

S/PV.7259

the kidnapping and recruitment of children by armed
groups, as well as sexual violence.
Therefore, we at the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations remain determined to continue our efforts
to protect them, under the double arch of responsibility
and partnership. Responsibility means setting an
example by making children a priority. Partnership
implies coordinating our efforts to maximize existing
competencies and to draw on the competencies and
resources of all parties. Partnerships and coordinated
action with international child-protection partners.
including the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF
and other international and non-governmental
organizations, enable us to contribute to a
comprehensive response to the plight of children. That
response includes monitoring, reporting, humanitarian
assistance, physical protection, political action and
psychosocial services, as well as demobilization,
community reintegration, education and employment.
Our partnerships with Member States, particularly
with the troop- and police-contributing countries,
allow the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
lead by example and to uphold the exemplary conduct
and action of our troops, our police — both men and
women — and our civilian colleagues. I will return to
that point in a moment.
Most importantly, we have sought to create
partnerships with States in which our peacekeeping
operations are deployed in order to ensure that they
fulfil their fundamental responsibility to protect
children. Earlier this year, Special Representative
Leila Zerrougui, in concert with UNICEF, made
State responsibility a priority by launching the global
Children, not Soldiers campaign. My Department
will spare no effort to promote that campaign in the
areas where we maintain a presence, and to support
the Governments and security forces of Afghanistan,
Sudan, South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, among others, in order to ensure that there
are no more child soldiers by 2016.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example, where the Government has adopted an action
plan to free children associated with its armed forces,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and United Nations partners are now supporting the
establishment of joint technical working groups with
provincial authorities. I would like to commend the

14-528105/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

Government’s efforts to promote that campaign on
national radio and television. In South Sudan, the
Ministry of Defence recently appointed some 20 new
child protection officers to address the rise in child
recruitment across the country. We recently contributed
to their training programme in support of that positive
initiative.
Beyond the campaign itself, Governments must
also set an example by providing support for access,
monitoring, assistance and involvement with armed
groups. That remains a challenge, for example, in the
Sudan or Mali, but the child protection advisers of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) have been able to establish contact
with Minni Minawi of the Sudan Liberation Army and
the Musa Hilal group, both of whom have issued orders
this year prohibiting the recruitment and use of children
in their ranks. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
has initiated contact with certain parties known to have
recruited child soldiers in northern Mali.
In negotiating peace agreements or ceasefires,
States must also lead by example, making childprotection provisions a non-negotiable part of all
agreements. To that end, the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan is working closely with the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
to integrate child-specific provisions in the ceasefire
agreement in South Sudan. In Algiers, at this very
moment, MINUSMA is sending the same message
to the negotiating parties to make sure that they do
likewise.
Robust action must also be launched against armed
groups that are holding child soldiers. For instance, the
joint rescue operation led by the Armed Forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO,
which was launched on 7 August, has so far enabled 41
civilians, including 34 children, to be extracted from
the hands of the rebel Allied Democratic Forces.
Tо successfully carry out such operations, our
peacekeepers are required to show courage and uphold
the highest standards of conduct and integrity. They
need to understand the ways in which robust military
action, which is indispensable for the protection of
civilians, can be adapted to the specific needs of
girls and boys. To that end, in April we completed the
development of specialized child-protection training
modules for soldiers. The modules explain how to
interact with children while keeping their best interests
6/77

08/09/2014

in mind. They also remind our peacekeepers of their
responsibility to protect teachers and schools. Most
importantly, they seek to leverage the presence and
comparative advantage of our Blue Helmets by giving
them the tools to understand how to report the most
serious violations and how to support child-protection
advisers in their contacts with armed actors, with
particular concern for securing the release of children
from their ranks.
After being piloted in Malaysia and Uruguay in
2013, the training modules have now been shared with
all troop-contributing countries, and this year the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations organized
training courses for trainers from our largest troopcontributing countries, which were held in Austria and
Sweden. I would like to take this opportunity to thank
the Member States that funded the development of the
modules and hosted those courses. The project would
not have been possible without their support.
The countries that sent military instructors to those
courses need to generate appropriate follow-up in order
to strengthen child-protection training for their troops.
They must also appoint military child-protection
officers to all units on the ground. They might also
make sure that there is a higher percentage of female
peacekeepers so as to facilitate our troops’ interactions
with girls who fall victim to conflicts. In order to
complete our training curriculums, we have now begun
to develop specialized modules for the United Nations
police force, with a focus on capacity-building for
host State police, as well as on wider judicial reform,
correction systems, and juvenile justice issues.
Before concluding, I would like to say a word on
the Central African Republic and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), since we are
due to take over that mission from the African Union in
under a week. I will obviously be there, and I would
like to reassure the Security Council and partners
that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations is
taking all necessary measures, as we do with all our
missions, to minimize any risk that our peacekeepers
might unwittingly inflict on the local populations. The
United Nations human rights screening policy requires
our troop- and police-contributing countries to certify
that the women and men sent as peacekeepers have not,
or are not alleged to have, committed past violations.
With respect to MINUSCA in particular, we have
taken targeted measures that go well beyond the scope
14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

of the screening policy so as to ensure that all our troops
abide by the highest standards and do not include children
in their ranks. Those measures include engagement
with the Governments concerned, proactive humanrights screening of individual commanders by United
Nations personnel and ongoing physical screening for
under-aged personnel, as well as the sensitization and
training of troops. For instance, a mobile training team
has just returned from Bangui, where it had spent a
month in Central Africa providing targeted training
to all troops of the African-led International Support
Mission for the Central African Republic on United
Nations standards, including conduct and discipline,
the protection of civilians, human rights, protection of
children, countering sexual violence and so forth. The
team utilized our new modules on child protection, and
another team in the near future will provide training on
all these matters to additional troops currently being
deployed.
Generally
speaking,
the
Department
of
Peacekeeping Operations continues to work in
close coordination with Special Representatives
Zerrougui Bangura to ensure that all of our troop- and
police-contributing countries are in compliance with
international legal standards, including, needless to
say, the relevant Security Council’ resolutions.
Therefore, rest assured, Madam President, that
these issues lie at the very heart of our mandates and
that we are naturally focusing on them. Children — girls
and boys — are trusting, but their trust is so easily
betrayed. To earn it, we are required to show a high
degree of responsibility. We must set an example. We
must put an end to their suffering, and to do so we will
need to continue to enhance our cooperation with all
our partners.
The Council’s continued support is therefore
absolutely necessary to ensure that we are able to deploy
child-protection advisers to all priority areas and to
ensure that our Blue Helmets are motivated, equipped
and trained to assume that mission. And that is all the
more necessary now, as we have numerous challenges
before us because of all the children who have our trust,
and our mandate is to protect those children.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsou for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Brandt.
Ms. Brandt: I offer special thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, for her determined efforts and those of

S/PV.7259

her Office to keep children in armed conflict safe;
to the United States for organizing this open debate;
to Luxembourg for chairing the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict; and to the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations for our productive
partnership on child protection.
It is indeed a terrible irony that in the twenty-fifth
year of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, a
time when we should be celebrating global progress in
children’s welfare, we are witnessing so many atrocities
against children. Efforts to keep children safe in armed
conflicts are continuing, so there is some progress to
report. But challenges and setbacks have taken a tragic
toll on children.
Since our last open debate on the subject (see
S/PV.7129), children in Iraq, Syria, South Sudan,
Gaza and the Central African Republic have suffered
indescribably; they have been recruited, used,
orphaned and killed. They have witnessed massacres
that no child should ever see, they have endured pain
from which they should have been protected, and they
have been brutalized. We have seen that too often,
their schools, which should be safe havens, are not,
as playgrounds become battlegrounds. Governments
and non-State armed groups continue to use schools
to store weapons, detain prisoners and house soldiers.
Teachers and students are targeted. I am, of course,
thinking especially of the more than 200 Nigerian
schoolgirls abducted and still missing, and I join the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
emphasizing that we must bring them home. We must
redouble our efforts to protect all children and schools
from targeted attacks.
So UNICEF appreciates all the more the initiative
by the Global Coalition to Protect Education from
Attack and its partners to advocate for schools as safe
and protected spaces, including through the new Lucens
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from
Military Use during Armed Conflict, which outline
actions Governments can take to end military use of
schools. UNICEF therefore calls on all Member States
to support and implement the Lucens Guidelines so that
schools can remain places of learning and hope where
children can build strong foundations for their futures
and those of their families.
I should like to say a few words on the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign, launched six months ago by Special
Representative Zerrougui with UNICEF. We have seen
some encouraging results since that time. For example,

14-528107/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

Myanmar’s armed forces recently released 91 children,
and of course, we hope that that will be followed by
the release of all other children identified through the
ongoing age verification and reporting process. The
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
implementing its action plan and has released hundreds
of children, and UNICEF will continue to support the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s efforts to make its
army child-free. As the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General mentioned this morning, the armed
forces of Chad have achieved their action plan and have
been subsequently delisted, as noted in the annexes of
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/339).
While we note such achievements, we also remain
focused on the challenges and especially the recruitment
of children by non-State armed groups. In the Central
African Republic, the Sudan and South Sudan, among
others, children continue to be mobilized, manning
checkpoints, loading weapons, carrying guns and
worse. In some places, however, a number of non-State
armed groups are taking bold steps to end that heinous
practice. In the Philippines, the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front convened a meeting with 30 of its commanders at
which the group recommitted to protecting children. In
Myanmar, the country task force has begun discussions
with the Karen National Union, the Karenni National
Progressive Party and the Kachin Independence
Organization and hopes to engage other listed parties
soon.
But we need to see more — more negotiations to
release children held by these groups, more efforts to
changes attitudes about the role of children in conflict
and more rehabilitation centres to help mend their
hearts and their minds, so that they can continue their
journeys towards better, more prosperous futures.
Thankfully, some children have begun that journey.
Nanette, who was recruited by the Séléka rebels in the
Central African Republic, said this to us:
“I was released from Séléka at the start of this
year to a transit centre. I was disturbed when I
arrived, very nervous and worried about my future.
I cried and lived folded in on myself. But, with the
support of the team, I have learnt to move on and
build a life. I now live with my big sister and have
begun a vocational training programme”.
Fortunately, Nanette is now healing, standing tall
and reclaiming her future. Let us give more children
like her that blessed opportunity.

8/77

08/09/2014

The President: I thank Ms. Brandt for her briefing.
I now give floor to Mr. Whitaker.
Mr. Whitaker: I would like to thank the Security
Council for receiving me today. As a humanist and as the
UNESCO Special Envoy for Peace and Reconciliation,
I am honoured by the opportunity to come to speak
before the Council on such an important matter, and
I am especially grateful to Ambassador Power for
extending this invitation to me.
I just returned yesterday from South Sudan, training
youth in transformative peace-building through my
foundation. I was also in the country in June with
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict Leila Zerrougui and Irma
Bokova, Director-General of UNESCO, advocating for
the protection and education of children affected by the
conflict and working with individuals to help push the
country towards peace.
For the past two years, I have gone in and out of
South Sudan, working with my foundation, and I have
watched and participated as the various temperaments
and conflicts have manifested themselves. As I am
sure the Council is aware, the situation in South Sudan
remains dire. After meeting with generals, soldiers and
civilians on the ground, I fear that there is no end to
the violence in sight. About 100,000 individuals have
sought shelter in the overcrowded civilians camps
around the country. Nine months after the conflict
started, most of them still do not feel that it is safe to go
back home or even know if they have a home to return
to. The city of Bentiu in the north is all but deserted,
with houses burned to the ground, hospitals closed, and
villages nearby destroyed.
What concerns me most are the conditions that
so many children in South Sudan must endure. In the
protection of civilians camp in Bentiu, some of the
boys’ and girls’ hair is turning red from malnutrition.
Throughout the country, hundreds of schools are
empty, and some have been turned into military camps,
as thousands of young people go without food and basic
education. Perhaps worst of all, walking through the
cities, I saw child soldiers wearing military uniforms
and carrying guns.
I know that, to everyone in this Chamber, the idea
of children living in military camps or fighting wars is
unconscionable. It is inhuman in the strictest sense of
the word: it robs its victims of a phase of their lives to
which every human being is entitled. I also know that
14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

the Security Council, Special Representative Zerrougui,
UNICEF and the many individuals present here today
have done a lot of important work to combat the use of
child soldiers. The Security Council has given us tools
to better protect children affected by conflict and to
end and prevent the recruitment and the use of children.
The Children, Not Soldiers campaign has united the
countries that are taking action to end such practices in
their armies. Since the launch of the campaign, there
have been several positive developments: Chad recently
completed the requirements of its action plan, bringing
down the number of countries involved to seven. Just
a few weeks ago, Myanmar freed close to a hundred
children.
My commitment to the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign is rooted in my own experience growing up
in South Los Angeles, knowing many children whose
lives would be forever marred by gang violence. When
I started working with child soldiers 10 years ago and
heard their stories, I recognized the face of the trauma
that comes from having lived in conflict as a child. This
is a unique opportunity for me to make the statement
that it is unacceptable for children to become agents of
violence in any form.
What I want to talk about today is the work that
remains to be done. Until I started working with child
soldiers, I had not realized the depth of the problem
nor the complexity of its resolution. To begin with,
many different conflicts around the world engage child
soldiers, and the reasons why those children become
soldiers are often unique to each conflict. In Uganda,
the Lord’s Resistance Army would kidnap children
from their villages, forcing them to kill those they love.
In some cultures, being a soldier is seen as a rite of
passage, and many children join, thinking that they will
have the honour of supporting their tribes. In South
Sudan, some children are coerced, while others go to
the military because they need food and shelter and
cannot find it any other way.
Though children may become soldiers for a variety
of reasons, the practice is singularly and universally
unacceptable, and must be ended. But there is one
common and stubborn challenge that arises whenever
we attempt to liberate children serving in armed groups,
and that is that reintegrating former child soldiers into
their families and communities is a long, complex and
resource-intensive process.
Supporting Governments in their efforts to end the
recruitment and use of child soldiers is a paramount and

S/PV.7259

necessary first step, but we must also devote adequate
resources to caring for these children once we bring
them home from war. We may take a child out of an
army, but unless we do more for him — help him
re-enter society, enrol him in a good school or teach
him a useful trade, we have not set him free. For so
many of those children, war and violence are all that
they have ever known, and if we do not take it upon
ourselves to teach them something new, then they are
just soldiers-in-waiting. And when another war breaks
out, only five or ten years in the future, they will be the
first ones recruited to go back to the battlefield.
We must act to prevent this. Not only because those
children deserve the chance to live normal, healthy
lives, but also because we have an opportunity to
prevent future violence. If we can make such children
emotionally whole again and restore a sense of normalcy
to their lives, then they will want to put down their arms
for good, and, instead of perpetuating a vicious cycle
of violence, they will be able to help build a peaceful
future for their country.
There was a former child soldier I met in Uganda.
He and his parents had been captured by the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA). The LRA trained the boy
as a soldier, and they forced his mother and father
into labour service. When his parents could not work
anymore, the boy looked on helplessly as the LRA
executed them, right in front of him. One day, he saw
an opportunity to escape. The boy ran from the camp,
found a place to bury his uniform, his gun and his army
gear, and wandered alone through the bush. He came
upon a family. They took him in, they fed him. The boy
told me that, in that moment, as he was sitting down
to eat dinner with those strangers, he suddenly felt so
afraid. Here he was, in that warm home with a normal
family, and he had no idea how to behave, how to talk
to them, how to eat like them. He left, found where he
had buried his gear and his weapon; he dug it all up, and
went back to the same LRA that had killed his parents.
This is not a parable; it is a true story about a real
boy. But it encapsulates the struggle that thousands of
other child soldiers just like him face. Child soldiers are
trapped in a prison without walls. Even after their wars
are over, many of them cannot go home, because they
feel safer, more at home in an army camp than with a
loving family. That leads to a vicious cycle of violence
where, during today’s wars, the seeds of tomorrow’s
battles are sown, because we have created a generation
of soldiers-in-waiting, for whom war is more normal
than peace.

14-528109/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

That is true of girls I have met as well, many of
whom were forced to commit unspeakable acts of
violence, or were coerced into sexual slavery. I visited
an internally displaced persons camp a few years ago
and spoke with a girl who had been a child soldier and,
because of that, was completely ostracized when she
returned to civilization. It was a crowded camp, acres
of mud huts all around, and not a soul would talk to
her. “They say I am crazy,” she said, “and I may be,
because I do things, and I do not know why. They say I
am stupid, and I may be, because I do not know how to
do the things that everyone else can do.”
I am not telling these stories to suggest that there is
no hope for such children. On the contrary, I have been
moved beyond words by the work that so many dedicated
individuals have done for former child soldiers. In Gulu
in Uganda, Sister Rosemary Nyirumbe has created
a home for girls and women whose lives have been
shattered by violence and sexual exploitation. She cares
for them and teaches them. She makes them whole
again. Okello Sam, a former child soldier himself, has
opened a school where he educates and rehabilitates
children who have been soldiers and victims of war. I
have seen students at those schools transformed from
soldiers back into children. And I have watched as they
have grown up to be dynamic, intelligent, and hopeful
young men and women who will be voices for peace
and change in their communities and will help end the
cycles of violence that have existed for so long in these
regions.
More programmes of that kind and more support for
existing ones are needed. UNICEF in particular works
with hundreds of non-governmental organizations that
provide services to former child soldiers and children
affected by conflict. It is essential that the Council
and the international community devote the resources
needed to heal such children in the present and to make
sure that they do not become soldiers again in the
future. It is that same underlying philosophy — that
we must educate and rehabilitate the victims of today’s
violence to prevent tomorrow’s conflicts — that has
been at the centre of the work that my foundation, the
Whitaker Peace and Development Initiative, has carried
out in Uganda, South Sudan, Mexico, and soon in other
countries, too.
I have watched as old patterns of violence and
discrimination have been broken. When we started our
programme in South Sudan in 2012, we recruited youths
from all of the region’s major ethnic groups. When the

10/77

08/09/2014

fighting broke out last December, I was heart-broken to
learn that so many of our youths were impacted by the
conflict. But I was also incredibly proud when I read
their reports and saw that they were using their training
to reach across ethnic lines, to contact each other and
to coordinate their efforts as they travelled around the
country advocating for peace.
They have shown me the beauty of the spirit of
the people of South Sudan. They give me hope, hope
that even the most vicious cycles of violence, the most
intractable conflicts can be stopped. I have seen the
transformative power that peace and diversity education
can have on young people. But for most children in wartorn regions, and especially for former child soldiers,
those lessons do not come naturally. Rather, it is
incumbent on all of us to muster the will and devote the
resources to create safe environments for these children
and former child soldiers so that they can receive those
lessons and move forward with their lives.
Helping children rebuild their lives after such
unfathomable traumas is central to the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign. Reintegration is a part of each
and every action plan signed by Governments with
the United Nations. For the children living in those
countries, the actions we have promised cannot come
soon enough. By the end of 2016, we want to be able to
tell children not only that they will grow up protected
from recruitment and use by Government forces in
conflict, but also that current child soldiers will be
cared for when they are brought home.
The objective is ambitious, but not unrealistic.
In the last two years, we have coalesced around this
issue in unprecedented ways and have made important
strides towards ending the use of child soldiers around
the world. Countries that have long been among the
most egregious violators are now showing a true will
to reform. The Security Council and the international
community must continue their support for such
efforts without compromise or exception, and, just as
important, we must provide the resources necessary to
put in place and strengthen the programmes we need to
truly rebuild these children’s lives.
It is impossible for us to comprehend the magnitude
of a child soldier’s pain — how deep his wounds, how
heavy her burden. How alone such children must feel
when they return from the battlefield to a world they do
not recognize. Unless we are there to meet them with
open arms, open homes and open schools, their wars
will never end, and neither will ours.
14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

The President: I thank Mr. Whitaker for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Uwiringiyimana.
Ms. Uwiringiyimana: I would like to thank the
Council for the opportunity to speak today. My name
is Sandra Uwiringiyimana. I am 20 years old, and I
am from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. My
ancestors are from Rwanda; for many generations, my
family lived in the Democratic Republic of Congo,
where I was born. Still, many Congolese considered my
people, the Banyamulenge, to be Rwandans because of
the language we speak and the way we look.
We were born into war. These are some of my
earliest memories. I remember seeing Congolese
soldiers marching in the streets with the heads of the
Banyamulenge on sticks. I remember spending nights
in bushes, hiding from attacks. I got used to dropping
out of school and fleeing every time a new war broke
out. One day in 2004, my father showed up at school and
said we had to leave immediately. We fled to Burundi.
We were robbed and beaten before we could make it to
the border. They took everything. We finally made it
to a United Nations camp in Burundi called Gatumba,
where we lived in a large tent with other families. I was
about 10 years old.
We had been there for a few months when it
happened. I remember it vividly. It is night time, and I
am woken up by what sounds like popcorn popping. My
mother is frantically telling me to wake up. I open my
eyes and see fear in her face. Then I see my aunt next
to her, blood running down her arm like a stream and
gushing onto my leg. I start screaming, and my screams
wake up my six-year-old sister. My mother tells us to be
quiet and to find sheets to wrap around my aunt’s arm.
I try, but all I see is blood everywhere. My mother tells
my older cousin to take my sister and me through a hole
that has been ripped in the side of our tent. People are
rushing to escape, but right after my cousin runs out,
gunshots ring out. My mother pulls us back and shoves
us under a thin mattress. We wait until it is quiet. Then
we hear a voice saying, “Is there anyone there? We
are here to help. Please come out.” My mother shouts,
“Are you really here to help?” They say they are the
good guys. We come out and walk towards the door.
My mother carries my two little cousins with my little
sister on her back. My aunt is crawling.
Just then, I see two armed men in the doorway
and something tells me there is danger. I start running
in the other direction. Then the shooting starts. As I

S/PV.7259

look back, I see sparks going through my mother and
everyone around her. I go back to my hiding place under
the thin mattress. I shut my eyes and start to pray. Then
I feel something hot drop on my leg. I open my eyes
and the whole tent is on fire. Everything around me is
melting. I throw off the mattress and start to run, but a
man with a gun grabs me. He looks about 20 years old.
I say, “Forgive me,” and I do not know if I am speaking
to him or to God. I lost my younger sister and many
of my childhood friends that night. I am nothing. That
is what he thought, this man who had just killed my
family. He kicks me and releases his grip. To this day
I will never know why he let me go. Then I am crying
and running, as quick as I can. I stumble and fall, but I
get up and keep running.
That is my story. I will tell it to anyone who will
listen. Not because it is easy. Every time I tell it 1 am
back in Gatumba, a 10-year-old burning in a tent. But
as long as the criminal who admitted to leading that
massacre continues to walk freely in the streets of
Burundi, I have no choice. I must keep telling it until
the international community proves that my words are
worthy not only of empathy but also of accountability.
Until leaders like those here and the countries they
represent show me that my family and all others are
not disposable. The only way to do that is by bringing
people like Agathon Rwasa to justice. Only then will
war criminals know that their crimes are wrong and will
not go unpunished. Only then will millions of survivors
like me hear loud and clear that our lives have value.
My life is very different now. In 2007, my family
was resettled in the United States through a United
Nations programme. I am studying at Houghton
College. My older sisters and I have set up a foundation
to help survivors like us, called Foundation of Hope.
Resettlement is important. So is treatment for the
horrors we have been through. The survivors’ travelling
exhibit that my brother and I photograph serves as a
learning tool for many college communities, and, of
course, as an aid to healing for myself and my family.
But healing and peace will not come until there
is justice. Until there is justice, the comfortable new
home and safe community I live in may as well be that
tent in Gatumba. Until there is justice, the nightmares
will never stop. The Security Council has the reports; it
knows the criminals. Acknowledgement is not enough.
It must take action.
The President: I would like to thank Sandra for a
briefing that none of us will forget.

14-5281011/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

Before we proceed to statements, I would like to
point out that we intend to continue the practice started
last month during the United Kingdom presidency of
using the flashing light on the collar of the speaker’s
microphone to signal when five minutes have elapsed.
I strongly encourage both members and non-members
of the Council to conclude their remarks as soon as
possible after that light starts flashing. We will carry
on this open debate right through lunch, as we have
a very large number of speakers, again testifying to
the interest and concern of all States Members of the
United Nations.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you warmly, Madam, for organizing
this open debate on children and armed conflict during
your presidency of the Council.
I have to say that it is very difficult to speak after
Sandra Uwiringiyimana’s speech, a speech not only
about atrocities but also about the hope that is possible
when such children receive our help. I would also like
to thank Ms. Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict;
Ms. Brandt, the Deputy Executive Director General of
UNICEF; and Mr. Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, for their enlightening
presentations. I would also like to take this occasion
to thank Mr. Forest Whitaker, Special Envoy for Peace
and Reconciliation of UNESCO, for his commitment to
the cause of children affected by armed conflict and for
his truly moving statement.
Six months ago almost to the day, we unanimously
adopted a tenth resolution on children and armed
conflict (resolution 2143 (2014)) during an open debate
(see S/PV.7129) that I had the honour to preside over.
However, despite the successive resolutions adopted
by the Council and the progress they represent for the
protection of children, children continue to pay a very
heavy price in conflicts.
From Syria to the Central African Republic, from
South Sudan to Afghanistan and from Gaza to Iraq,
children are killed, maimed or, depending on the
situation, abducted, sexually abused or recruited, both
by Government forces and non-State actors. Schools
and pupils continue to be the targets of deliberate
attacks. School infrastructure is regularly looted
or diverted from its primary purpose to be used for
military purposes. Such acts deprive children, and the
12/77

08/09/2014

communities whose future and hope they represent,
of a fundamental right: the right to education. The
ignorance that results from a lack of education fosters
intolerance and perpetuates the cycle of poverty, thus
feeding the violence. I hope the Security Council will
continue to give this issue the attention it requires in
the spirit of resolutions 1998 (2011) and 2143 (2014).
The persistence of violations and abuses
committed against children in conflict situations is a
stark reminder that the progress we make should be
measured not only by the improvements we bring to
our normative framework — however important they
may be — but also by how the Council implements its
decisions in specific contexts. Whether in countryspecific
resolutions,
peacekeeping
operations’
mandates, sanctions regimes or the conclusions of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, the
Council must be consistent and concretely apply what
it has committed to in its thematic resolutions. The
Council’s credibility is at stake here.
That is true also for the fight against impunity.
Those who commit atrocities against children must be
held accountable for their actions. In that respect, the
Council must act in accordance with its prerogatives,
including its ability to make referrals to the International
Criminal Court.
As I have just stated, wherever conflicts rage,
children in particular are affected. A conflict of untold
violence has been decimating Syria for three and a half
years now. Far from diminishing, the fighting continues
unabated. The month of July 2014 has been the most
deadly for the civilian population since the beginning
of the conflict. Among the victims, there are now
well over 10,000 children. Thousands more have been
maimed and will remain scarred for life, physically and
psychologically. Countless innocent children have lost
their lives due to indiscriminate attacks on populated
areas and indiscriminate bombardments by barrel
bombs, the sole objective of which is to sow terror and
despair among the civilian population. Others have
fallen victim to deliberate attacks against their schools:
240 children have been killed or wounded in such attacks
between April and June 2014 alone. That does not even
include the children denied access to humanitarian aid
and those detained and tortured by Government forces
or even forced to fight in pro-Government armed
groups, armed opposition groups and terrorist groups,
first and foremost among which is the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7259

Reports of abuses committed against children by
ISIL in territories under its control, whether in Syria
or Iraq, are increasing. Recruitment, murder, rape,
abductions and attacks against schools are common.
As the Special Representative, Ms. Zerrougui, has just
recalled in her statement, more than 500 children have
been killed in Iraq since the beginning of the year.
Close to 500 have also been killed during the most
recent cycle of violence in the Gaza Strip during the
summer. Leaving political considerations aside, one can
only be outraged when the number of children killed
during a military operation is as high as the number of
combatants killed. It is simply beyond comprehension.

In the introduction to her study on the impact of
armed conflict on children, Graça Machel underlined
that children are

I could go on and list many other conflict situations
and give many more examples of grave violations against
children, such as the abuses committed by Boko Haram,
which has rightfully been added to the list of shame.
But I would like to conclude on a more optimistic note.
Indeed, despite the reasons for concern — which, it is
true, are many — the commitment of the international
community as a whole has enabled progress to be
made, which constitutes a real glimmer of hope, as
Mr. Whitaker has just reminded us.

Mr. Bante (Chad) (spoke in French): Allow me
to thank you, Madam President, and to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the representative of
Luxembourg. I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
the Executive Director of UNICEF and the Special
Envoy for Peace and Reconciliation of UNESCO for
their statements.

Thanks to the tireless awareness-raising efforts
of the Special Representative, Governments continue
to undertake commitments, in particular to end the
recruitment and use of children in conflict. In Yemen,
an action plan was signed by the Government on 14 May,
thereby bringing to seven the number of Governments
committed to ending the recruitment of children. That
is an additional encouraging sign for the success of
the Children, Not Soldiers campaign launched by the
Special Representative and UNICEF. It comes on the
heels of Chad’s removal from the list contained in the
annexes of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/339),
following its Government’s implementation of the
action plan it had signed. Allow me to commend here
the determined efforts of the Chadian authorities to that
end.
In Myanmar, which the Council’s Working Group
visited last year, the armed forces have continued
with the process of demobilization of children from
their ranks, in line with their commitments. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the President has
appointed his first Special Adviser for the fight against
sexual violence and the recruitment of children. The
regional organizations are also active and are mobilizing
to improve the protection of children, as illustrated by
the creation of a post of Special Envoy of the African
Union for children in Africa.
14-52810

“both our reason to struggle to eliminate the worst
aspects of warfare, and our best hope for succeeding
at it.”
That blend of idealism and pragmatism best
characterizes the children and armed conflict agenda.
I hope that the Council will be able to pursue its noble
task of eliminating the worst aspects of conflicts and
find practical solutions to end the violations and abuses
committed against children.

I take this opportunity to commend the efforts
by the Security Council and its Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and thank the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Envoy for their ongoing work
to protect children.
We note with concern that armed conflicts continue
to exacerbate the situation of children, which, as stated
in the Secretary-General’s report for 2013 (S/2014/339),
has become more alarming. Indeed, the report gives
an overview of the trends and new developments, in
particular the explosion in the number of killings of
children and physical attacks against them in several
countries, in particular Afghanistan and Iraq, and
serious and systemic attacks against them, such as in
Syria, Gaza or Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
2013, the recruitment of children by the parties to the
conflict in Central African Republic became a common
occurrence, and they are being used on a large scale and
serious violations are being committed against them in
South Sudan. The recent kidnappings of children in
Nigeria are a new source of concern.
In this brief period, we have noted over 4,000 new
cases of the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict in the countries under review. In a number of
countries, children are the targets of serious abuse,
including sexual violence, whose perpetrators very
often remain unpunished, despite the legal provisions
13/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

of countries and international humanitarian law.
Cases of hospitals and schools being bombed or used
for military purposes are frequent in the majority of
countries covered by the report. Furthermore, schools
are increasingly among the primary targets of a number
of armed groups, as is the case in Mali, Yemen, Nigeria,
Afghanistan and Thailand. The intensification of
conflicts and emergence of new conflicts in a number
of places explains the increase in the number of abuses
against children. All of that requires that new measures
be taken and that consideration be given to the United
Nations approaches and strategies to adapt them to the
new contexts.
We note that progress was achieved in 2013 by
a number of parties to conflict. While insufficient,
that progress should be welcomed, especially when it
concerns armed groups, which have a greater tendency
to commit crimes against children. In that regard, we
pay tribute to the active involvement of the United
Nations, including that of the Secretary-General,
with the support of the Security Council, through
various decisions and initiatives. We would also like to
commend the efforts undertaken by the various actors
within the framework of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism and we encourage them and assure them of
our continued support.
We should not lose sight of the fact that impunity
is one of the main causes of the increase in violence
against children. The report of the Secretary-General
contains a number of recommendations for the
strengthening of the protection of children. We support
those recommendations and encourage the SecretaryGeneral to continue his efforts, together with all players
working for the protection of children, including the
United Nations agencies and regional and subregional
organizations. We support the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflicts and the Secretary-General for his
initiatives to encourage dialogue with armed groups
and we urge him to continue to work closely with
regional and subregional organizations in those fields.
To substantially improve the situation of children,
we believe that special focus should be placed on a
cohesive policy for preventing those types of violations.
Other measures could also be considered, including the
strengthening by States of their criminal legislation to
ensure that no grave violations are committed against
children and to guarantee that individuals who have
been recognized as guilty of such acts are punished.

14/77

08/09/2014

New measures and strategies to protect schools,
teachers and hospitals, which have recently been the
primary target of certain armed groups, are worthy
of special attention. Broad adherence by States to the
international Convention on the Rights of the Child and
its Optional Protocol could yield improvements in this
situation.
With respect to schools targeted by attacks based
on cultural and identity grounds, new measures
and strategies within the framework of the United
Nations protection strategy need to be initiated and
implemented. The Children, Not Soldiers campaign,
which was launched in March, is aimed at putting an end
to and preventing the recruitment and use of children
in the national security forces of those countries by
2016. The campaign’s objectives were approved this
year in resolution 2143 (2014) and require the continued
support of the Security Council and the commitment of
the international community.
The important role being played by the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, the Security
Council’s technical body, should be emphasized. We
believe that the Group can continue to work with the
different actors active in the field, as has taken place
under the chairmanship of Ambassador Sylvie Lucas.
In that way, it could further participate in the process
of protecting children, given the new situations arising
throughout the world, which require appropriate or
urgent solutions.
In conclusion, we would again like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, as well as the UNICEF Office
and our bilateral partners for their multiform support,
which has enabled Chad to fulfil its action plan in
less than two years and to ensure that it is no longer
listed in the annexes of the report of the SecretaryGeneral covering the period from January to December
2013. We wish to underscore that the political will of
the country’s authorities has played a fundamental
role in that process. Chad remains ready to share its
experience, in particular at the regional and subregional
levels, to strengthen the protection of children in armed
conflicts.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Madam President, for your kind words on the
United Kingdom’s presidency of the Security Council
in August, and I wish you well for your stewardship of
the Council in September. Thank you also for convening
today’s debate on children and armed conflict.
14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7259

I want to recognize the presence of Foreign Minister
Asselborn today. We commend Luxembourg’s strong
leadership and unwavering commitment to this issue
during its time on the Council, including through the
chairmanship of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. Let me also warmly thank all today’s
briefers for their inspiring and moving statements.

Kingdom is supporting UNICEF and others in Syria
and the region to deliver the No Lost Generation
initiative. That aims to increase support to education,
to psychosocial programmes and protection for the
children of Syria and to partners who are establishing
child-friendly spaces for Syrian children to safely play
and study.

We have seen some progress on this dossier. This is
largely a result of the dedication and active engagement
of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, as a tireless champion
for children affected by conflict. Most recently, in
May the Government of South Sudan and the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army in Opposition committed
to ending grave violations against children and the
Government of Yemen signed an action plan to end
the recruitment and use of children. We also welcome
the Special Representative’s news that the Free Syrian
Army has committed to ending the recruitment and use
of children. Moreover, Ms. Zerrougui has driven the
implementation of commitments through her effective
advocacy, field visits and, in particular, by launching
the Children, Not Soldiers campaign with UNICEF
in March, aimed at ending the recruitment and use of
children by Government armed forces in conflict by
2016.

The past year has seen an increasing trend of attacks
against the military use of schools, as well as abductions
and the detention of children. In Nigeria, today marks
the 148th day since over 200 schoolgirls were abducted
in Chibok. There were 57 who escaped, but 219 are
still missing and none has so far been rescued. Those
attacks are not only barbaric abuses of human rights.
They deprive children of their right to education; they
put an end to their innocence as they become hostages
and instruments of conflict. Communities and families
are torn apart by fear, trauma and loss.

As others have noted, the completion of Chad’s
action plan has led to its delisting from the annexes of
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/339). We
urge Chad to continue building on that success and to
share its experience with other Governments. We also
call on all parties — State and non-State — that have
not yet concluded action plans to do so as a matter
of priority, and we call on those that have signed, to
honour their commitments in full.
Although the progress is welcome, the report of
the Secretary-General and the moving evidence we
have heard today from the five briefers highlight the
horrifying scale of violations still being committed
against children in new and intensifying crises across
the world today. Given time constraints, I shall mention
just two.
In Syria and the region, 5.5 million children
are in need of education and more than half of them
are out of school. We are facing a lost generation of
Syrian children traumatized, displaced and without
education. Their lives have been disrupted and their
future potential wasted with the obvious future risk of
alienation and radicalization. That is why the United

As Sandra Uwiringiyimana so movingly pleaded,
we must do more to fight against impunity for crimes
committed against children. The International Criminal
Court has an important contribution to make. When
the Council visited the Hague last month, we called on
the Court to hold perpetrators to account for all such
egregious violations of international law. We urge the
Secretary-General and the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict to consider ways to increase
pressure on persistent perpetrators of human rights
violations and to put an end to impunity. We owe that,
at least, to victims like Sandra and her family.
This debate is a reminder that children continue not
only to be affected by conflict, but, much worse, are
often specifically targeted, coerced and exploited during
conflict. The United Kingdom remains committed to
working to prevent these abhorrent violations, to ensure
the implementation of action plans, and to tackle those
who persist in committing violations against children.
To provide the world’s children with a safer future, we
must spare no effort.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): It has been established that,
in conflict situations across the world, non-combatants,
especially children, are often at the greatest risk. They
risk being abducted, they risk being maimed, and they
risk being killed. They are indoctrinated and recruited
as child combatants. Their rights — notably, their right
to education — are brazenly violated. The Council’s
debate today demonstrates remarkable leadership in
drawing attention to and taking action on the children
and armed conflict agenda. I want to thank all the

14-5281015/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

briefers for sharing their profound insights on the
subject, and especially acknowledge the presence and
participation of Foreign Minister Asselborn at this
debate.
My delegation welcomes this opportunity to share
its perspectives on children and armed conflict as they
concern the activities of the infamous terrorist group
Boko Haram, which has now been included as a party
on the Secretary-General’s list. Our nation has been
particularly traumatized by the deplorable and inhuman
acts of terror perpetrated by Boko Haram, particularly
targeting schools. The Boko Haram ideology, which
inherently opposes Western education, propels it to
attack schools and educational institutions.
The Nigerian Government and the Nigerian people
have condemned these heinous acts in the strongest
terms and are united in the determination to put a firm
stop to them. We acknowledge with appreciation the
support of the United Nations and the international
community in our fight against Boko Haram. We
believe that these global partnerships are critical to
our campaign to confront the Boko Haram insurgency.
The Government has no higher priority than routing
and defeating Boko Haram and rescuing the almost
220 schoolgirls kidnapped from Chibok. Our concern
is not only to rescue the girls, but to bring them back
alive and intact — all of them. We are extensively and
effectively utilizing all resources at our disposal in this
effort. Let there be no doubt that the Nigerian people
have mustered the will and determination to succeed
in this effort.
We recognize that a multi-track strategy represents
the best chance of defeating Boko Haram. Accordingly,
the Nigerian Government is implementing a
comprehensive programme of assistance to support,
protect and empower local communities, with a special
focus on the most vulnerable parts of the country. The
Safe Schools Initiative is one aspect of the programme.
It is aimed at strengthening the security of educational
facilities in states under emergency rule in order to
keep our schoolchildren safe. Measures that are being
taken under the Initiative include the construction
of perimetre fences around schools and housing
for teachers, improved community policing, the
employment of school guards, and the installation of
alarm systems and modern communication equipment.
The federal Government is also working with state
Governments, community leaders, teachers and parents
to identify and remedy the vulnerabilities that put our
children at risk.
16/77

08/09/2014

The Safe Schools Initiative is a collective effort.
The Government’s spending has been matched by the
private sector, and now totals over $20 million. Our
goal is to create a fund of $100 million to support this
programme, and we have already received pledges of
support not only from the United Nations Special Envoy
for Global Education, but also from the World Bank,
the African Development Bank and other development
partners.
Strident steps have been taken by the Government
to address the salient dimensions of the socioeconomic
factors that feed the insurgency. A community
services programme has been instituted, and has
already recruited 11,500 young people to participate
in community development projects. Similarly, the
Government is developing a comprehensive economic
empowerment plan for the region under a presidential
initiative for north-eastern Nigeria. This initiative is
aimed at helping the region to productively harness its
abundant resources. It is being pursued in partnership
with state and local Governments in the north-east of
Nigeria.
It is common knowledge that hatred is conceived
in the minds of men, and ultimately hatched in terror
and conflict. Our collective responsibility is to reverse
this mindset for good and for peace. The Nigerian soft
approach to countering violent extremism is premised
on four streams, one of which is deradicalization.
The deradicalization programme aims to integrate
extremists and their families back into society through
a number of activities, including prison interventions
and vocational training.
Changing behaviour patterns is at the core of
the reradicalizaiton strategy. This stream seeks to
understand the process of radicalization that Boko
Haram adherents undertake, and to engage them
mentally, psychologically and spiritually in a series of
activities that are designed to transform the way that
they think and the way that they behave. It is envisaged
that, through this process, radicals will begin to realize
that certain forms of behaviour are incompatible not
only with their faith, but also with the society to which
they belong.
The Nigerian Government and people remain
unwavering in their determination to work tirelessly, in
collaboration with all domestic stakeholders, our friends
and partners, and the United Nations, the African Union,
relevant multilateral agencies and non-governmental
organizations to promote and to protect all aspects of
14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

the well-being of children affected by this insurgency
in the north-eastern part of our country.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui, UNICEF and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations for their
indispensable efforts. I also thank Forest Whitaker,
UNESCO Special Envoy for Peace and Reconciliation.
We are all in debt to his commitment and empathy. We
welcome, as always, the presence of Foreign Minister
Asselborn. Luxembourg’s leadership of the Working
Group on what is — but should never be — a politically
challenging issue has been exemplary. I also thank
Sandra Uwiringiyimana. We are so fortunate that that
young soldier let her go. The Council needs to hear such
direct testimony, and we hope that others with Sandra’s
courage will continue to help keep the Council focused
on why what we try to do here can mean so much to so
many and why the cost of her own failures, whenever
they occur, can be so high.
You have asked us to be brief, Madam President, so
I will not repeated the details of the situation that has
been outlined to us this morning. We all know that the
situation of children in conflict throughout the world
is dire and that children continue to suffer each of the
six grave violations. There has been some progress, as
people have noted, including the delisting of Chadian
forces, the Somali Government’s recommitment to
making its army child-free, Yemen’s action plan
issued in May, Afghanistan’s endorsement, finally,
of a road map to implement its action plan, the recent
commitment of the Free Syrian Army to end child
recruitment and, in Australia’s own region, Myanmar’s
continuing release of many child soldiers. Despite that
progress, important though it is, much more must still
be done, as has been indicated. I shall briefly highlight
three key concerns.
First, the Children, Not Soldiers campaign will be
instrumental. But we must also maintain our efforts to
end recruitment and other grave violations by non-State
actors, who make up the vast majority of listed parties.
For example, we have seen good progress in the
Philippines over recent months in the implementation
of the action plan between the United Nations and
the Moro Islamic Liberation Front — the only action
plan currently in place with a non-State actor. My own
country will continue to support UNICEF’s efforts to
help the Front implement the plan.
Secondly, we need to do more to protect schools,
teachers and students during conflict. Attacks on

S/PV.7259

schools and their military use are depriving children of
their basic right to schooling and endangering the lives
and safety of students and teachers. Military forces
and non-State armed groups have turned schools into
barracks, detention facilities, torture centres and firing
positions — not play grounds but battle grounds, as has
ben noted. Schools are also being used as shelters. An
estimated half of the schools in the Kurdistan region of
Iraq are being used to house displaced populations. We
must ensure, urgently, that schools remain safe places
for students and their teachers, before generations of
children lose access to an education.
Finally, there is much more that we can do to end
impunity for those responsible for violations against
children during armed conflict. We strongly support
the active efforts of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) to end impunity through the investigation and
prosecution of violations against children, which include
the recent confirmation of charges against Congolese
ex-militia leader Bosco Ntaganda for enlisting and
conscripting children. The ICC’s prominent focus on
crimes committed against children will be important in
deterring violations in future conflicts and situations of
armed violence.
We also support efforts to address perpetrators of
violations against children through targeted Security
Council sanctions. Resolution 2134 (2014) establishes
targetted sanctions and designates those in the Central
African Republic responsible for recruiting or using
children in armed conflic and those who attack schools
and hospitals. That demonstrates the role that sanctions
can play in denying perpetrators the means to continue
violating child rights during conflict and sends a strong
message that they will be held to account. We encourage
Ms. Zerrougi to continue to brief the relevant Sanctions
Committees to strengthen the effectiveness of those
measures.
In conclusion, as we know only too well, the
intensity of the conflicts that the world faces is currently
dangerously increasing, as is the level of violence
deliberately targeting civilians. As Ms. Zerrougi has
just reminded us,
“in a large majority of conflicts throughout the
world, children are targeted and used deliberately.
Conflict confronts them in their homes, at school,
in hospitals and when they seek to run away.”
Protection for those children is an intrinsic element of
the Council’s work. We have the tools, the mechanisms

14-5281017/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

and the legal framework. But, demonstrably, we have to
do much more to ensure that they are put to better use.
Again, as Ms. Zerrougi condluded, the child victims
around the world count on us.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I wish to thank
the United States presidency of the Security Council
for holding this debate. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her
tirelessness dedication in carrying out her work. I
also thank all the other briefers for their valuable
contributions.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
We must maintain focus on this issue because,
for all the progress achieved on the legislative side,
crimes continue to be committed against children in
armed conflicts in different parts of the world, both by
Government and non-Government forces.
Due to the widespread availability and proliferation
of modern light weapons, children not even 10 years of
age are forced to kill. In that respect, we cannot stress
enough the importance of implementing resolution 2117
(2013), on small arms, including placing greater focus
on how to help States to tighten control over arms.
As others have said, children are used to clear
mines, manufacture and plant improvised explosive
devices and sent to carry out suicide attacks. Forced
displacement, sexual slavery, abductions and
recruitment and the resulting enormous physical
and psychological trauma shape the brutal reality for
countless children in conflict zones.
Girls are particularly vulnerable, as they may be
kidnapped into sexual slavery or forced to become child
brides. Crimes against girls often go unreported, either
because they are missed at the point of identification
and release or because assistance programmes are
actively avoided. Many of those girls will never benefit
from rehabilitation and reintegration assistance. For
that reason, we stress that special efforts are needed to
take into account and meet the special needs of girls.
Child recruitment remains a particular and
constant concern. Out of the 59 parties listed for grave
violations against children in the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/339) eight are Government
security forces and 51 are armed groups. We note the
steps taken by the relevant Governments to address the

18/77

08/09/2014

problem, and we strongly encourage all of them to live
up to their commitments and seek tangible progress in
implementing national action plans, so as to achieve
the goals set out in the joint campaign Children, Not
Soldiers.
While we welcome the recent delisting of Chad,
the signing by Yemen of an action plan and the
reconfirmation of commitment to end child recruitment
by Afghanistan and South Sudan, we also urge the
Sudan, the only remaining country among the eight
listed, to sign without further delay an action plan
aimed at stopping the recruitment of children.
Actions by various armed groups and non-State
actors are of particular concern to my delegation.
As others have mentioned, last April Boko Haram
kidnapped 276 girls from a school in north-eastern
Nigeria, following the destruction of a school in Borno
in February, where nearly 60 children were killed or
burned to death. In May the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria abducted more than 150 Kurdish boys returning
from Aleppo after end-of-year exams. My delegation
supports including the abduction of children as an
additional trigger for the monitoring and reporting
mechanism and in the name-and-shame listings
contained in the annexes to the reports of the SecretaryGeneral.
We must make sure that all the instruments at our
disposal are well suited to tackle crimes against children
and that they contain strong elements of dissuasion,
deterrence, accountability and justice. Existing lessons
learned, from the worst failures to the best practices,
from the States concerned should serve as useful
guidance. As Ms. Zerrougi has mentioned, the role of
the relevant regional organizations should be further
explored and utilized. All the tools available to the
Council should be consistently employed, including the
use of child recruitment and violence against children
as sanctions-designation criteria, regular thematic
briefings to the Council and the relevant Sanctions
Committees by the Special Represenative — as our
Australian colleague suggested just a few minutes
ago — and cooperation with the International Criminal
Court and special tribunals, fact finding missions and
commissions of inquiry.
Legal cases against perpetrators of child recruitment
and violence against children are still too few and far
between. We must redouble efforts to pursue justice and
end impunity for crimes committed against children.

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

In that context, let me note my delegation’s concern
about the failure so far by the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict to adopt its conclusions
on Syria, where more than 10,000 children have
fallen victim to conflict-related killing, maiming,
displacement and forced early marriage. Massive
numbers of Syrian children are deprived of their right
to education. We strongly urge all Council members to
place the fate of Syrian children above all and to rally
behind the relevant conclusions by the Working Group.
Earlier this year we adopted resolution 2143 (2014),
with a key focus on the need to respect and protect
schools from attacks and the use by armed forces or
groups. The recent situation in Gaza reminded us once
again of the huge gap between the letter of the resolution
and its implementation.
It is deplorable that schools — the very places that
should be safe havens for children — are subjected to
attacks or are converted to military uses, in blatant
violation of international humanitarian law. In fact,
a recent study shows that since 2009 schools and
universities have been used for military purposes in
more than 30 countries: as barracks, detention centres,
fighting positions, weapon-storage centres and so
forth. Timely and accurate monitoring and reporting is
crucial for responding to such attacks and for holding
the perpetrators to account.
Lithuania strongly condemns any and all attacks
on schools and reminds all parties to conflict of their
obligation under international humanitarian law to
respect the principles of distinction, proportionality
and precaution in attack. We call on all States and
non-State actors to abide by the Lucens Guidelines for
Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use
during Armed Conflict.
In conclusion, let me convey my delegation’s
appreciation for the dedicated work carried out by
Luxembourg, Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. Let me assure our Luxembourgois
colleagues and Special Representative Zerrougui of
our full support and cooperation as they continue their
vital work for the sake of thousands of conflict-affected
children.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, at the outset, to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing this important meeting. I would also like to
thank Ms. Lelia Zerrougui, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,

S/PV.7259

for the work she continues to do on behalf of children
in armed conflict. I would also like to thank Mr. Неrvé
Ladsous and Ms. Yoka Brandt. I welcome Mr. Forest
Whitaker. I had the pleasure of getting to know him
two years ago when I was at UNESCO. I would also
like to thank Sandra Uwiringiyimana for her moving
statement, which reminds us of the importance of what
we are doing here in New York. And I would like to
welcome the Minister for Foreign and European Affairs
of Luxembourg and to express our appreciation for the
role of Luxembourg and Ambassador Sylvie Lucas in
placing the subject of children and armed conflict on
the Council’s agenda for debate.
We would like to align ourselves with the statements
to be made on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the Human Security Network.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/339) notes
numerous violations of the rights of the child in areas
of armed conflict. Allow me to complete the picture on
the situation in the Middle East.
Jordan is surrounded by countries in which
children are mistreated. Over the past four years, the
international community has seen Syrian children being
killed, tortured, displaced, starved and captured by
armed groups, and we have done nothing. The Security
Council has not yet sent a strong enough message to the
perpetrators of such crimes against humanity to ensure
that they are held responsible and punished for their
acts. In May, the situation should have been referred,
pursuant to resolution 2143 (2014), to the International
Criminal Court. That did not happen, which had the
effect of encouraging those violations to spill over
into Jordan. We believe that the Syrian crisis can be
resolved only through a political solution that reflects
the hopes of the Syrian people. Only through a peaceful
settlement will we be able to bring the violence against
civilians and children to an end. A political transition
must be put in place. That is our view of the Syrian
crisis.
With respect to the situation in Iraq, there has been
continuing deterioration. Children continue to pay the
steepest price for the war and the conflicts that have
been raging there for years. The suffering of children
has worsened owing to the practices of terrorist groups,
among them the Islamic State. In that regard, Jordan
calls on all sectors of Iraqi society to come together to
denounce the marginalization of any group and create
an inclusive Iraqi Government that responds to the
needs of the Iraqi people. That would undermine the

14-5281019/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

influence of armed groups in the country and would
enable the return of peace and stability to a country
whose people deserve to enjoy the fruits of their
abundant resources.
Concerning Palestine, for how much longer
will Palestinian children be used as targets? Should
Palestinian children be subjected to murder, attack and
arbitrary detention? How much longer will we remain
silent in the face of such suffering? Our silence must
end. Otherwise, it will come as no surprise if those
children turn out one day to be extremists. I wish in
no way to justify extremism of any form, but it is the
consequence of tyranny, violence, murder, oppression
and the humiliation experienced by Palestinian
children. Israel’s latest war against Gaza was the most
brutal violation committed against the Palestinian
people and their children — an act of aggression that
took the lives of 491 child victims, with an additional
3,000 wounded and thousands displaced. The 280,000
civilians who took refuge in schools, 95,000 of them
in schools run by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, need
psychological support. Unexploded ordnance in the
areas of conflict pose a grave danger to children, as
well as a violation of international law. All of that
undermines the human rights of all Palestinians in the
Gaza Strip, especially children.
The Secretary-General’s report makes frequent
mention of armed Islamist groups. I would like to point
out that such groups have nothing to do with Islam.
They have hijacked Islam and have killed, tortured,
decapitated and attacked innocent people to sell
oil — all in the name of Islam — but they have distorted
that religion, which is one of tolerance.
In conclusion, our meeting reflects the political
will of the Member States of the Security Council to
protect children in situations of armed conflict. We
stand ready to support the efforts of all countries and
organizations that share that aim.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Madam President, for convening this debate. I
also thank you for your kind words of welcome. It is
an immense honour to represent France in this body
and to begin with a debate on such a crucial subject.
I would also like to thank the other speakers for their
analysis and their poignant, moving testimony, I take
this opportunity to congratulate Luxembourg once
again for its outstanding work on children in armed
conflict. The presence here today of Foreign Minister
20/77

08/09/2014

Asselborn is further proof of his country’s commitment
to that cause.
Our efforts on behalf of children in areas of
armed conflict have not flagged. The United Nations
mechanism has already produced concrete results. Since
its implementation, it has enabled tens of thousands
of child soldiers to be demobilized each year. The
Children, Not Soldiers campaign allows us to glimpse,
a few years down the road, the possibility of a world in
which no national army will be recruiting children.
The core of the mechanism is its action plans. This
year, thanks to the implementation of one such plan,
the national army of Chad was removed from the list
for child recruitment. All told, the 20 or so action plans
signed in agreement with Governments or armed groups
represent a certain degree of progress in the efforts to
protect children in conflicts. Those action plans should
be implemented with all possible speed to insure the
credibility of our actions. With that in mind, the United
Nations should deploy all its available material and
human resources.
The credibility of our efforts to liberate child
soldiers also depends on our collective example. That is
why France supports clarification of the rules governing
participation in peacekeeping operations by national
armies on the list for child recruitment. Moreover,
the Secretary-General’s human-rights screening
policy and his zero-tolerance policy with regard to
sexual exploitation and sexual violence must be fully
implemented. Of course, the limitation on contact with
individuals wanted by the International Criminal Court
must be rigorously applied at all levels.
In too many armed conflicts, children are the first
victims. In Iraq and Syria, the Islamic State has proven
guilty of the worst types of attacks on children. That
terrorist organization recruits children by the hundreds
and trains them in training camps. The steps taken
by the international community to put an end to the
actions of that group should be continued and bolstered.
It is for that reason that France will soon organize an
international conference on security in Iraq.
In Syria, for more than three years now, the
regime and its militias have not spared children. More
than 10,000 children have been killed — a number
that is probably well below what it really is. Schools
are relentlessly bombarded; 3,000 of them have been
destroyed. That denies an entire generation its right to
education.

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

We commend the commitment of the coalition and
the Supreme Military Council of the Free Syrian Army
to prevent and put an end to the recruitment of children.
We encourage Ms. Zerrougui to continue dialogue with
a view towards the signing of an action plan.
In the Central African Republic, children are also
victims of armed groups. Ex-Séléka and anti-Balaka
still have among their ranks more than 6,000 children.
The deployment of United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, as of 15 September, will allow for a more
effective fight against those groups and their attacks
on civilians. The operation has a strong mandate for
the protection of children, and it must act quickly to
implement it.
In its fight for the protection of children, the
International Criminal Court (ICC) plays an important
and essential role. The sentencing in 2012 of Thomas
Lubanga and the transfer to the ICC last year of
Mr. Bosco Ntaganda served to send a clear and
strong signal as to the criminal consequences of child
recruitment, which is considered to be a war crime. We
are in favour of strengthening dialogue with the Court.
Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda spoke before the Working
Group, and we could now invite her to speak before the
Council on this issue.
I should conclude by renewing our call upon all
States to endorse the Paris Principles and commitments,
which are complementary to the actions of the Security
Council. They provide a robust framework for the
international community in its efforts to protect
children in armed conflict. France will be firmly
committed to that fight. It is part of our moral and
political responsibility to do so. It is at the centre of
the universal conscience that we share in the United
Nations.

S/PV.7259

us. Equal attention must be paid to all six categories
of grave violations against children in armed conflicts,
namely, the recruitment and use of children, sexual
violence, killing and maiming, kidnapping, attacks
on schools and hospitals, and a refusal by parties to
conflict to afford access by humanitarian organizations
to children. It is just such a comprehensive approach
that is enshrined in resolution 1612 (2005) and the
successive Security Council documents on the issue.
In that way, the parametres for the functioning of
monitoring and accountability mechanisms have been
determined, as well as the actions of the thematic
Security Council Working Group. Their work must focus
on situations of armed conflict on the Security Council
agenda, as such situations are most urgent in their scale
and nature. Clearly, children require assistance, and
not only in times of conflict. Their protection can be
most effectively upheld by the international community
if it abides strictly by the existing mechanisms for the
division of labour within the United Nations system
through the consistent and targeted work of each of its
entities in its own field.
In her briefing, Ms. Zerrougui in detail noted the
suffering of children in various parts of the world
that have been engulfed in conflict. We are extremely
concerned about the situation of children in yet another
region, namely, south-eastern Ukraine. Children there
find themselves in a pressing, dire humanitarian situation
as a result of large-scale military actions launched by
the country’s authorities in that region — including
aerial artillery strikes on residential houses and other
civilian facilities. The call to put an end to the bloodletting has gone unheeded by Kyiv for much too long
now.

Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We are grateful to the United States
delegation for its initiative to convene today’s meeting.
We also would like to thank all the invited briefers
for their assessment of the situation on the protection
of children in armed conflict and their commitment
to that objective. We would like especially to express
our gratitude to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Zerrougui, for her untiring work for the well-being
of children in situations of armed conflict.

According to data from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
beginning in mid-April, at the very least 23 children
have been killed and 38 injured in the country as a
result of the destruction of 200 schools and the absence
of basic security. The school year in Donetsk and
Luhansk has in effect been disrupted. Extreme pressure
has been predicted on the educational system of other
regions. A great many educational establishments and
accommodations have been allocated to internally
displaced persons. No less than 20 hospitals in Donbass
are no longer functioning. Another 17 have been
destroyed or seriously damaged.

Crimes against children and their suffering in
conflict situations always especially shock and shake

A serious lack of physicians and medical personnel
is being felt. Especially alarming is the fate of children

14-5281021/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

who require immediate medical assistance — injured
children, insulin-dependent children, children who
suffer from cancer and other serious illnesses, as well
as disabled children — in the combat zone in southeastern Ukraine. According to various sources, over
1,000 children have been orphaned. Unfortunately,
although Russia’s human rights defenders have stated
the Russian side’s readiness to rapidly welcome those
sick children from Donetsk and Luhansk for treatment,
children requiring special medical assistance have
not received any response from Kyiv. We hold on to
the hope that, in the light of the recent agreements
achieved, renewed outbreaks of military activity in
those long-suffering regions will be avoided. However,
the children there and the children who have left
population centres that have been overtaken by conflict
continue to cry out for heightened attention and care.
We have carefully considered the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2014/339) on children and armed
conflict. We are concerned about the increase in the
number of parties in conflict that allow serious crimes
against children to occur — the annex to the report
lists 59. Despite the fact that some have been on the list
of violators for more than five years, there still is no
effective approach on how to redress the situation. We
believe that clear procedures and criteria are needed for
the listing and delisting of parties to conflicts from the
annexes to the Secretary-General’s annual report.
The work of that mechanism must be as objective
and as transparent as possible. The Council provided
the relevant instructions in resolutions 1998 (2011) and
2068 (2012). The parameters for selecting information
to be used in the preparation of the report is of great
importance. A balanced assessment on the basis of
verified reliable data is a guarantee of the accuracy and
appropriateness of recommendations made, as well as
a guarantee of their practical implementation for the
forging of mutually respectful dialogue with interested
Governments.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic
of Korea appreciates the initiative of the United
States delegation in convening today’s debate on this
important topic. We also thank Special Representative
Zerrougui, Under Secretary-General Ladsous, Deputy
Executive Director Brandt, Special Envoy Whitaker
and Sandra Uwiringiyimana for their participation and
for sharing their experiences. We also welcome Foreign
Minister Asselborn of Luxembourg.

22/77

08/09/2014

As we speak in the Council today, millions of
children are trapped in armed conflicts all over the
world. Children in Syria are facing a dire situation
where they are killed, injured and displaced. Equally
horrible violations against children are taking place in
many areas, including Afghanistan, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq,
Palestine and South Sudan. With the changing character
and tactics of armed conflicts, children are facing
even more serious threats. The deliberate targeting of
schools, the military use of schools and children being
used to carry explosive devices are just some of the
despicable examples. Given those situations, allow me
to outline some areas where we could make greater
efforts.
First, more concrete and time-bound action plans
are necessary to protect children from the impacts of
armed conflicts. Despite increasing international efforts
to prohibit the recruitment of children as combatants,
non-State groups still constitute the large majority of
perpetrators. Different strategies of engagement, as
well as the identification of specific incentives, are
required based on lessons learned from previous cases.
Secondly, we need to offer greater support in
addressing the special needs of girls in conflict
situations. As demonstrated by the abduction of
schoolgirls in Nigeria and elsewhere, girls are under
constant threat of sexual violence and other forms of
abuse in conflict situations. They are often deprived of
education rights, raped and forced into marriage, which
has a lasting, detrimental impacts on their physical
and mental health. They are even rejected by their
own communities because of their association with
rebel groups, and are often bypassed in reintegration
programmes.
Thirdly, to protect children from being used as
combatants, it is critically important that armed groups
be kept from acquiring arms and weapons. The illicit
trade in small arms and weapons results in death,
injuries and maiming of children in armed conflicts.
The Arms Trade Treaty, adopted by the Generally
Assembly in April 2013, is a significant instrument for
arms control. It stipulates that exporting State parties
shall take into account the risk of covered arms being
used to commit acts of violence against children.
Lastly, we support vigorous measures to address
persistent perpetrators, who continue to commit
violations against children year after year, which

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

demonstrates the failure of justice. If we are serious about
protecting children we should ensure accountability for
those perpetrators. Ending impunity is vital not only
for enhancing justice, but also for deterring potential
perpetrators. National legislations and judicial systems
should be empowered to protect and to prosecute such
crimes. International tribunals and Security Council
sanctions regimes should also play greater roles in that
regard.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):We
thank the United States for convening this open
debate and we thank Foreign Minister Asselborn of
Luxembourg for his country’s leadership of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Important
recommendations have emerged from its work. We also
thank the guest briefers and, in particular, we thank
Ms. Sandra Uwiringiyimana, whose childhood marked
by conflict should inspire us to continue working on
this agenda.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made by the representative of Austria on behalf
of the Human Security Network, of which my country
is part.
Graça Machel once recalled that there were
clear moral and overwhelming reasons to protect all
children in armed conflict. The fact that children are so
shamefully abused is an indication that we have barely
begun to fulfil our obligations to protect them.
The changing nature of conflicts, indiscriminate
attacks against civilian areas and the increase and
persistence of the killing, maiming and detention
of children; the recruitment and use of children; the
sexual violence of which they are victims; attacks on
the schools and hospitals; and the actions of extremist
groups like the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant,
Jabhat Al-Nusra and Boko Haram call us to live up our
responsibilities. The situations in the Gaza Strip, Iraq,
the Syrian Arab Republic, the Central African Republic
and South Sudan serve to highlight that such actions
continue to be perpetrated.
We therefore support the initiatives of the
Secretary-General and the recommendations set out
in his annual report (S/2014/339). We underscore the
work of his Special Representative Leila Zerrougui,
UNICEF and other actors within the United Nations
system, including the Children, Not Soldiers campaign.
We also appreciate the efforts of civil society in this

14-52810

S/PV.7259

realm, and we acknowledge the important support that
Forest Whitaker continues to provide.
We welcome the fact that eight of the Governments
listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s report
have signed action plans or have made a commitment to
putting an end to the recruitment and use of children by
their security forces. We hope that those commitments
will be accompanied by benchmarks and deadlines
for their rapid implementation and sustainable
implementation.
We also acknowledge the progress achieved
by nine non-State armed groups in the releasing of
children and in the publication of commitments to
protect, including the prohibition of recruitment.
In addition, the Secretary-General recommends the
adoption of binding concrete measures to prevent the
use of schools by armed forces and non-State armed
groups in violation of applicable international law. In
that regard, we urge the implementation of the guidance
note on resolution 1998 (2011) and resolution 2143
(2014) through strategies and plans of action to protect
children and their teachers, including establishing
measures for follow-up. Adequate training on childprotection issues for must also be provided for civilian
peacekeeping personnel before deployment and during
a mission.
States have the primary responsibility to end
impunity and to prosecute and punish those responsible
for egregious crimes perpetrated against children.
Should States not have the ability or will to try those
who are allegedly responsible, it should be up to the
International Criminal Court to try those crimes set
forth in the Rome Statute.
Our country is aware that for there to be justice,
there must be a preservation of evidence. To that end,
there must be capacity training for United Nations and
peacekeeping personnel regarding the preservation of
evidence in crimes committed against children.
Chile strongly condemns all acts of sexual violence
committed against children and the perpetration of those
practices that seek to use children as sex slaves. We
would like to express the need for continued awarenessraising for all parties to conflicts to eradicate those
unacceptable practices.
We appreciate the recommendations made by the
Panels of Experts of the Sanctions Committees, as well
as the informal briefings of the various committees that

23/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

include the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. As our country has been
proposing, we hope that resolutions on new committees,
or the renewal of mandates, can duly address the matter
of children in armed conflict.
In conclusion, I think that nothing we do here today
will allow us to forget the horror, abuse and death that
Sandra has shared with us. However, we offer her full
solidarity, and we hope that the work of the Council,
as well as the work of the Secretary-General and the
United Nations system, can mitigate, to some degree,
the abuse that exists.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the United States for having organized and
convened this debate. At the same time, I should also
like to express appreciation for the dedicated work and
leadership of Ambassador Lucas in her time at the helm
of the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We should also especially like to thank
Ms. Zerrougui, Mr. Whitaker and Ms. Uwiringiyimana
for their briefings.
In August 15 years had passed since the adoption
of resolution 1261 (1999). It was the first resolution
addressing children in armed conflict, and, as with
resolution 1612 (2005) and the recently adopted
resolution 2143 (2014), Argentina supported these
efforts in each of the three occasions as a member of the
Council. My country firmly supports the work of the
Security Council with the goal halting serious human
rights violations of children in armed conflict. We
demonstrated that commitment when we became one
of the first States to ratify the 2002 Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.
Like the rest of the international community,
Argentina is very aware of the devastating effects that
armed conflicts have on children through indiscriminate
attacks in civilian areas and direct attacks on civilians
themselves — whether with explosive devices, aerial
bombardments or the tactics of terror — which produce
intolerable numbers of victims among children. We
are all aware of the serious effects of the use of longrange explosive weapons in densely populated areas,
of which the recent escalation of the violence between
Israel and Palestine is a clear and tragic example.
Schools, hospitals, mosques and protected civilian

24/77

08/09/2014

sites, including United Nations facilities, have been
damaged or completely destroyed. Entire families and
hundreds and hundreds of children have been crushed
beneath the rubble of buildings demolished by bombing
of residential areas. Whether intended or not, collateral
damage or not, such distinctions blur when bombs
are capable of destroying whole buildings in densely
populated areas, with results that can only mean the
deaths of human beings. Argentina urges that the use
of such weapons in such areas be banned and to ensure
that their use is considered a war crime or a crime
against humanity, and that those responsible be brought
to justice.
The escalation of the crisis in Syria, with an
intensification of hostilities that during the reporting
period led to serious violations of children’s human rights
and a worsening humanitarian crisis, is another grave
situation that requires the international community’s
urgent attention. We regret that the Security Council’s
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict has
still been unable to act on the report’s conclusions on
Syria (S/2014/339), and we call for increased efforts
here in the Security Council to reach the consensus
needed to achieve that. We urge just as strongly that
the Council listen to what Argentina has been saying
since it became a member — as has the SecretaryGeneral — which is that supplying arms to every party
to the conflict must stop.
That is why it is not enough for us to be aware of
what is happening; we must act if we are to bring about
change. We want to change the disgusting behaviour
of inflicting violence on children, whether in times of
peace or war and armed conflict. We must fight to end
impunity for those who commit serious crimes against
children, particularly sexual crimes. The SecretaryGeneral’s report covers much of this and indicates
that such crimes must be brought to justice. As we
know, children in armed conflict are victims of sexual
violence, in different ways. Sexual violence is used
to torture, wound, extract information, humiliate and
intimidate and as punishment for acts, real or imagined,
by children or their families, in order to destroy the
dignity of individuals, families, and communities. The
rape of girls is used to inflict dishonour. Today, girls in
some armed conflicts are raped on the basis of terrible
beliefs. There are people who believe that raping a
young girl can give protection from or provide a cure
for HIV infection. We have seen how the loss of family
members can result in an increase in early or forced or

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

early marriage, at the same time reinforcing the idea
that this protects girls. Children are recruited by armed
groups and by particular States’ forces for particular
purposes, whether military, for support or for sexual
slavery.
We say, enough of this. We in the Security Council
must fight impunity. We in the Council acknowledge the
important efforts of Special Representative Zerrougui,
of UNICEF and of the Children, Not Soldiers campaign,
in working to end the recruitment of children by
security forces and Governments in situations of armed
conflict, which must happen before the end of 2016.
We welcome the eight Governments in the SecretaryGeneral’s report that have joined the campaign in order
to declare that, ethically and politically, we must have
children, not soldiers.
Lastly, we agree with the report’s conclusion
that we must pay attention to non-State actors and
incorporate them into the plan for children and armed
conflict. We must find new ways to hold a dialogue
with armed groups. We welcome such efforts, as
well as the growing number of statements by such
groups on preventing the recruitment of children.
We condemn the attacks on schools and hospitals. As
everyone has done, we condemn the use of schools for
military purposes. It is a violation of international law
when educational institutions become targets, since it
endangers children, teachers and staff and jeopardizes
the future of all humankind. Argentina is committed
to upholding the principles designed to protect schools
and universities from being used for military purposes
in armed conflicts.
Madam President, you know how much I respect
you for your defence of human rights. For that reason, I
call on you to help us in the Security Council. We need
children, not soldiers. When the Council says, again and
again, that we must address the underlying causes of
conflicts, when it says over and over again that military
solutions are not solutions, that the only true solutions
are non-military, we cannot just say those words. We
must believe them, live them and act on them. We must
say no to weapons and violence.
I would also like to say to Sandra that we have
previously heard the Pakistani girl Malala speak here.
She told the Council that more violence and more
weapons were not the answer. That was what she said.
A child, a teacher, a book, a pencil — that can change
the world. That is the peace that Argentina believes in.

S/PV.7259

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes the initiative of the
United States in holding today’s meeting. I would also
like to thank Special Representative Zerrougui, UnderSecretary-General Ladsous and the representatives of
UNICEF and UNESCO for their briefings. China also
listened carefully to the statement made by the victim
of armed conflict.
Providing a safe environment for children to grow
up in requires joint efforts on the part of national
Governments and the international community. In
recent years the international community has made
tremendous strides in working to protect children
and safeguard their basic rights, with positive results.
However, in too many areas of conflict, children, as
the most vulnerable group of all, are still the first to
suffer the effects of war and conflict. China opposes
and condemns violations of children’s rights in armed
conflict, and supports the initiatives in the United
Nations and the Security Council aimed at protecting
children in such conflicts. In that regard, I would like
to emphasize the following points.
First, the key to protecting children in armed
conflict is preventing and resolving such conflicts.
Since it bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council should focus serious attention on
preventing, curbing and resolving armed conflicts,
thus eliminating the basic source of harm to children.
Other United Nations agencies should leverage their
own comparative advantages and work in synergy so
as to provide comprehensive protection to children in
armed conflict. We welcome the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign, jointly launched by the Secretary-General
and UNICEF, and are happy to see the positive results it
has achieved. We hope that the countries concerned will
take action in terms of formulating and implementing
action plans so as to achieve the goal of completely
eliminating the phenomenon of child soldiers.
Secondly, national Governments bear the primary
responsibility for the protection of children. Therefore,
the international community should provide space to
national Governments to play a leading role, value
and support their efforts and help them in their
capacity-building. At the same time, it is important to
mobilize donors to address the financing difficulties
in implementing the programmes for the protection of
children. The Council’s Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict should strengthen its dialogue and

14-5281025/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

communication with the Governments concerned and
be willing to listen to their views so as to win their trust
and cooperation.
Thirdly, all parties to the conflict must cease their
acts of violence against children, effectively respect
relevant international law and obligations and protect
and respect children’s rights in accordance with
the relevant Council resolutions. The international
community and regional organizations, in their
endeavour to protect children, must not overlook the
acts of violence against children perpetrated by armed
groups and non-State actors. In particular, the harm
done to children and the attacks against schools carried
out by extremist terrorists must receive the highest
attention from the parties concerned, and efforts must
be undertaken to resolutely fight that phenomenon.
Fourthly, protecting children in armed conflict
requires that the international community adopt an
integrated strategy and create enabling security and
social environments for children. In their efforts
to promote post-conflict reconstruction and design
peacebuilding strategies, the international community
should place priority on children’s return to their
families, society and school and help those children
affected by conflict resume a normal life.
We encourage UNICEF and the World Bank to each
play their respective role and work jointly to enhance
the capacity of national Governments in protecting
children. At the same time, it is important to support
national Governments in their efforts to eliminate
poverty, make education available to all and promote
sustainable development.
Addressing the issue of children and armed conflict
requires not only efforts by the Council, but also that
United Nations agencies and regional organizations
strengthen their coordination and cooperation and play
an even greater role in preventing children from being
sucked into conflict. China is ready to work with the
parties concerned in order to comprehensively improve
the situation of children in armed conflict and to ensure
that children be spared the pain and suffering brought
about by war and conflict.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this open debate. I commend
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
for her tireless efforts in executing her mandate and for
her insightful briefing today. I also thank Mr. Hervé

26/77

08/09/2014

Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF; and Mr. Forest Whitaker, Special
Envoy for Peace and Reconciliation of UNESCO, for
their respective briefings and remarks.
I pay special tribute to Ms. Sandra Uwiringiyimana
for sharing her tragic story, which, unfortunately, has
been the story of the Great Lakes region for the past 20
years. Ms. Uwiringiyimana’s call for the international
community to go beyond acknowledgment of the
Gatumba massacre and ensure that the perpetrators are
brought to justice deserves our undivided attention. As
she requested, we must take action for the nightmares
to stop. Indeed, the Gatumba massacre she survived
10 years ago and the mass atrocities committed in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo by the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR) and
other armed forces and militias on the ground, mainly
against the Rwandaphone community, are consequences
of the proliferation of the same genocidal ideology that
nearly destroyed my country, Rwanda, 20 years ago.
The situation of children in armed conflict has a
particular resonance for Rwandans. In 1994, children
were killed and maimed for being born Tutsi. Others
were recruited into the Interahamwe militias, for which
they committed atrocities. That is not to mention the
children who were victims of bombings, including of
schools, hospitals and churches. Unfortunately, 20 years
later, children continue to bear the brunt of increasing
conflicts, as regularly reported by the SecretaryGeneral in his reports on children and armed conflict.
Violations and abuses against children have even taken
a barbaric turn, as evidenced by the use of chemical
weapons against children in Syria, the mass rapes of
children and mothers in Minova, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and the abduction and enslavement of
young girls by Boko Haram, the Islamic State, Jabhat
al-Nusra and other terrorist organizations.
Children, like every human being, should have the
right to life, but children should also have the right to
childhood and education. They should not be recruited
to kill or deprived of joy and innocence. Rather, they
should be enrolled in schools to be educated, succeed
and contribute to a better world. In that regard, Rwanda
is concerned at the increasing targeting of schools and
hospitals in armed conflicts and the utilization of those
facilities for military purposes. We are also alarmed by
the continued use of child soldiers by armed groups,
including terrorist organizations.

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

More alarming, however, is the fact that a number of
Government security forces remain on the list contained
in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s reports for
violations against children. We therefore reiterate
our unreserved support to the United Nations global
Children, Not Soldiers campaign to end the recruitment
and use of children by Government security forces by
the end of 2016. We endorse, in that respect, the call
by the Secretary-General to all concerned States to
continue with determined and tangible steps to finalize
the development and implementation of related action
plans.
We recognize the primary role of national
Governments in protecting their citizens, including
children. We are convinced that the responsibility to
protect, as enshrined in paragraphs 138 and 139 of
the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly
resolution 60/1) and as reaffirmed by resolution 2150
(2014), starts with our collective resolve to protect
our children. It is important that the international
community, in particular the United Nations, increase
support to States for providing protection and relief
to children affected by armed conflict. In that regard,
the Rights Up Front initiative, the deployment of highranking child protection advisers in peacekeeping
operations and the inclusion of child rights and
protection in training programmes for peacekeepers are
all important initiatives that will enable us to live up to
our responsibility to protect children.
The United Nations system, through the work of
the Security Council and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, has demonstrated its continued commitment
to advancing the protection of children agenda.
Nevertheless, the plight of innocent children who
remain victims demands that we reflect on why effective
implementation remains a challenge. We therefore need
to redouble our efforts and find ways to avoid children
paying the heaviest price for the wars that adults choose
to fight.
In that regard, the United Nations system must
be consistent in its protection agenda and ensure that
persistent perpetrators, such as the FDLR, which
is a genocidal movement subject to United Nations
sanctions and listed in the annexes of the SecretaryGeneral reports on the subject since 2002, are not
allowed to continue recruiting, killing and maiming
civilians, particularly women and children, with
virtual impunity. In the same vein, the United Nations

S/PV.7259

should ensure the strict implementation of a policy that
prohibits the United Nations from collaborating with
entities listed in those annexes, including the United
Nations mandated missions, until the Secretary-General
certifies the full implementation of their action plan to
end and prevent violations against children.
While we strive to improve accountability for
grave violations committed against children in conflict
situations, attention should also be given to ensuring
that resolute support and cooperation are provided to
States in strengthening the rule of law. Therefore, the
United Nations should build on existing frameworks and
continue to cooperate with Governments and regional
organizations in order to find sustainable solutions
to the protection of children. In the same spirit, it is
also imperative to tackle the structural causes that
lead to conflicts and the recruitment of children by
armed groups, while improving living conditions and
providing alternatives for children, particularly through
education.
To conclude, I wish to acknowledge the participation
in this debate of Mr. Jean Asselborn, Minister for
Foreign and European Affairs of Luxembourg. I take
this opportunity to commend his country, through
Ambassador Sylvie Lucas, for its dedication to the cause
of children and armed conflict, including through its
effective leadership of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, established pursuant to resolution
1612 (2005).
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zerrougui, Special Envoy Whitaker, Deputy
Executive Director Brandt, Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous, Foreign Minister Asselborn and Sandra
Uwiringiyimana for speaking with us today and for
their tireless efforts on behalf of the world’s children.
We have heard a lot of statistics measuring the
massive scale of this problem. They include 3 million
kids out of school in Syria and 9,000 children recruited
to fight in South Sudan. Many of my colleagues have
rightly spoken to the enduring big-picture problems we
have to address, such as sexual violence and attacks on
schools. Amid so many numbers and issues, it is easy
to forget that we are talking about a lot of individual
children — boys, girls and infants who suffer these
deplorable injustices. As the last speaker among the
Council members, I should like to tell three stories in

14-5281027/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

the hope of reminding us that, no matter how hard we
are working to protect children, we have to work harder.
An 18-year old woman from Mosul, in northern
Iraq, relayed in a whisper what happened after she
was abducted by armed men from the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). The fighters took her to a
village called Kocho, where they separated the men and
boys over 12 from the women, girls and younger boys.
This young woman, just 18, was forced to watch as the
fighters massacred the men and older boys. Then her
captors took her back to Mosul, where she said she was
held with more than 300 Yazidi girls and women. They
were locked up, two or three to a room. Every day, the
routine was the same; they were told to shower, and
then the men came to rape them. The young woman
had managed to hide a cell phone before the fighters
abducted her, and she called a family member from
captivity to tell her story. That was on 20 August, just a
few weeks ago. It is the last news we have of this young
woman.
Matthew, aged 16, was in math class in January
in Bentiu, South Sudan, when rebel fighters raided
his school. Matthew is an ethnic Nuer, as are most
inhabitants of his village. The armed men told Matthew,
one of some 300 students there, that the students were
being taken away to fight against the Government,
led by the rival Dinka group. Matthew did not want to
fight, but he was told that his family would be killed
if he refused. He gave in, and was taken for military
training. He learned how to march, find cover and
shoot. One night when he was sent to gather firewood,
he fled and eventually reached a United Nations camp,
where he told his story to Al-Jazeera. He is afraid that
fighters will catch him if he leaves the United Nations
site. “If they find me, they will kill me”, he says.
Abu Ibrahim lost his wife and four of his children
when the Syrian regime struck his home in Ghouta
with a barrel bomb in April 2013. His only surviving
child — a 10-year-old boy — nearly died from shrapnel
wounds in his leg, head and chest. For eight months, a
desperate Abu Ibrahim carried his son from city to city
in Syria seeking medical help. In January, he finally
made it to Amman, where his son was treated. When I
met Abu Ibrahim in a refugee camp in June, his son’s
physical wounds were healing, but the boy was still
deeply traumatized. He had not been to school in over
a year.
These are just three of the 23 places covered by
the report on children and armed conflict (S/2014/339),
28/77

08/09/2014

where children have been the victims of violence. There
are many places — Pakistan, Palestine and Israel,
Nigeria, the Central African Republic, Afghanistan
and so many other countries. What is happening to the
18-year-old girl and other Yazidi captives in Iraq, to
Matthew in South Sudan and to Abu Ibrahim’s children
is part of a disturbing pattern.
First, we are seeing the continuing rise of extremist
groups that are openly hostile to children’s rights,
and particularly the rights of girls. Girls captured by
groups like Boko Haram and ISIL are being sold into
markets, given to fighters as so-called brides or kept
as sex slaves. Secondly, as others have noted, we have
a repeat offender problem. Thirty-one of the 59 armed
groups listed in the report have been named in the
report for the past five years and 11 of those persistent
perpetrators have been named in every single report
issued by the Secretary-General since the Office of the
Special Representative began issuing reports in 2002.
We have to do better in protecting kids. One key
step is condemning in a single, unified voice those
abuses. Resolution 7129 (2014), which was adopted
by the Council in March and condemns military use
of schools, is one example. The only battles fought in
schools should be battles over ideas. We also need to
try to work with all groups — State and non-State — to
set concrete, time-bound action plans to root out those
practices. That can be especially challenging with
non-State groups, but in 2013, nine non-State groups
issued public statements or command orders prohibiting
the use of child soldiers. Last month, the Free Syrian
Army sent a letter to the Council announcing it had
banned the use of child soldiers and pledging to punish
child recruiters.
As the persistent perpetrator problem makes clear,
global campaigns, action plans and trainings will
not do it alone. As Sandra told us today so movingly,
perpetrators have to be held accountable. Groups that
fail to change their behaviour must be hit where it hurts.
The United Nations can apply that pressure, of course.
So can individual countries. In 2008, the United States
passed the Child Soldier Prevention Act, which limits
United States military assistance to Governments that
recruit or use child soldiers.
Chad provides an example of how multilateral
pressure can bring about real change. Last year, a
chorus of actors pressed Chad to address its child soldier
problem in the run-up to re-hatting its peacekeepers
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7259

Stabilization Mission in Mali. Chad responded by
setting up child-protection units in its military,
conducting age verification reviews of its troops with
the United Nations and signing a presidential decree
making 18 the minimum recruitment age, among other
steps. As a result, Chad was taken off the list of abusive
parties in the Secretary-General’s annual report. Now,
that does not mean that our work is finished, but real
progress has been made. Governments can change, and
when they do, so do the lives of kids.

been recruited and used. What is more, impunity for
grave and consistent violations of children’s rights
is rampant. Children continue to be killed, maimed,
abducted and subjected to sexual violence. Wars and
conflicts leave deep psychotraumatic scars on their
tender minds. Pakistan condemns the recruitment and
use of children in conflicts. We call on all parties to the
conflict — States and non-State armed groups — to
stop forthwith violations of children’s rights and prevent
their recurrence.

We were all so moved today by Sandra’s story. She
is a child, as she described it, born into war. She is a girl
driven from her school and her home, who witnessed
her relatives gunned down in cold blood in a refuge that
they thought was safe. But the most defining part of
Sandra’s story is not the trembling, 10-year-old girl who
said that what she feared was her last prayer at the barrel
of a gun. The defining feature is the young woman who,
with tremendous strength and determination, addressed
the United Nations today. A young woman who spoke
not of revenge, but of justice. A young woman who has
already done so much to assist children recovering from
experiences like hers and dedicated herself to changing
the world so fewer children endure such horrors.

In the past 15 years, because of the Council’s resolute
efforts and the Secretary-General’s effective outreach,
significant progress has been made in protecting
children’s rights. The theme of children and armed
conflict has been mainstreamed into the Council’s work
so effectively that it is now cited as a good example of
proficiency. Comprehensive norms and standards have
been developed. The commendable work done by the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
the regular monitoring, reporting, listing of the parties,
and action plans have all helped. Thousands of children
have been demobilized, rehabilitated and reintegrated
into socities. And yet, the scourge continues.

To see Sandra today is to see the potential of all the
children out there whose destinies hang in the balance in
today’s conflicts. There are so many of them — Sandras
held captive in Nigeria, Sandras suffering through
humanitarian blockades in Syria and Sandras fleeing
massacres in the Central African Republic. They are
children who, like Sandra, have a world to change. We
must do more to ensure that they can.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank you,
Madam President, for convening this open debate on
children and armed conflict. We also appreciate the
insightful briefings given today by various briefers,
and commend Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Leila Zerrougui’s determined efforts to protect
the rights of the children trapped in conflicts.
The statistics on the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflicts are chilling. The United
Nations has documented more than 4,000 cases in
2013. But the Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/339)
says that thousands more children are believed to have

Pakistan supports the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign, launched by the Special Representative and
UNICEF to end the recruitment and use of children by
Government security forces by 2016. Progress through
that innovative campaign is assured because of its
emphasis on priority activities, road maps, benchmarks,
deadlines and a review, as well as the active participation
of listed States. The donor community should step
forward at this point to fill the funding gaps.
As you said in your remarks, Madam President,
persistent perpetrators of violence against children must
be identified and brought to justice through national
judicial systems and, where applicable, through the
use of international justice mechanisms. To that end,
investigative and prosecutorial capacities should be
strengthened at all levels.
We endorse the Secretary-General’s key message.
The ultimate goal is to ensure that no child is ever,
anywhere associated with parties to conflict. In that
context, we welcome the dialogue with non-State armed
groups that has led to public statements and command
orders to prohibit the recruitment and use of children.
The United Nations advocacy strategy should include
ways to convince the commanders and ideologues of
armed groups not to indoctrinate children to participate

14-5281029/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

in conflicts. In the meantime, attacks on schools and
hospitals should cease, and schools should never be
allowed to be used for military purposes. That should
also be made part of military planning and training. The
protection of children should also be made an integral
part of peace negotiations and agreements.
Peacekeeping missions have an important role to
play in the protection of children in situations of armed
conflict. It is therefore essential that peacekeeping
missions receive the necessary training and requisite
resources to effectively perform that critical task.
As one of the largrest troop-contributing countries,
Pakistan welcomes the recommendations on specific
operational predeployment and in-mission training of
peacekeeping troops.
Pakistan supports the mandate of the Special
Representative, which is adequate to dealing with
situations of armed conflict. We want to strengthen
the political consensus around it, but the mandate
does not need accretion. We firmly believe that the
legal parameters of the mandate established by the
resolutions 1261 (1999), 1612 (2005) and 1379 (2001)
must be respected. Our singular focus should remain
on child soldiers and the protection of children in
armed conflict. In that context, we want to state for the
record that the references to Pakistan in the SecretaryGeneral’s report of 15 May (S/2014/339) are not within
the purview of the established mandate on children and
armed conflict. We hope that this principle will be kept
in mind when future reports are being prepared.
Finally, we call on the Council and the Working
Group to pronounce themselves on the plight of the
children of Gaza.

08/09/2014

Yet, significant challenges remain. The latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/339) highlights
the despicable ways in which the rights of children
continue to be violated, as well as the severe effects that
conflicts have on children. With the changing nature
of conflicts; kidnappings, torture and sexual violence
against children; attacks on schools and hospitals;
limited access to even the most basic humanitarian
needs; and wide-scale displacement have become the
realities of war.
One heartbreaking example is the situation in
Syria, which lies right across our border. According
to UNICEF statistics, over 5 million children in Syria
need essential humanitarian support, an estimated
3 million have been displaced, and over 1 million are
out of school, while schools are destroyed, damaged
or used for other purposes. Last month’s report of
the Independent Commission of Inquiry points to the
grave crimes that continue to be committed against the
children of Syria, such as their killing, maiming and
injury, as well as their recruitment and use in hostilities.
Nearby in Gaza, children are experiencing difficulties
starting their new school year as educational facilities
have been destroyed or damaged or are being used for
shelter by the displaced. Last but not least, the Islamic
State in Iraq and Sham for gruesome violations against
children in Iraq and Syria.
A strong display of global political will and joint
action is our most crucial tool. United Nations and
other missions provide essential assistance to children,
as well as monitoring and reporting functions that
facilitate better planning, protection and response.
They should be supported.

Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I would like to thank the
United States presidency for organizing this important
debate, as well as the briefers for their insightful
comments and remarks.

Another way forward is the integration of child
protection provisions in negotiations and ceasefire
and peace agreements. It is also essential to provide
mediators in these situations with sufficient expertise
on child protection. Mainstreaming principles related
to children and armed conflict into peacekeeping
mandates is another way forward.

The developments in the legal and normative
framework on children and armed conflict; the strong
attention devoted to the issue in the Security Council,
exemplified by the adoption of important resolutions,
such as resolution 2143 (2014); and the increased
momentum achieved by ground-breaking campaigns
such as Children, Not Soldiers have led to significant
developments on the ground.

Finally, the increased number and scope of
conflicts heightens the importance of cooperation
and coordination between United Nations, regional
countries and organizations, troop-contributing
countries and other relevant actors in crisis areas.
Regional and subregional organizations in particular
can contribute to the protection of civilians and child
protection.

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Turkey.

30/77

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

While focusing on new threats and challenges, we
must not lose sight of the initial goal of mobilizing efforts
to end the recruitment and use of children by armed
groups. The Security Council must continue to apply
pressure on persistent perpetrators, including through
sanctions if necessary. Preventive measures, such as the
establishment of legal frameworks and age-verification
mechanisms, especially birth registration, are of
particular importance. On the other hand, international
organizations and non-governmental organizations
should refrain from concluding any kind of documents,
including deeds of commitment, with terrorist
organizations, which can easily abuse this situation to
legitimize their existence and acts.
In concluding my words, I would like to voice
our strong readiness to extend our full support to
international and regional efforts related to child
protection and child soldiers. I would particularly
like to commend the valuable efforts of the United
Nations, and express our heartfelt gratitude to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui and
her hard-working team.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia): I thank you very much,
Sir, for convening this very important open debate. I
also thank the Foreign Minister of Luxembourg and the
group of friends of this cause.
(spoke in Spanish)
I wish to express my appreciation for the very
moving words spoken by the briefers, including
Mr. Whitaker, Sandra Uwiringiyimana and Ms. Brandt.
I say that because we are experiencing a time of great
upheaval owing to a state of conflict that impacts
international peace, security and stability.
I would like to say that, having listened to
Ms. Zerrougi this morning and having read the
discouraging report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2014/339), I have
nothing but gratitude and admiration for her work. In
the case of my country, Colombia, her efforts have
provided genuine and effective support to face up to
this problem.
Although the situation in Columbia is not on the
Security Council’s agenda, we have been mentioned in
the report of the Secretary-General. It is clear that the
internal conflict in Colombia has affected our citizens.

14-52810

S/PV.7259

And, as the Special Representative has correctly
pointed out, the conflict has impacted children through
actions that Colombia’s Government and society
resolutely reject. Therefore, since August 2012, we
have been working on a general agreement on an end to
the conflict and the building of stable and lasting peace.
In the course of converstations at the dialogue table in
Havana, the Government and the Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia are discussing the fifth point of
the agenda on victims, including special provisions in
peace agreements with regard to children affected by
the conflict, as Ms. Zerrougi pointed out in her briefing.
For us there are no victims more important than
others. But we especially aim to avoid that women,
which according to our constitutional court have
suffered a disproprotionate brunt, as well as boys,
girls and adolescents in Colombia continue to suffer
the severity of the conflict. On the contrary, we aim to
ensure that the next generation can grow and flourish
as individuals and citizens for the first time living in
an atmosphere of peace. And we are not confining
ourselves to political rhetoric. As we have said here in
previous debates, the Government of President Juan
Manuel Santos Calderón has succeeded in passing a
law through Congress concerning victims and property
resitution. That marks significant progress on the right
track. The law was a historic milestone for Colombia,
in that it set up a process for reparations — in fact,
it began before the agreements were even signed. We
are prepared to share with everyone the drawbacks,
successes and difficulties as we learn from our
experience on the ground.
In the period covered by the report of the
Secretary-General, with a view to opening up space
to educate populations at risk on issues relating to
anti-personnel mines and preventing recruitment and
sexual violence against children, we have put in place
a genuinely innovative national system to provide care
and comprehensive recovery. That mechanism allows
for evaluating the victim-recovery process not just in
the urban areas of our country, but also in rural parts of
Colombia — which is more difficult — where we daily
continue to face the confrontation.
The relationship that Colombia has established with
the United Nations system in the course of many years,
including its agencies, has been one of cooperation and
support during even the most difficult moments of the
conflict that we want to leave behind, without failing
to take on the lessons learned. My task, therefore, is

31/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

to build up a harmonious and stable relationship of
mutual respect with the system through which it can
be possible to improve conditions on the ground so
that Colombia — having signed a peace agreement and
implemented the principles set out in the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign, which we resolutely support— is
never again included in the Secretary-General’s report
on this issue. Our commitment is indisputible. It is clear
that there is much left to do and that for us in Colombia
there is always room for improvement. But we have the
tools at our disposal, as well as the clear politial will,
to work with the boys and girls of our country. That is
their right, as well as our responsibility.
The President: I now give the floor to the
represenative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank the President
for convening this debate on an important matter. I
would also like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui, Mr. Hérve
Ladsous, Ms. Yoka Brandt and Mr. Forest Whitaker
for their enlightening briefings. I am also grateful for
the touching briefing by Ms. Sandra Uwiringiyimana,
which deserves our particular appreciation. Let me
also acknowledge the commitment in this regard of
Foreign Minister Jean Asselborn of the Grand Duchy
of Luxembourg.
Brazil reiterates its support for the initiative of
the Office of the Special Representative to launch the
Children, Not Soldiers campaign.
Protecting children from the scourge of war is not
just a legal requirement or a humanitarian obligation. It
is, above all, a universal moral imperative — a powerful
call that should unite humankind in an effort to build a
better and more hopeful tomorrow.
Over the years, the Security Council has enhanced
its institutional framework on children and armed
conflict, including instruments such as the monitoring
and reporting mechanism and the Working Group. That
positive trend continues, as confirmed by the recent
release of a Guidance Note on Attacks against Schools
and Hospitals, as per resolution 1998 (2011). We are
confident that this document will strengthen awareness
and promote dialogue with concerned parties in order to
prevent attacks on educational and health institutions.
When examining the 23 cases currently under the
mandate of the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, we should not lose sight of the

32/77

08/09/2014

essential distinction between situations of armed
conflict, on the one hand, and those related to domestic
law enforcement, on the other, which are two very
different categories, each posing specific political and
legal challenges.
For situations of armed conflict that fall within
the purview of the Security Council, international
humanitarian law is clear on the responsibility of all
the parties to protect civilians, including children.
Both children of war and child soldiers are particularly
vulnerable groups and, as such, need to be afforded
specific protection. Furthermore, efforts should always
be focused on promoting diplomatic initiatives aimed
at ceasing hostilities and fostering sustainable peace,
so as to minimize the impact of conflicts on civilians
in general. Accountability must also be upheld. The
International Criminal Court has a role to play not
only in the investigation and prosecution of individuals
accused of serious crimes under the Rome Statute, but
also in providing reparation to victims.
In situations of law enforcement where there is
no armed conflict, and where therefore international
humanitarian law does not apply, our priority should
be to afford protection to children and other vulnerable
groups in accordance with the even higher standards
established by international human rights law. That
matter deals directly with domestic laws of States,
and therefore falls outside the mandate of the Security
Council. Our actions should be guided by the various
instruments and mechanisms already created to protect
and promote human rights.
As the annual report of the Secretary-General
highlights (S/2014/339), armed conflicts around the
world still affect children in a disproportionate way.
While some situations have improved, the overall
picture remains dire.
Protracted hostilities in Syria have left countless
numbers of children vulnerable to forced displacement,
military recruitment, illegal detention and other abuses.
Brazil has contributed to the No Lost Generation
strategy launched by the United Nations to support
Syrian children by expanding their access to education
and psycho-social support, strengthening social
cohesion and promoting peacebuilding efforts.
In Iraq, hundreds of minors are killed every year and
innumerable others have had their childhood disrupted
by a spiral of violence whose origin can be traced to
2003. That trend will doubtlessly be exacerbated by

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

the rise of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
other extremist groups.
The recent conflict in Gaza, where an estimated 500
Palestinian children lost their lives and another 3,000
were injured due to the disproportionate use of force
by the occupying Power, is yet another grim reminder
of the unacceptable toll paid by innocent civilians in
the State of Palestine. As a member of the Executive
Committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization
and of the Palestinian Legislative Council, Hanan
Ashrawi noted last week at the United Nations that
“All children of Gaza are suffering, are in a state of
trauma. And it is not post-traumatic stress; it is an
ongoing trauma.”
The international community should consider how
social and economic circumstances may impact the
safety and welfare of children in armed conflict. While
it would be erroneous to believe in an automatic chain
of causality between poverty and violence, promoting
access to education, social inclusion, food security and
a healthy environment could lessen the risk of abuses
against children in many circumstances.
We are concerned by the contradiction between
the international consensus on the need to promote the
protection and the welfare of children, especially those
affected by armed conflict, and the regrettable fact
that developed countries seem to continuously work
to reduce the United Nations budget for development
activities. Any consistent commitment to save children
from the tragedies of conflict will be undermined if
United Nations programmes and agencies dedicated to
promoting development are the preferential victims of
budgetary cuts.
Brazil believes in the power of sports, arts and
cultural activities in this field. An innovative example is
the “Capoeira for Peace” programme in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, launched last month by Brazil,
the United Nations Children’s Fund and civil society
organizations. The initiative will enable 1,200 children
formerly associated with armed groups to practice
capoeira — a dance-like form of martial arts inherited
by Brazil from Africa — as a way to offer them an
activity that fosters discipline and promotes group
interaction and cooperation, thus facilitating their
social reintegration in the province of North Kivu.
Let us again recall that the protection of civilians,
including children, should be carried out in a

14-52810

S/PV.7259

non-selective manner. Children in Juba, in Bangui,
in Aleppo, in Goma and in Rafah deserve the same
concern, solidarity and engagement on our part. In
the same vein, children, as a vulnerable segment of
society, are often one of the first victims of economic
sanctions, as those measures negatively impact and
frequently compromise their education, health and
living conditions.
That is why investments in diplomacy, conflict
prevention, the peaceful settlement of disputes, and
economic and social development are always the best
choice. They not only bring us closer to sparing children
from war, they also provide those same children with
a telling example of how to resolve disputes through
dialogue, not through coercion.
To conclude, let me emphasize that Brazil will
remain engaged with the Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Working Group and the United Nations
system, as well as with our bilateral partners, in order
to shield children from violent conflict worldwide,
while striving to ensure better living conditions for
future generations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
At the outset, we would like to thank the United
States presidency for the continued focus of the
Council on this important issue. We would also like
to acknowledge the crucial role played by Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui and her Office, as
well as the important work of the United Nations
Children’s Fund and other United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations in the field. In that
regard, we would like to thank all of today’s briefers for
their valuable contributions to this debate. We would
also like to thank the Secretary-General and his staff
for an excellent report (S/2014/339).
Armed conflict is devastating for children. Today,
1 billion children live in areas affected by armed
conflict, and 300 million of those children are under
the age of five. New crises overshadow some of the
previous gains we have made with regard to protecting
children. The substantive increase in the number of
children killed and injured in conflict in 2013 was
alarming, and reminds us again of the grave impact on

33/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

children of the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas and of the indiscriminate use of violence by some
non-State armed groups. But we must also consider
the large-scale indirect effects of conflict on children,
namely, the vast number of them who perish from
effects such as disease, starvation and dehydration.
Child mortality at birth is twice as high in conflictaffected States as compared to developed countries
where peace prevails.
Some 77 per cent of children in conflict-affected
and fragile States never enter primary school, and
malnourishment attributable to conflict imperils their
learning capability. Of course, the majority of the
world’s malnourished children live in conflict-related
areas.
This November will mark the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the signing of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, but we still continue to see
atrocities against children. The protection of children
in armed conflicts is a moral imperative and a matter
impacting our credibility as representatives of the
international community. One step we can take involves
the predeployment training of peacekeepers on child
protection, as mentioned by Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous in his briefing earlier in the meeting. Last
month, Sweden hosted a United Nations child-protection
training-of-trainers course at the Swedish Armed Forces
International Centre, in which 27 experienced trainers
from 23 different countries participated. The course
benefited from the participation of child-protection
advisers from the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan, who shared their
experiences with the national trainers. Those trainers
are now ready to conduct predeployment training of
peacekeepers on the issue of child protection in their
respective countries. It is important that United Nations
troop-contributing countries maintain the highest
standards in that regard.
The Nordic countries would also like to stress the
importance of children continuing to have access to
basic services, including education and health care,
during conflict and post-conflict periods. Attacks on
schools and hospitals deprive children of their basic
rights and may amount to war crimes. The use of schools
by armed parties as bases, barracks, weapon-storage
facilities or for other military purposes, as detailed

34/77

08/09/2014

in the Secretary-General’s report, disrupts access to
education and learning and poses a grave threat to the
lives of students and teachers. We have seen appalling
examples of attacks on schools in recent months. We
call on all States to take concrete measures to refrain
from using schools and similar facilities for military
purposes and from carrying out attacks on facilities
used for hosting children. Protecting schools and access
to education in conflict settings is not only a matter of
protecting lives but one of minimizing the long-term
impact of conflict on children and their communities.
Schools simply must be safe havens.
The Nordic countries are deeply concerned
about the many cases of indiscriminate violence and
killings in Iraq. We condemn the killing and maiming
of children, as well as the rampant use of abduction
and sexual violence in attacks against civilians and
minorities, including children. Likewise, the situation
in Syria remains extremely serious, with the killing
and maiming of children and attacks on schools and
hospitals occurring at very high rates. The fact that
children constituted almost a quarter of those killed in
the recent Gaza conflict is simply horrifying.
As pointed out in the report, developments in
several African States, as well as in Afghanistan,
also constitute cause for serious concern, not least
with regard to the abduction of children by non-State
armed groups, notably Boko Haram. We strongly urge
all actors to immediately cease all grave violations
of international humanitarian law with regard to
children, including sexual and gender-based violence.
Perpetrators must not go unpunished. We must fight
against impunity and support national and international
accountability mechanisms such as the International
Criminal Court.
We reiterate our support for the Special
Representative’s Children, Not Soldiers campaign to
end the recruitment and use of children by Government
security forces by 2016, as endorsed by the Council
on 7 March. We welcome the commitment by eight
concerned Governments to protect children, and
we acknowledge the efforts by the Government of
Chad to fulfil the requirements of the accelerated
implementation of its action plan to end the recruitment
and use of children as soldiers. We share the view that
more resources will have to be devoted to the healing
and reintegration of former child soldiers.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the briefers who spoke at the outset of the meeting,
as well as the presiding delegation for convening this
important debate.
In recent months, there has, unfortunately, been no
lack of examples with respect to the problem of children
and armed conflict. Iraq, South Sudan and Gaza are
cases that remind us of the need to continue working
collectively to protect those who disproportionately
suffer the consequences of armed conflict, violence
and abuse.
As a responsible member of the international
community, Mexico firmly defends the principle of
children’s interests having the highest priority under all
circumstances, and calls for increased cooperation to
address that challenge at the international, national and
regional levels. We reiterate our commitment to ensure
the full protection of civilians in armed conflicts,
especially the protection of women and children, two of
the most vulnerable groups.
My country condemns attacks on schools and
hospitals as a tactic of war, as well as the use of
explosives in densely populated areas, given their
disproportionate and indiscriminate effects on civilian
populations, especially minors. Such acts are contrary to
international humanitarian law and to the international
law of human rights.
We welcome recent advances to counter that trend,
especially the Guidance Note on Attacks against
Schools and Hospitals, which was circulated in May
by UNICEF, the World Health Organization and the
Special Representative and seeks to contribute to the
implementation of resolution 1998 (2011).
Moreover, the recently adopted resolution 2143
(2014) constitutes an innovative and positive step
forward aimed at ensuring the protection of schools and
promoting measures to discourage and put an end to the
use of schools for military purposes. Attacks on schools
not only endanger the lives of thousands of children and
teachers, they also undermine the future of the societies
affected by denying that sector of the population their
inalienable right to education and, consequently, the
development of their own countries.
My country has supported a number of initiatives in
this area, including the Children, Not Soldiers campaign,
which seeks to prevent and halt the recruitment and use
children in armed forces by the year 2016, as well as

14-52810

S/PV.7259

the British Government’s proposal to deal with sexual
violence in armed conflicts, which seeks to reinforce
the international community’s response in this area.
From the perspective of the participation of children
in armed conflict, Mexico has shown its concern with
the link that exists between such conflicts and sexual
violence as a tactic of war. Such violence exacerbates
conflicts, prevents the reconstruction of the social fabric
and, when used systematically, constitutes a war crime
and a threat to international peace and security. We will
continue working hand in hand with the international
community and civil society to show that we are equal
to that great challenge.
As indicated by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General at the beginning of this meeting,
impunity is a significant obstacle to efforts to grapple
with the impact of armed conflicts on children. It is
vital that national authorities and the parties concerned
take appropriate legal action to bring those responsible
to justice. The fight against impunity should be part of
the process of reintegration and the particular attention
needed by children affected by armed conflict.
In that context, the Security Council must ensure
that its Sanctions Committees take into account the
protection of children as a central component in their
mandates and that they carefully and in detail analyse
the cases of persistent perpetrators who commit
systematic violations against children, so that more
dynamic measures can be taken in that regard.
We urge the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict to promote the effective use of all the
tools available to it, such as the regular use of visits to
the field and the convening of informative meetings,
emergency or informal, when faced with cases of grave
violations, at the request of the Chair or of any member
of the Working Group.
Finally, my delegation wishes to recognize the very
worthy work of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Leila Zerrougui and her team, as well as that
of UNICEF, who, together with civil society, have
implemented a practical mechanism for investigating
and monitoring and who work tirelessly on this priority
issue on the international agenda.
We cannot, nor should we, lower our guard. The
future of our children is our chief responsibility.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.

35/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): At the outset, let
me express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate. Thailand also thanks
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2014/339), as
well as the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, the Under
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF and the
UNESCO Special Envoy for Peace and Reconciliation
for their informative briefings.
As a member of the Human Security Network and
the Movement of Non-Aligned countries, Thailand
aligns itself with statements to be delivered later in this
meeting by the representatives of Switzerland and the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Thailand is no less concerned than others when
it comes to the plight of children affected by armed
conflict. The large number of children killed or injured,
as mentioned in the Secretary-General’s latest report,
in the ongoing conflicts in many areas is unacceptable
and must end immediately.
Thailand, as a State party to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol, is
fully committed to fulfilling its obligations under
those instruments. We have been an active supporter
of various international efforts on child protection.
However, we are concerned about certain aspects of the
Secretary-General’s latest report on children and armed
conflict, which mentions the situation in the southern
border provinces of Thailand. In that connection, I
would like to present some of our observations.
First, Thailand wishes to underline that the scope
of the report should be confined only to situations of
armed conflict or those on the Council’s agenda. I would
like to make clear that the situation in the southern
border provinces does not constitute armed conflict as
defined by international law. Neither is the situation in
Thailand’s southern border provinces on the Security
Council agenda. Therefore, Thailand disagrees with
the inclusion of the situation in that area in the report
prepared by the Office of Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, whose mandate is, and
should be, limited solely to situations of armed conflict.
No one denies that violence against innocent children
is abhorrent. Thailand has never spared any effort to
enhance child protection in the country in an effective
and sustainable manner through law enforcement and
various protective mechanisms. We have close and

36/77

08/09/2014

constructive cooperation in the area of child protection
with the relevant United Nations agencies under their
respective mandates, and we continue to enhance such
cooperation in the best interests of the child.
Secondly, the United Nations should be extremely
mindful of the sensitivities and complexities of
the situation on the ground, which require specific
knowledge, understanding and expertise, as well as
a tailor-made approach. The United Nations should
therefore work closely with, and have the consent of, the
Governments concerned, particularly when non-State
actors are involved.
The mentioning of, or direct engagement with,
non-State actors needs to be done with the utmost
care and only when mandated. Such engagements can
complicate the situation on the ground, give those
groups more leverage and may, in many cases, imply
recognition of such groups. In order to avoid unintended
negative consequences, the United Nations should play
a supportive role aimed at ensuring that States can carry
out their sovereign responsibility to protect children.
Thirdly, we strongly suggest that the sources
of the information included in the reports of the
Secretary-General be identifiable and verifiable. We
value objective and accurate information from all
stakeholders. Likewise, information or comments
provided by the Governments concerned should be
honoured and seriously taken into account.
Child protection is a critical issue of common
concern and requires our collective efforts and
constructive cooperation. Therefore, it is essential that
the relevant United Nations agencies and Member States
enhance mutual respect, trust and confidence. In that
light, Thailand would like to point out that the arbitrary
stretchting of mandates, the reliance on inaccurate
and biased information and a lack of sensitivity will
not serve or nurture the spirit of cooperation. On the
contrary, it can only be counter-productive, create
mistrust, misdirect future policy and resources and,
even worse, inadvertently place children in such
situations at higher risk.
In conclusion, Thailand reaffirms its decisive
determination and systematic efforts to promote and
protect human rights, particularly among women and
children. We will continue to work constructively with
the international community and the appropriately
mandated United Nations bodies, as well as with civil
society, to better safeguard our children.

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. Let
me also take this opportunity to commend Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui for her work and we reiterate our strong
support for her mandate. I also wish to thank UnderSecretary-General Hervé Ladsous, UNICEF’s Ms.Yoka
Brandt and UNESCO Special Envoy Forest Whitaker
for their commitment, which, in our view, is crucial to
efforts to advance our cause.
Italy associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
wishes to deliver some remarks in its national capacity.
As a constant advocate of greater Security Council
action to address the scourge of children in armed
conflicts, Italy welcomes the progress made in recent
years towards strengthening the protection framework.
That trend is confirmed by resolution 2143 (2014), of
which Italy was a sponsor.
Italy also concurs with the Secretary-General’s
assessments in his annual report (S/2014/339) regarding
the increase in deliberate attacks on schools, teachers
and students. Of the 23 conflicts profiled in the report,
17 involved targeted attacks on schools, students and/or
teachers, and even hospitals.
In too many parts of the world, violations against
children, including sexual violence, are carried out with
impunity, perpetuating what the Secretary-General’s
report calls “the disproportionate effect armed conflicts
have on children”.
Cooperation with national and international courts
is crucial. In cases involving serious crimes of concern,
when national judicial systems are unable or unwilling
to intervene, let us remind everyone that States parties
to the Rome Statute should consider referring such
cases to the International Criminal Court.
The commitment of the entire United Nations
system is critical to ensuring the implementation of
the architecture created since resolution 1621 (2005).
We therefore commend once again the work of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, in cooperation
with the Office of the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, UNICEF and non-governmental
organizations, to develop a comprehensive and
systematic training programme on child protection and

14-52810

S/PV.7259

children’s rights for all peacekeeping personnel. That
is an initiative that Italy has strongly supported since
its inception. Italy also hosts the Centre of Excellence
for Stability Police Units based in Vicenza as part of
its technical cooperation with any willing country and
party.
We have a solid protection framework to implement
and a decisive Children, Not Soldiers campaign to
support and consolidate. Any boy or girl whom we
save from the scourge of war represents hope for a
better future. As many speakers before me have said,
we need to maintain the pressure on the part of the
international community, but at the same time we
should acknowledge the progress made and commend
Governments that engage strongly, as in the case of
Chad, Yemen, Somalia, South Sudan, Afghanistan,
Myanmar and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We hope that the trend will continue and that the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict
will soon be ratified by all countries. That will show
our strong determination to join forces to implement
all its provisions for the sake of each and every child
in the world.
The President: I would like to thank the
representative of Italy and the previous speakers for
sticking to the allotted five-minute time period for their
statements.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like thank the United States presidency for convening
today’s open debate on children in armed conflict. We
also wish to thank all of the briefers for their extensive
and important briefings.
Armed conflicts continue to inflict violence and
deprivations of many kinds upon children. Given
their lack of capacity to make choices, be it social or
political, children are increasingly exposed to various
threats, such as being orphaned and suffering injuries
and disabilities. Unfortunately, traumatic and violent
experiences are not easy to forget and have long-term
implications for affected children and societies at large.
My country remains concerned about the
negative impact of armed conflicts on children, and
strongly condemns all violations of international law,
international humanitarian law and human rights

37/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

law committed against them. The emergence of high
numbers of refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs) as a result of the numerous conflicts and wars,
many of whom are children, are a daily reminder of the
gross violations committed against children. However,
where the right of return continues to be challenged
and impunity prevails, reconciliation and sustainable
peace seem hardly to be attainable. Mechanisms of
reconciliation and transitional justice should safeguard
the rights to restitution, compensation, rehabilitation
and reparations.
We cannot but agree with the view that children
have no place in war under any circumstances and that
the best way to protect is to prevent. Protection efforts
and related international support policies must be free
of selectivity and politically motivated approaches
and preferences. In that regard, we appreciate the
critical role played by the Security Council and the
related mandate-holding bodies in bringing the issue
of children’s rights and protection to the forefront of
international development and the humanitarian agenda.
In that connection, I would also like to commend the
Children, Not Soldiers campaign.
The work of the Security Council, as well as various
initiatives pursued by the United Nations system, has
been instrumental in making a change on the ground.
Yet serious challenges remain. In the context of the
protection of children’s rights, particular consideration
should be granted to internally displaced children in
terms of ensuring their inalienable right to return and
to the implications of illegal policies and practices in
situations of foreign occupation. We commend the
attention paid to the situation of IDPs, particularly child
IDPs, by Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, during her recent address to the Human
Rights Council just a week ago.
Children who have become hostages or are reported
missing pose another challenge deserving urgent action.
The resolution of that issue should not be contingent
upon the political settlement of conflicts.
Ensuring the protection and sustainability of waraffected children should be a high priority for the entire
United Nations system, both during and after armed
conflict. It is important to develop and support policies
and programmes that provide war-affected children with
access to the quality education and training in technical
skills that will enable them to pursue productive and
sustainable livelihoods.
38/77

08/09/2014

In conclusion, I express our support for the
Secretary-General’s recommendations contained in his
report on children and armed conflict (S/2014/339).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): First, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
presiding over the work of the Security Council and for
holding this important meeting.
My delegation would like to associate itself with
the statement to be made by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
In those areas that are controlled by the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant, the Army of Islam, also
known as the Free Army, or other terrorist entities
that are satellites of Al-Qaida, criminal battalions
have been created under a number of different names.
They include the Zarqawi Youth around Damascus, the
Khalifa Youth in Al-Bukamal in the eastern part of the
country, and the youth of the Ibn Taymiyyah Brigade
in the Aleppo area, which is linked to Jabhat Al-Nusra.
Those battalions are fuelled by children who have
been brainwashed in order to turn them into monsters,
murderers, rapists and executioners. They undergo
rigorous physical training, drill with arms and carry
equipment and weapons that weigh more than their
own young bodies. The innocent laughter of children
has vanished from the region, replaced by slogans of
hatred, murder and blood. The children have been
turned into suicides with an instinctual hatred for their
fellow citizens.
In one of the videos that are circulating, an old man
is talking to some children in a school yard. He speaks
with a distinct Gulf accent and indoctrinates them with
distorted religious statements that he then ties to a
historical personage, religion or party so as to establish
a religious and divine justification for killing and
slaughtering. In the video, he asks them what should be
done with evil Christians and Jews, and the response
they have been taught is that their throats should be
cut — preceded, of course, by the phrase “Allah akbar”
or “Allah is great”.
In order to deal with such violations, the
Government of Syria, since the beginning of the crisis
and in accordance with its constitutional responsibility
to protect its citizens, has undertaken various measures
aimed at promoting the protection of children, including,
14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

as I have said, every possible measure to prevent
the recruitment of children into combat, including a
decree adopted on 6 May 2013. The Government has
taken steps to prevent the targeting of schools and
hospitals and violence against children, including
sexual violence, killing and mutilation. The relevant
Syrian authorities are cooperating with the Special
Representative in the country regarding the monitoring
of crimes committed against Syrian children and their
investigation. The Government has presented her with
proof and confirmed information on the hundreds of
crimes and serious violations committed by the armed
terrorist groups in Syria, in the hope that that will help
to expose those crimes, but so far we have not seen any
concrete steps taken to do so.
As an example, on 6 April, our delegation presented
the Special Representative with verified information on
the armed groups’ systematic attacks on schools and
hospitals, including 58 cases relating to schools and
54 cases of children killed, abducted or mutilated. On
7 March we asked for an investigation by the Special
Representative into the recruitment of Syrian children as
war correspondents by foreign authorities and satellite
TV networks. On 7 April, we informed the Special
Representative about the more than 18,000 cases of
organ trafficking involving Syrians in northern Syria.
Around 100,000 children in refugee camps in Turkey
are at risk for such trafficking. We have voiced our
concern dozens of times about the situation of children
in the refugee camps in neighbouring countries, which
we do not have time to discuss today. What has the
Special Representative and the country team done
to verify those crimes or to denounce the violations
perpetrated by the terrorist armed groups against the
Syrian children in my country?
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
I would first like to thank all of today’s briefers
for their presentations, and in particular to recognize

14-52810

S/PV.7259

Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and to reaffirm our strong support
for her mandate.
The report presented to the Council today
(S/2014/339) underlines yet again the direct impact
that ongoing armed conflicts around the world have
on children. We urge all parties to immediately stop
the violations described in the report and to take
action to prevent them in the future. We also call on
every State to become party to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, which has
been ratified by all member States of the European
Union.
Both the protection and promotion of children’s
rights and the issue of children and armed conflict
are central to the European Union’s human rights
policy and funding instruments. That includes the
right to education and well-being of children affected
by conflict, which is addressed through, among other
actions, the EU’s Children of Peace initiative. That
initiative is especially designed to provide education
to children in emergencies. Between 2012 and 2014,
108,000 children have benefited from that programme.
The EU is determined to continue its support for
activities aimed at preventing child recruitment and at
demobilizing and reintegrating former child soldiers into
their communities. We emphasize the inclusion of child
protection in the training of peacekeepers, the mandates
of crisis-management operations, standard operating
procedures and the rules of engagement. In 2013, the
European Union mainstreamed the promotion of human
rights, child protection and international humanitarian
law into the mandate of the EU training mission in
Mali. The European Union has also incorporated child
protection into the planning documents of its operation
in the Central African Republic.
We are proud to support the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign, aimed at ending and preventing
the recruitment and use of children in conflict by
Government armed forces by 2016. Fighting impunity
for such serious crimes of international concern should
be part of our actions, and we continue to see the role
of the International Criminal Court as essential in that
regard.
The European Union has invested in strengthening
its capacity in the area of child protection, both at its
headquarters and in its operations. In cooperation with

39/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

UNICEF and several non-governmental organizations,
we have organized our first regular training course
for our staff on children and armed conflict. We
are currently finalizing our pre-deployment childprotection training module for civilian and military
personnel.
We underline the importance of further cooperation
between regional and subregional organizations in view
of their important role in the promotion and protection
of the rights of the child. Last year in Addis Ababa,
together with the African Union, the World Bank
and the United Nations, we organized a workshop on
children and armed conflict, and we hope to further
develop such partnerships with other organizations.
We are concerned about the surge during 2013 in the
recruitment and use of children in the Central African
Republic, which is described in the Secretary-General’s
report. With help from UNICEF, the European Union is
currently implementing an educational programme in
the Central African Republic with a component for the
temporary care and training of 1,000 children who were
connected to armed groups.
We share the Secretary-General’s concern about the
targeting of schools and the abduction and recruitment
of children by Boko Haram, as was most prominently
shown by the kidnapping events in April. In the context
of its cooperation with Nigeria, the European Union
provides assistance in the field of counter-terrorism
and protection services for children in the northern
Nigerian state of Borno.
We also share the Secretary-General’s concern
that attacks on schools and hospitals have become a
common feature in the majority of armed conflicts and
situations covered in his report. We urge all parties to
stop attacks on schools and hospitals and to deter the
military use of schools in accordance with international
law.
Let me also underline that the European Union
deplores the grave violations and abuses against children
committed by all parties to the conflict in Iraq, as
highlighted by Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zerrougui at the recent special session of the
Human Rights Council on Iraq. We are particularly
concerned by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant’s
brutal killing of civilians, including children, not only
in Iraq, but also in Syria. Children continue to be the
most affected by the armed conflict in Syria. Well over
10,000 children have been killed thus far, and many

40/77

08/09/2014

more injured. We express our profound indignation at
the scale, scope and gravity of the violations and abuses
committed against children.
In conclusion, we wish to reaffirm our strong belief
that the issue of children and armed conflict must
remain in the focus of the Council and of our efforts at
the national and regional levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Riecken (Austria): It is my honour to speak
on behalf of the members of the Human Security
Network, namely, Costa Rica, Chile, Greece, Ireland,
Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama, Slovenia, Switzerland,
Thailand, South Africa as an observer, and my own
country, Austria. The Human Security Network
is an informal group of States that advocates a
people-centred, holistic approach to human security,
complementing the more traditional understanding of
national and international security.
Let me take the opportunity to thank the United
States presidency of the Council for convening this
important open debate, as well as today’s briefers
for their presentations and for sharing their moving
experiences with us, and Luxembourg for its work and
efforts as Chair of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.
The Human Security Network welcomes the
Secretary-General’s recent annual report on children
and armed conflict (S/2014/339), including the listing
of perpetrators in its annexes. We welcome the hard and
committed work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and UNICEF.
The Human Security Network wishes to draw
attention to the adoption of resolution 2143 (2014),
which sets out practical steps to combat violations
against children in armed conflict and to protect
their right to education, including through preventive
training in child protection for military personnel,
police and peacekeepers. Recent events have shown the
timeliness of such a focus on protecting schools from
military use, including as weapons storage facilities,
and we therefore underline the Council’s call on
Member States to consider concrete measures to deter
the use of schools by armed forces and non-State armed
groups. In that regard, the Network also takes note with
interest of the work on the draft Lucens Guidelines on
the military use of schools.

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

Although we remain concerned about the
high number of parties listed in the annexes to the
Secretary-General’s report, including the 31 persistent
perpetrators, we also acknowledge that there has been
significant progress, which confirms the benefits
and merits of the Security Council framework for the
protection of children in armed conflict.
We would like to commend the Chadian
Government for the various steps it took in 2013 that
led to the de-listing of its armed forces and encourage
it to take further measures to ensure the sustainability
and effective prevention of violations against children.
That progress is an important step towards achieving
the goal of the Children, Not Soldiers campaign. In that
regard, we also commend the Government of Yemen for
signing an action plan in May 2014 to end and prevent
the recruitment and use of children by the Yemeni
armed forces.
The Secretary-General’s report also highlights
the ongoing crises in the Central African Republic,
South Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic and their
devastating impact on children. Violence in the Syrian
Arab Republic reached unprecedented levels in 2013
and remains an urgent concern. The United Nations
estimates that more than 10,000 children have been
killed in the conflict, and the violations, including
indiscriminate shelling, attacks targeting civilians and
the killing, recruitment and use of children by armed
groups, continue unabated. The emergence of new
situations with worrying effects on children reminds
us that violence against children is a common feature
of conflict nowadays. Most recently, UNICEF reported
on 7 August that 429 children had been killed “as a
result of airstrikes and shelling” in Gaza. In Nigeria,
Boko Haram’s attacks on schools and schoolchildren
are notorious. That reminds us of the particular
vulnerability of girls in armed conflict, who are often
used in support roles.
While we welcome the progress made, we would
like to point out that the overwhelming majority of
parties listed in the report of the Secretary-General are
armed non-State actors. We also call for more efforts
to address impunity and to investigate, prosecute and
punish all those who commit grave violations against
children.
Finally, the Human Security Network encourages
States that have not yet done so to ratify the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.

S/PV.7259

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I would like to congratulate
the United States on its presidency of the Security
Council this month. I also want to commend Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui for bringing much needed attention to this
important subject.
Israel assigns great importance to protecting
children in armed conflict, and we look forward to the
commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child
in November.
One of the world’s most-beloved children’s authors,
Dr. Seuss, once wrote: “A person’s a person, no matter
how small”. All children around the world deserve to
grow up in an environment where their dignity and
human rights are respected and their aspirations are
valued. Yet in too many parts of the world, children are
the targets of violence or casualties of conflict. Abuses
against children in armed conflicts not only tear at our
hearts, they unravel entire communities and destroy
the fabric of a society. An estimated 2 million children
have died as a direct result of armed conflict over the
last decade, and many more have been permanently
disabled or seriously injured.
In the Middle East, terrorists regularly single
out children in their attacks. In June, millions of
Israelis were numb with horror when they learned
that Hamas terrorists had kidnapped and murdered
three Israeli teenagers — Eyal, Gilad and Naftali — as
they made their way home from school. That is just
one of many attacks targeting Israeli children. Over
the summer, over 3,800 rockets and mortars were
fired into Israel, which represents an average of one
rocket every 10 minutes. The rockets landed on Israeli
kindergartens, playgrounds and homes. Four year-old
Daniel Tragerman of Kibbutz Nahal Oz was one of
the tragic casualties of those attacks. Daniel’s mother,
Gila, sent a letter to the Secretary-General this week,
in which she wrote:
“Daniel, 4.5 years old, was killed in our house,
while playing with his sister in a tent built indoors
and not outside, because it’s dangerous. He was
killed by a mortar shell that was shot by terrorists
from Gaza, he died in our hands. Daniel died in
front of his little sister, who is 3.5 years old; he died
in front of his baby brother Uri, only four months

14-5281041/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

old and right before our eyes, his mother and father.
Daniel was killed by a mortar shell that was fired
by Hamas members from an elementary school
for boys in Gaza City. It was not a stray shell. It
was not an accidental death. From that school,
terrorists fired deliberately at the kibbutz to murder
civilians — children, women and old people.”
Today, over 1 million Israeli children live with the
threat of Hamas missiles. One in every three children
living in communities near Gaza has been diagnosed
with post-traumatic stress disorder. Thousands of
those children cannot sleep at night and refuse to go
outdoors — for good reason. In recent weeks, the
Israel Defence Forces have discovered dozens of terror
tunnels leading from Gaza to the doorsteps of Israeli
communities. Hamas planned to use those tunnels to
send terrorists into the hearts of those communities to
kill and kidnap as many people as possible.
As a father who has raised three children in Israel,
I can say that Israeli children grow up in an abnormal
reality. They go to school with security guards, walk
through metal detectors in malls and live with bunkers
in their buildings. They grow up thinking that all of
that is normal. Each and every day, Israeli parents
worry that their children will be the next victims of a
rocket attack, kidnapping attempt, suicide bombing or
stone throwing.
Israel is committed to upholding international law
and takes extensive measures to ensure the protection
of civilians. In contrast, radical extremist groups
like Hamas see no problem with using civilians and
children to achieve their ends. They deploy minors as
suicide bombers and recruit them to carry out attacks
against Israeli civilians and soldiers; they send children
deep underground to dig their terror tunnels; and
they place children in harm’s way by using schools,
hospitals and civilian neighbourhoods as bases for their
terror activity. During Hamas’s most recent escalation,
terrorists booby-trapped hundreds of Palestinian homes
and went so far as to use children’s bedrooms and even
baby cribs to hide explosives and conceal terror tunnels.
Hamas also launched M-75 rockets from a children’s
playground located in the Shuja’iya neighbourhood.
Dozens of other rockets were launched only steps from
Gaza schools, including the Al-Wakaf Al-Shariah
School, the Sinah School, the Haled Al-Alami Girls
School and the Shahada Al-Manar Boys School. And,
of course, we are well aware that, on at least three
separate occasions, rockets were found hidden in the

42/77

08/09/2014

schools of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). I can
assure you that Hamas did not place them there because
it had added rocket science to the school curriculum.
Hamas has made its educational priorities clear.
Earlier this year, UNRWA tried to distribute new
textbooks to teach Gaza’s children about human
rights. Hamas rejected the books on the grounds that
the materials would brainwash Palestinian children.
A representative from Hamas’s Education Ministry
explained that the books would foster “negative feelings
toward armed resistance” and that the inclusion of
topics such as the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights would contaminate children’s minds.
Learning about human rights would contaminate
children’s minds? The truth is that every single day
Hamas is polluting young Palestinian minds with
hatred and violence. Over 100,000 children have
graduated from Hamas’s paramilitary camps, which
encourage teenagers to “follow in the footsteps of the
suicide martyrs”. The toxic lessons taught by Hamas
are poisoning any opportunity for Palestinian children
to grow up in peace. Generations of Palestinians have
suffered under a leadership that would sooner tear Israel
down than raise its own people up. It is time for the
Palestinian leadership to teach its children tolerance,
coexistence and mutual understanding.
The United Nations has a duty to shield the world’s
young people from hate and protect them wherever
and whenever they are threatened. For the sake of
those children and for the future of our region, the
international community must act and must act now.
As Dr. Seuss wrote: “Unless someone like you cares a
whole awful lot, nothing is going to get better.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, and your delegation on
your assumption of the presidency and thank you for
calling this meeting, which gives us the opportunity to
hear the voices of all the children affected by armed
conflicts. It is also my pleasure to welcome the Minister
for Foreign and European Affairs of Luxembourg,
Mr. Jean Asselborn. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, the Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF and the Special Envoy

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

for Peace and Reconciliation of the United Nations
Educational, Social and Cultural Orgabization for their
valuable statements this morning.
I would like to take the opportunity to underscore
the importance of the Children, Not Soldiers campaign
aimed at putting an end to the recruitment and use of
children by Government armed forces in conflicts. That
campaign comes at an opportune time, in view of the
notable increase in violations against children in many
conflict areas throughout the world and the severity
of the violations committed against them. We express
our deep concern about the severity of the violations,
which constitute a humanitarian crisis, and about the
killing and recruitment of children and other violations,
including sexual abuse and kidnapping, such as the
action of Boko Haram, in which they kidnapped more
than 200 students, who are still missing. All of those
incidents are a source of grave concern.
The report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2014/339) paints a very painful
picture. Many children suffer gravely from the effects
of armed conflicts throughout the world. We are also
aware that the suffering of children in the Arab region
of the world is part of that painful picture. However, I
would like to address two particular cases.
Palestinian children are undoubtedly not immune
to injustice, given the continued Israeli violations. In
addition to the information contained in the report
of the Secretary-General on the grave violations and
the killing of Palestinian children in the Palestinian
occupied territories, the recent Israeli aggression
against the Gaza Strip has led to the death of more than
2,000 civilians, mostly women and children.
As for Syria, the Secretary-General’s report paints
an indescribable picture of grave violations against
children and the extreme danger they are in. More than
10,000 children have been killed since the beginning of
the conflict, and the number of children killed increased
significantly in 2013. Nevertheless, the Syrian Arab
Armed Forces continue to indiscriminately shell areas
inhabited by civilians, and the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham continues to commit horrible acts, including
kidnappings and other violations against children.
We are also gravely concerned by the violations
committed against educational establishments in armed
conflicts and strongly condemn the repeated attacks
against schools, such as the deliberate attack in Gaza
in August against the schools of the United Nations

14-52810

S/PV.7259

Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East. The targeting of those schools, their
transformation into part of the battlefield and their use
by parties to the conflict for military purposes, such as
for military barracks, operational bases and detention
centres, is not only a violation of the civilian nature of
those schools, but it also endangers children and denies
them the right to education.
The facts contained in the relevant reports,
including the most recent report of the Global Coalition
to Protect Education from Attack, shed light on the use
of schools and universities for military purposes in
more than 24 countries since the beginning of 2009. We
believe that the time has come to make further efforts
to protect schools and universities from military use.
We would also like to stress the importance of
taking further strict measures with regard to those
responsible for violations and aggression against
children and for the military use of schools. It is also
critical to adopt additional laws that criminalize such
violations, fight impunity and ensure accountability,
with a view to putting an end to the violations and
horrors committed against the children of the world.
Let us instead invest in the future of those children.
They need it the most, and perhaps we will be able to
reintegrate them into society and make them forget the
horrors they have witnessed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Addressing the Security Council on behalf of the
countries of the Non-Aligned Movement, I would
like to begin by congratulating the United States of
America on assuming the presidency of the Council
and by thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this
open debate in a timely manner on the very important
matter of children and armed conflict. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his report entitled
“Children and armed conflict” (S/2014/339), which
covers global trends on the subject. My thanks also go
to the briefers and to Ms. Sandra Uwiringiyimana for
their valuable reports to the Council.
Current world events indicate that children are
suffering in massive numbers as a result of armed
conflicts. Despite all the efforts made at the international
level for the protection of civilians in general and
despite the measures adopted by the Security Council
and the relevant humanitarian institutions, it is still

43/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

regrettably true that armed conflicts continue to take
a heavy toll on children. As the Secretary-General’s
report indicates, we are still witnessing the recruitment
and use of children, sexual violence against children,
the killing and maiming of children, and recurrent
attacks on schools and hospitals, in contravention of
international law.
Children in the occupied Palestinian territories
have always suffered the heaviest casualty rate. They
continue to be harshly affected by the ongoing military
occupation, conflict and blockade. The SecretaryGeneral’s report indicates that in 2013, eight Palestinian
children were killed and 1,265 injured in the occupied
Palestinian territories, while 54 boys between the ages
of 14 and 17 years of age were held in Israeli military
detention for alleged security violations. Moreover,
according to the United Nations, in the latest round of
Israeli aggression against Gaza, at least 501 children
were killed and over 3000 injured, while 373,000
Palestinian children need immediate psychosocial first
aid. According to UNICEF, at least 219 schools have
been damaged by Israeli air strikes, while 22 were
completely destroyed.
In light of the foregoing, the Non-Aligned
Movement would like to take this opportunity to
call for accountability for the crimes and violations
committed by Israel, the occupying Power, during
its recent military aggression against the Palestinian
civilian population, and for the wanton destruction
of vital civilian infrastructure in the Gaza Strip. The
international community, including the Security
Council, should ensure serious follow-up efforts to
bring an end to Israel’s impunity and to secure justice
for the victims.
The Non-Aligned Movement calls on all parties
to armed conflict to redouble their efforts to comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law, including the principle of proportionality, inter
alia, and the prohibition against the targeting of
civilian populations, civilian property and certain
special property during an armed conflict, and the
obligation of the parties to a conflict to ensure general
protection against the dangers arising from military
operations for civilian installations, hospitals, schools,
means of transportation and relief materials and their
distribution.
The Movement of Non-Aligned Nations has
also expressed its resolve to eliminate all forms of

44/77

08/09/2014

discrimination and violence against women and girls,
especially in situations of armed conflict and foreign
occupation, including the systematic use of abduction
and rape by the parties to a conflict as an instrument
of war, as well the trafficking in and victimization
of women and girls. In that regard, the Non-Aligned
Movement has called upon States to take all necessary
measures against the perpetrators of such acts and to
ensure compliance with international law and domestic
legislation. That should include legislation to protect
women and girls in situations of armed conflict, bring
perpetrators to justice and ensure access to justice for
survivors.
Finally, the Movement acknowledges the progress
achieved in protecting children in situations of armed
conflict. To sustain those advances, it is crucial for all
stakeholders to continue to work closely to ensure that
the reports and documents on that important issue are
based on clear, accurate and verifiable data. It is, after
all, on such data that all comments and recommendations
are based. In that regard, the Non-Aligned Movement
stresses that gaps in the reporting process must be
addressed and that efforts should be made to improve
the reporting process. Such efforts should include
enhanced cooperation and coordination among the
countries concerned and the office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict and the Security Council Working
Group on the subject. The Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict and the Security Council Working
Group must take cognizance of those gaps and ensure
that they are addressed. The integrity of the reports and
the work of our Organization rest on that fundamental
requirement.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statement presented by the observer of the European
Union.
Allow me to thank today’s speakers for sharing
their expertise and insight. They have once again shown
that the situation of children in today’s conflicts around
the world remains dire. The annex to The SecretaryGeneral’s current report on children and armed conflict
(S/2014/339) lists 59 parties to conflict for having
committed grave violations against children in conflict
situations. Each and every one of them is one too many.

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

Despite the Council’s significant progress on the
legislative side, as well as the increasing commitment
on the part of Governments to raise and tackle this
issue, implementation on the ground remains all too
often inadequate. Moreover, it seems that children,
along with other civilians, are increasingly being
deliberately targeted during conflicts, especially by
non-State actors. The current list of shame also shows
that dealing with non-State actors remains our biggest
challenge. Many of those groups have been listed for
far too long. The international community needs to
reinforce its efforts in that regard, and we need to find
new and creative solutions to deal with that kind of
violations.
Taking one current example, we are appalled by
reports from Iraq suggesting that the so-called Islamic
State has used sexual violence as a tactic of war, in
particular against children who belong to religious
minorities. Also, in Nigeria, the terror organization
Boko Haram regularly abducts, kills and maims
children and deliberately attacks schools and hospitals.
This year’s report by the Secretary-General looks into
that conflict for the first time, and the findings are
shocking. Children in northern Nigeria grow up in fear
and are not safe even in their schools. In that regard,
we welcome the very specific and concrete Guidance
Note on Attacks against Schools and Hospitals that
was launched in May by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in collaboration with UNICEF,
the World Health Organization and the United Nations
Educational, Social and Cultural Organization. The
latest report of the Secretary-General shows that eight
parties have been listed for attacks against schools and
hospitals in armed conflict.
We hope that the Guidance Note provides clear
instructions to those who carry out monitoring and
reporting in the field. The Note will contribute to an
ever more effective implementation of resolution 1998
(2011). In our view, it is of paramount importance that,
where relevant and feasible, a sufficient number of
child protection officers be deployed to United Nations
peacekeeping and special political missions to allow for
comprehensive monitoring and support. It is only when
we have a clear picture of what is happening on the
ground that we can take adequate action and advocate
to create change.
Germany fully supports the United Nations
Children, Not Soldiers campaign, and we welcome the
commitment of the listed armed forces to ending the

S/PV.7259

recruitment of children by 2016. Moreover, it would be
important to guarantee that the armed forces of those
States parties listed in the annexes to the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report on children and armed conflict
be allowed to contribute troops to United Nationsmandated missions only once the Secretary-General
has certified the full implementation of their action plan
with the United Nations to end and prevent violations
against children.
Ending grave violations against children is
a task that requires joint efforts on the part of us
all — United Nations Member States, non-governmental
organizations and civil society. While specific
guidelines are developed in New York, the actual work
to implement them needs to be done on the ground.
Therefore, we would like to encourage all Member
States to support the United Nations and respective
organizations in their important endeavour to end
violence against children in armed conflict. Germany
will certainly remain committed to this issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish
to congratulate the United States on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Malaysia associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and with that to be delivered
by the representative of Indonesia on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
We are deeply concerned by the continuing grave
violations against children in situations of armed conflict
around the world, as highlighted by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2014/339). Despite a series
of measures taken by the international community to
protect children in armed conflict, they continue to be
recruited, killed, maimed, abducted, sexually exploited
and deprived of humanitarian access and health care.
In recent months alone, the international community
has been stunned by heartbreaking images of children
suffering in the crossfire of conflicts beyond their
control in many parts of the world, particularly in the
Middle East and Africa.
Malaysia is particularly concerned over the high
number of child casualties caused by the recent Israeli
aggression and atrocities in Gaza, which have claimed
the lives of over 500 children. The horrific and brutal

14-5281045/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

attacks also left more than 3,000 children injured and
countless others orphaned. The fact that non-military
United Nations facilities sheltering refugees, including
schools and hospitals, were deliberately targeted during
the conflict is deplorable and cannot be condoned. The
sanctity of schools and hospitals in times of war must
be safeguarded to ensure that communities in crisis
continue to have access to education and health care.
In that regard, we fully support the Secretary-General’s
call, in line with applicable international humanitarian
law and in accordance with resolution 2143 (2014), on
Member States to consider adopting additional concrete
measures to deter the military use of schools and other
public places.
We also continue to be alarmed by the arrest
and detention of children in the occupied Palestinian
territories, many of whom are subjected to cruel and
degrading ill-treatment by the Israeli security forces.
The mistreatment and lack of adequate legal protection
for Palestinian children in detention are unacceptable
and must be urgently addressed.
Malaysia notes with deep concern the rise in
attacks on and abductions of children by terrorist
groups. We also condemn the continuous recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict in many parts of
the world. No child should be associated with parties
to conflict. It is high time that Member States upheld
their responsibility to protect children, particularly
those trapped in conflict situations. Malaysia therefore
warmly welcomes the Children, Not Soldiers campaign,
launched by the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict and UNICEF, and aimed at ending the
recruitment and use of children by Government armed
forces in conflict by 2016. We recognize that this is an
ambitious undertaking, and we call on the SecretaryGeneral to ensure that the campaign is mainstreamed
throughout the United Nations work, from peace
processes to peacebuilding. We are confident that the
road map and the comprehensive plan of action that
have been incorporated into the campaign will yield
many positive outcomes.
We are also deeply shocked by the appalling level
of sexual and gender-based violence against children
documented in the Secretary-General’s report. These
acts are horrendous crimes for which those responsible
must be brought to justice. They also have far-reaching
implications for the development of affected societies
in general. We are concerned that impunity for grave
violations against children, in particular sexual violence,

46/77

08/09/2014

is common to several situations and exacerbates even
further the vulnerability of children. My delegation
believes that there should be no leniency or amnesty for
crimes perpetrated against innocent children, and we
continue to call on Member States to establish effective
accountability measures to bring justice, dignity and
rehabilitation for children victimized by armed conflict.
We fully concur with the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that the Council strengthen provisions
for the protection of children in all relevant mandates
of United Nations peacekeeping, special political and
peacebuilding missions that include the deployment of
child protection advisers. Peacekeepers and front-line
personnel in conflict situations should be adequately
equipped to prevent and mitigate violations against
children. Malaysia also supports efforts to mainstream
the children and armed conflict agenda into the work of
the Security Council, which ensures the continued high
visibility of this subject matter.
Children are among the most vulnerable members
of any society, as they are the easiest prey for ruthless
perpetrators. At the same time, they are the key to the
future of any society in the world. The violence inflicted
upon children in armed conflicts can leave physical and
psychological scars that last for generations, affecting
efforts to rebuild peaceful communities and nations.
We therefore must put an end to acts by groups or
individuals who systematically and deliberately target
and abuse children in situations of armed conflict.
In conclusion, Malaysia would like to express
our continued commitment to working with Council
members and the international community to ensure
that the protection of children in armed conflict around
the world remains our priority.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate on a topic so relevant to the work of
the Council. We also wish to express our appreciation
to Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representativeof the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict;
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Hervé Ladsous; Deputy Executive Director of
UNICEF, Ms. Yoka Brandt; and Mr. Forest Whitaker for
their participation and their valuable contributions to
today’s debate. We would also like to thank Ms. Sandra

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

Uwiringiyimana for her statement, which motivates us
to work even harder.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2014/339), which is the basis for our deliberations,
and express our special appreciation to the delegation
of Luxembourg for chairing the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.
It is of great concern to our delegation that the
information provided in the annexes of the most recent
report nof the Secretary-General, which includes eight
new groups that recruit or use children; kill or maim
children; commit rape and other forms of violence,
including sexual violence, against children; and
attacks against schools and hospitals. These attacks on
schools and hospitals or their use for military purposes;
the serious violations of the rights of girls and boys,
including their right to education; and the murders not
only of children, but of teachers and staff working in
school buildings, are unacceptable.
We are concerned about the emergence of new and
more radical armed groups, the fragmentation of armed
forces and the increase of other more violent groups,
such as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham and
Boko Haram, which have been changing the landscape
of armed conflicts and forging alliances, as well as
the appearance of other structures, some in opposition
to Governments and others associated with them.
We therefore believe that the focus should evolve in
accordance with changing circumstances.
We consider it necessary to strengthen national
capacities and to support security and justice sector
reform, as well as the creation of special tribunals
and mixed courts to combat impunity for those who
commit serious violations of the rights of children,
especially persistent perpetrators, who should not be
offered any kind of amnesty or hold office in their
respective Governments or armed forces. We emphasize
humanitarian principles in order to provide a broad and
effective protection, even against the kidnapping of boys
and girls affected by conflict or who are in situations
of concern. We also deem the complementarities of
international judicial bodies, such as the International
Criminal Court, to national mechanisms to be equally
important in bringing to justice those responsible for
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes
committed against children.
We are alarmed at the resurgence of conflict and
the escalation of hostilities that have led to widespread,

S/PV.7259

grave violations of children’s rights in the Syrian Arab
Republic, the Central African Republic, South Sudan
and northern Nigeria, to mention but a few cases. We
are deeply concerned by the humanitarian situation that
has been created in that region, where the Boko Haram
group has intensified its attacks on schools. Guatemala
continues to give high priority to address the situation
of children caught up in armed conflict, as well as to
strengthening provisions for the protection of boys and
girls in all relevant mandates of special political and
peacebuilding missions, including the deployment of
child protection advisers, as appropriate.
We have supported and will continue to support
the Children, Not Soldiers campaign launched by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF. We thank
them for their updates on the effects of the campaign,
which has been undertaken in collaboration with other
agencies and funds of the United Nations system, to end
by 2016 the recruitment and use of child soldiers by the
armed forces of the Governments listed in the annexes
to the annual reports.
We believe that field visits of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict are very useful
in apprising us of each case. Our delegation had
the privilege to participate in the visit to Myanmar
in December 2013, which allowed us to assess the
political will of the Government to end the recruitment
of children into its armed forces and its renewed
commitment to extend the action plan. We encourage
such visits to continue.
In conclusion, we have an obligation to future
generations in countries affected by armed conflicts.
Violations of the rights of children compromise future
prosperity and the ability of countries to achieve
a lasting peace. We must pledge to do everything in
our reach to prevent heinous violations and rise to the
challenge of protecting the world’s children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, I would like
to thank the United States presidency for organizing
this open debate on this important subject. I also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui, Under-Secretary-General Ladsous, Deputy
Executive Director Brandt and Special Envoy Whitaker
for their interesting and thought-provoking statements.

14-5281047/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

Special thanks goes to Ms. Sandra Uwiringiyimana for
her emotional and heartbreaking story.
Estonia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by observer of the European Union.
Estonia welcomes the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2014/339) and shares the deep concern on the grave
violations outlined in it. We must take all measures
to prevent violations against children, as well as to
make violators accountable. We call on all States that
have not yet done so to sign the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, and to join
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
Let me stress some key topics from our perspective.
First, education is one of the key elements for
prevention. It is also crucial in preventing situations
where progress is reversed and the rerecruitment of child
militants may occur. We share the Secretary-General’s
concern over the use of schools for military purposes,
as seen — among many other places — in Syria, Gaza
and Boko Haram’s attacks in Nigeria, among many
other countries. Moreover, military conflicts create
cross-border situations where neighbours need to find
ways to guarantee education to children in refugee
camps as well.
We are deeply concerned about the fact that
thousands of children remain without basic education.
Therefore, let me stress that schools should be for
children and should never and under no condition be
used for military purposes. In that regard, we welcome
the draft Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict.
In that connection, I would like to mention that Estonia
highly appreciates UNICEF’s work to provide quality
education to children in humanitarian crises, and has
recently supported UNICEF’s work in South Sudan, the
Central African Republic, Gaza, Syria and Somalia.
Secondly, educating and training the peacekeepers
is another important aspect. We believe that the
predeployment training should be a rule rather than
an exception and, in that respect, welcome the childprotection training launched in April. Let me also
reiterate the crucial role of child protection advisers,
who have to be deployed in peacekeeping operations,
peacebuilding missions and special political missions.
Third is accountability. With regard to the
Secretary-General’s report, Estonia would have liked to
see more focus on the accountability dimension, since
48/77

08/09/2014

we clearly see impunity as one of the main reasons
for the recurrence of these grave violations against
children. It is only by consistent prosecution, either
domestically or internationally, that we can deter the
commission of these crimes by sending out a strong
signal that people who commit such atrocities will be
held accountable for their action.
To achieve this, we reiterate the important role of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) where States
are unable or unwilling to bring perpetrators to justice
domestically, and emphasize the necessity for all States,
the Council and international and regional organizations
to cooperate with the ICC. Furthermore, we also
believe that the international community should assist
in strengthening national judicial capacities to ensure
accountability, including through the development of
legislation that criminalizes violations against children.
My delegation welcomes the positive progress
made with the Children, Not Soldiers campaign, and
the ongoing cooperation with the States mentioned in
the annexes of the report. However, a lot still remains to
be done, and it is important to find more ways to reach
out and to cooperate with non-State armed groups.
In conclusion, let me stress that Estonia highly
values the work of the Security Council, its Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, and its open
debates on this issue. We appreciate the work of the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative, UNICEF
and all other United Nations structures involved,
as well as the utmost important contribution of civil
society organizations. There is never too much we can
do for children. In short, by protecting children we
protect our future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Fathalla (spoke in Arabic): As this is the first
time that I am taking the floor in the Security Council
this month, I should like to begin by congratulating the
United States on acceding to the Council presidency,
and to thank it for its initiative of organizing this
important debate on children and armed conflict.
I take this opportunity to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2014/339). It is a very important
document, and we hope that this meeting will make it
possible for us to achieve a broader overview in order
to promote efforts to protect children in armed conflict
and the non-participation of children therein.

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

We believe this meeting is important because it
focuses on issues related to children in armed conflict,
and in particular on the tragic conditions that Arab
countries are enduring, which have increased children’s
suffering and the dangers they are facing, whether
through trauma or injuries, in the Arab world today.
This brings to the fore our responsibility to protect
one half of the population of the Arab countries. What
we sow today we will reap in the future. International
law forbids the exploitation of children and their use in
armed conflicts. Despite this reality, many countries,
especially in the Middle East, have resorted to recruiting
children without considering their wishes. They have
been forced to bear arms and become soldiers, as well
as to commit crimes, become a part of the machinery
of war and confront the dangers of facing a warring
opponent.
We should emphasize the promotion of the rights
of the child, particularly in the light of the changes
that have occurred in the Middle East since the end of
2011. At the 2012 Baghdad Summit of the Council of
the League of Arab States, a declaration was made at
a special meeting addressing the issue of a five-year
plan for promoting children’s rights around the Arab
world in order to combat the negative effects of conflict
on children. That included follow-up mechanisms and
a revitalization of Arab entities’ work in the area, as
well as organizing seminars and workshops aimed at
promoting the exchange of ideas and the role of civil
society organizations in promoting children’s rights in
society.
The 2013 Doha Declaration also looked at the issue
of children in the Arab region. The Arab countries
reiterated the importance of cooperation among Arab
States in promoting the rights and well-being of children,
both from a qualitative and quantitative point of view.
It also examined the importance of guaranteeing the
means necessary for providing protection to children
in areas of armed conflict. The Amman Declaration
emphasized for the post-2015 development agenda, in
a document that was adopted by the Ministers of Social
Affairs in 2011 and that provides for the importance of
guaranteeing social protection for children and putting
an end to all forms of violence against them, while
promoting development prospects in the Arab countries
and the post-2015 agenda.
Conditions in the Arab region are dependent
on the implementation of the relevant international
conventions relating to children’s rights and the

S/PV.7259

prohibition of violence against children. We would like
to emphasize some of the efforts undertaken by the
League of Arab States to protect children, specifically
in the light of current political and social trends in the
Arab world and their impact on children.
First was our cooperation with Ms. Coomaraswamy,
the former Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict. We were
involved in a campaign launched together with
UNICEF and the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights as it related to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. Through
various activities and working with various entities,
the League discussed the rights of children and the
possibility of inviting Arab States that were not yet party
to the Optional Protocols to accede to them, particularly
that on the involvement of children in armed conflict. It
is very important that we become party to the Optional
Protocols if we are to protect children and their rights.
Secondly, the League of Arab States is working to
support the efforts of the current Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, to promote the rights
of children affected by armed conflict, to protect them
and to back the Children, Not Soldiers campaign that
she launched at the beginning of this year. Our goal is
to see all children demobilized by 2016 and to end their
recruitment by Government armed forces. We support
the efforts agreed to by Government bodies to deal with
this scourge and create greater cooperation.
We note the issue of violations perpetrated by
non-State armed groups and those non-governmental
armed groups listed in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2014/339). It is key that cooperation be promoted
between the Office of the Special Representative and
the League of Arab States, which will soon conclude an
agreement on the issue that will be very similar to the
one signed between the Special Representative and the
European Union. The goal is the protection of children’s
rights. The League will also be promoting cooperation
with UNICEF in order to organize a conference on
rescuing Syrian children, thereby reaffirming the
importance of protecting children, especially in armed
conflict, and as a response to UNICEF’s campaign to
promote the rights of Syrian children.
Lastly, I would like to highlight the fact that more
than 1 million Palestinians in Gaza are suffering from

14-5281049/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

collective punishment under the Israeli occupation, and
from the blockade that has been in place since 2007,
affecting about 90 per cent of the people living there. In
addition, a very large number of children were wounded
or killed in the most recent war in Gaza, which lasted
some 50 days. The children in Gaza need the efforts
of the international community and international help
in protecting their rights. They also need international
assistance, through the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
other specialized United Nations agencies, in order to
rebuild the Gaza Strip and guarantee their basic rights
and their right to a life of dignity, and to put an end to
the serious violations of the four Geneva conventions
and of international humanitarian law, as well as of
other conventions that were put in place in order to
protect the rights of people under foreign occupation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I would like to begin
by saying that the commitment we must demonstrate
to children affected by wars and all other forms of
abuse should go well beyond that represented by
the international legal instruments and Security
Council resolutions that bind all States. It is a moral
duty — greater than the duty based on our representation
of our own countries or on our service in international
organizations— to fight, as hard as we can, the plague
of children being used as soldiers, targets or any other
form of abuse. I firmly believe, and state on behalf of
my country, Algeria, that children’s place is in school,
and those schools should be immune and protected.
It is heartening that the international community
has started to size up this crucial issue. Today’s
open debate — which I thank the United States for
convening — is of paramount importance and follows
similar meetings held in the past couple of years.
However, while some legal instruments do exist in
this field and the Security Council has adopted some
resolutions on the subject, we have to face the fact that,
according to credible accounts, 300,000 children are
still forcibly enlisted as soldiers and many others are
still abused in the maelstrom of conflict situations.
Children in the occupied Palestinian territories continue
to suffer from the prevailing military occupation. They
continue to be arrested, detained and prosecuted in
juvenile military courts, as has been highlighted in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/339). We all have in

50/77

08/09/2014

mind the images of the children on the beaches of Gaza,
their schools destroyed.
At this juncture in the debate, Algeria believes
that the Security Council should make its message
and action as clear as possible. First, the whole world
should know that the Council will take specific action
wherever continued abuses against children are
committed and against whomever is committing them,
be they States, groups or individuals. Secondly, all
peacekeeping operations should encompass, beyond
the current advisers that exist, specific differentiated
provisions on children in conflict situations. Thirdly,
the Secretary-General’s reports should include specific
recommendations. Fourthly, the Security Council
should be proactive and preventive on the issue of
justice and accountability, whether that involves States,
armed groups or individuals. Sanctions cannot be an
evasive or hypothetical option.
On a more positive note, I must thank the
Secretary-General for his report and commend the
tremendous work done by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Zerrougui, and her
Office, which deserve greater and broader support,
both politically and in terms of giving her Office the
appropriate means. We commend her for the United
Nations global Children, Not Soldiers campaign carried
out with UNICEF.
It is also important to encourage agreements
with regional organizations and States. Our duty is to
encourage those States that have voluntarily entered
such agreements and shown effectiveness. In that
respect, we deem it important to congratulate Chad
for setting an example for Africa and beyond. All
Member States should continue to work to stabilize and
help those countries with appropriate measures. The
international community should embark on rebuilding
homes and souls. We owe it to children to ensure they
hold pencils and computers in safe schools, and not
machine guns or targets in killing fields.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium aligns itself fully with the statements by the
observer of the European Union and the representative
of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict. I would like make the following observations
in my national capacity.

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

My country welcomes the annual report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/339) and his report on the
plight of children in armed conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (S/2014/453).
Belgium regrets that armed conflicts continue to
affect children disproportionately. Indeed, the annual
report notes a significant spike in 2013 in the number
of cases of killing and maiming of children in several
countries. In addition, the recruitment and use of
children in conflict remain endemic. Impunity also
remained a worrying problem.
Belgium welcomes the appointment by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo of a presidential
adviser on sexual violence and recruitment of children.
My country welcomes the progress made in the
national security forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, particularly following the adoption of the
national action plan in 2012. However, the recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has continued, indicating that
efforts must also continue. The impunity enjoyed
by perpetrators of sexual violence also remains a
serious concern. For those reasons, my country calls
on the Congolese Government to fully and effectively
implement the action plan and encourages it again to
take all possible measures to bring perpetrators of
sexual violence to justice. The Government must also
ensure that those responsible for serious violations are
not recruited into or from its security services.
Belgium would like to reiterate its concern
regarding the use of explosive weapons, particularly
in densely populated areas, and calls on all parties
to armed conflict to renounce their use, in particular
given the harm they cause to children. My country also
calls upon States that have not ratified the relevant
international instruments to do so as soon as possible,
in particular the conventions banning anti-personnel
mines and cluster munitions.
Belgium is also of the opinion that the Government
armed forces listed in the annexes to the report of
the Secretary-General on the plight of children in
armed conflict should not be able to provide troops
to peacekeeping operations until they have fully
implemented action plans to end violations against
children.
Finally, Belgium welcomes, as the SecretaryGeneral does, regional and subregional organizations’
initiative and the important contribution they make in

S/PV.7259

terms of conflict prevention, mediation and peacekeeping
operations. My country therefore echoes the invitation
extended to them by the Secretary-General to further
include elements for the protection of children when
developing their policies, planning missions, training
personnel and conducting peacekeeping operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): I take this opportunity
to congratulate the United States on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
for organizing today’s open debate on this issue of great
importance and urgency.
Children constitute nearly one third of humankind
and are our most valuable resource. Childhood is the
foundation for the physical, psychological, social and
intellectual development of any country.
Our commitments to the rights of the child are
continuously threatened by the perpetrators of armed
conflict. Children in many parts of the world are being
forced to bear arms and wage war alongside adults. In
affected areas and in new areas, schools continue to be
attacked, health care and education are on the brink
of complete breakdown and development is coming
to a standstill. That does not bode well for the proper
implementation of the post-2015 development agenda,
which we are going to adopt at the summit on the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations, in 2015.
India is deeply concerned that children are
becoming increasingly trapped in the vicious grip of
armed conflict, as both targets and victims of violence
and abuse. The primary responsibility for addressing
this issue lies with the Governments of Member States.
That is due to their obligations and responsibilities
under the relevant treaties and conventions they are
party to and to the duty that Governments have towards
their citizens. India acknowledges the integral role
of civil society in this framework and as invaluable
partners in our national and international efforts on
children’s issues.
There is a reference in paragraphs 172 to 176 of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/339) to the impact of
left-wing extremist armed groups on children in India.
That is a very serious issue, which the Government of
India has addressed as a priority. India believes that
through a combination of development and securityrelated interventions, the left-wing extremists problem

14-5281051/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

can be tackled. We do not underestimate the challenge,
but we are committed to redressing the situation through
a combination of law and robust policy initiatives. The
Indian National Commission for Protection of Child
Rights, set up in 2007, is one of the few commissions
of its kind in Asia. It ensures that actions taken in
India are in consonance with our Constitution and the
Convention on the Rights of the Child of 1989.
If Governments of Member States need assistance
in strengthening their capacities and resources to
tackle this problem, all of us in the United Nations
must demonstrate our willingness and commitment
to rendering such assistance. India, which this
month marks the fiftieth anniversary of sharing our
development experience with our partner countries in
the developing world, reiterates our readiness to do so.
We note that among the recommendations
included in the report of Secretary General is a call
for independent access by the United Nations for the
purpose of monitoring and reporting on grave violations
against children, and facilitating contact between
the Organization and non-State armed groups for the
purpose of dialogue. We believe that the United Nations
should act only in cooperation with the Government of
the Member State concerned, especially now that we
have an empowered institution that we unanimously
agreed to establish at the sixtieth anniversary Summit
of the United Nations in 2005, which is the Human
Rights Council. In that context, we note that the Human
Rights Council has already completed its first round
of the Universal Periodic Review of all 193 States
Members of the United Nations.
With respect to the interface between the United
Nations and non-State actors, we would note that
non-State actors are not bound by any legal obligations
or commitments. Any proposed interface with them is
therefore open-ended. It would be more effective for
the Council to recommend the strict application of the
rule of law as deterrence to armed non-State groups,
especially for the investigation and prosecution of those
non-State actors that are inveigling children into armed
conflict or violating the fundamental human rights of
children in armed conflict with impunity.
We are dismayed that, despite the clearly spelled
out provisions of paragraph 16 of resolution 1379
(2001), the report of the Secretary-General selectively
includes issues that do not appear relevant to threats
to the maintenance of international peace and security.

52/77

08/09/2014

That needlessly diverts the attention and resources
that are needed to address the core issue being debated
today. The selective inclusion in sub-section B of the
Secretary-General’s report of only countries from the
developing world, in our view, is a dangerous approach.
The impact of violent extremism and of the recruitment
and radicalization of children, the use of children to
commit violent acts, as well as incidents of armed
attacks on schools, which are listed in that section,
cannot be confined only to the developing world.
They occur in developed countries too, and need to be
addressed in a global framework.
We have referred to resolution 1379 (2001), which
was adopted in 2001. Since then, we have established
the Peacebuilding Commission. Perhaps the Security
Council should review the provisions of that resolution
to provide a more direct role for peacebuilding activities
to include provisions for the protection of children.
An area where India has been at the forefront of
implementing the Council’s decisions on the topic of
our debate today is through our participation in the
peacekeeping operations. Based on the experience
we have garnered as the largest contributor to such
operations, we must express concern at the lack
of resources to implement all the provisions of the
mandates. At the very basic level, we need to ensure
that more child-protection advisers are deployed in
those operations. On a broader level, we expect the
Council to take advantage of the two current parallel
review processes under way of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities. Both of them are directly under
the ambit of the Council. The objective should be to use
the provisions and resources of peacebuilding activities
in a more proactive and sustainable manner. That, we
believe, should apply especially to guaranteeing the safe
return of children impacted by armed conflict, and to
the sustainability of their demobilization, rehabilitation
and reintegration into society.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my sincere appreciation for your leadership,
Sir, in convening today’s open debate. Let me also thank
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Johanna Brandt, Deputy Executive Director
of UNICEF, Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, and Mr. Forest

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

Whitaker, UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador for Peace
and Reconciliation, and Ms. Sandra Uwiringyyimana
for their briefings.
Today I would like to focus on the issues of child
abduction and matters related to it. On 14 April, the
extremist Islamic group Boko Haram abducted 276 girls
from their school in Chibok, Nigeria. Two-hundred
twenty three of them are still missing. Prime Minister
Abe stated here at the United Nations last September
(see A/68/PV.12) that Japan would do everything
possible to prevent sexual violence against women
during armed conflict and to support, both materially
and psychologically, the people who unfortunately
become victims of such acts. It is absolutely necessary
to prevent similar outrageous crimes from taking place
again, and we should also spare no efforts in supporting
the victims. In that regard, on 13 June, the Government
of Japan contributed $855,000 to provide psychosocial
support and health care for the victims and their
community in Nigeria.
That horrid incident symbolizes the vulnerable
condition of children in armed conflict. It is neither
the first time that children have been abducted, and
it does not happen in Nigeria only. According to the
Secretary-General’s current report (S/2014/339, last
year 147 students were abducted in the Republic of the
Congo and 250 were abducted in South Sudan. Also, the
number of child abduction cases by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant in Syria is increasing. The Security
Council should consider the best ways to prevent and
eliminate child abductions in armed conflict.
One of the purposes of child abduction is to recruit
child soldiers. In that regard, the success of the Children,
Not Soldiers campaign is of considerable significance.
We welcome the progress made, such as the
successful use of the age verification scheme that Chad
has already used in approximately 3,800 of its military
units, in cooperation with United Nations agencies.
Over the past six months, since the last open debate
(see S/PV.7129), the Government of Japan has provided
more than $1 million to the Central African Republic,
the Islamic Republic of Mauritania and South Sudan for
children in need of protection, including psychosocial
support.
In order to achieve the goal of the campaign by 2016,
its agenda has to be reinforced. The age verification
procedure must be established universally, and those
who violate it must be sanctioned. While the campaign
14-52810

S/PV.7259

is applicable only to Government military forces, the
Security Council should begin to consider how the fruits
of the campaign could be diverted to non-governmental
military groups, given that they make up the majority
of perpetrators.
Lastly, a main objective of United Nations
peacekeeping operations is to protect civilians in
conflict and post-conflict situations. Children are the
most vulnerable in such situations. Yet we still of hear
cases in which United Nations peacekeepers violate
the rights of children. United Nations peacekeeping
operations should be a model for safeguarding our
children. We, the troop contributing countries, should
recognize our responsibility to train our personnel at
home so that they will not abuse children in the course
of their duties, but protect them.
In conclusion, we should be reminded that abduction
is one of the six most grave violations against children.
Yet that subject has not attracted adequate attention in
the Security Council. It is not recognized as a trigger in
the annex of the Secretary-General’s report, and is not
subject to the monitoring and reporting mechanism. It
is high time to think anew on this matter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I wish to thank the
United States delegation for convening this open debate
on children and armed conflict, an issue to which
Portugal attaches great importance.
I thank today’s briefers for their presentations. I
would particularly like to take this opportunity to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict for her briefing and
to commend her tireless efforts in contributing to the
advancement of the agenda on children and armed
conflict.
Portugal fully supports the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign with a view to ending the scourge of the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflicts
by 2016, both by Governments and non-State actors.
Much has been done, and we value the significant
steps taken to prevent recruitment and to end the use
of children by armed forces and groups. Action plans
have proved to be excellent tools to engage with armed
forces and organized armed groups. However, political
commitment per se is not enough. Compliance is also
required.

53/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

The Council adopted resolution 1261 (1999), its
first resolution on children and armed conflict, 15 years
ago, recognizing that this issue has serious implications
for international peace and security. We are fully
convinced that the issue of children and armed conflict
has serious implications for international peace and
security, and we believe that the protection of children
in such situations requires the commitment of the
international community as a whole.
Despite the significant progress made in advancing
the agenda with the adoption of a number of resolutions
and the creation of mechanisms to better address
the issue, the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/339), presented in the Chamber today, is blunt
in describing the appalling reality of children affected
by conflicts and as one of the main victims of the
changing nature of warfare and related human rights
violations and abuses, who bear the impact of the use of
explosives, air strikes and terror tactics.
It is extremely worrying that the Secretary-General
notes that the situation has deteriorated in a number of
countries, including in the Central African Republic,
South Sudan, Syria and northern Nigeria. The abduction
of more than 200 schoolgirls by Boko Haram in Nigeria
in April is an appalling incident that serves to stress the
need to continue to address the issue of children and
armed conflict.
In recent years, the Security Council has consistently
underscored the need to hold accountable persistent
perpetrators of grave violations against children. We
hope that, in the near future, all perpetrators of such
grave violations, including the abduction of children
and the denial of humanitarian access, will be listed in
the annexes to the Secretary-General’s reports.
The normative framework for the protection of
children in situations of armed conflict must continue.
Portugal believes that the Council should continue to
address situations of concern, while striving to find the
best way to promote the protection of children affected
by armed conflict.
We are gravely concerned about the widespread
and intentional attacks against schools, teachers
and students as an instrument of war. Schools and
education facilities are now part of the battlefield, as
they are systematically being used as bases, barracks,
weapon caches, detention centres and even torture
chambers by regular armed forces and by armed
non-State opposition groups. Education infrastructure

54/77

08/09/2014

has become a strategic target of attack, putting children
and teachers at risk and denying children their right to
education. That pattern needs to be reversed.
Against that backdrop, Portugal supports the
development of the Lucens Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict, which we have co-sponsored, as a
concrete tool to protect educational facilities and limit
the impact of conflict on students’ safety and their right
to education.
Those who abuse children in times of conflict
cannot go unpunished. The need to tackle impunity
regarding persistent perpetrators, already clearly
identified, should certainly guide our work in the near
future. We are referring to individuals or entities that
have been identified as persistent perpetrators for five
years or more, most of which are non-State actors.
The Council needs to address those difficult cases
and ensure that such individuals are accounted for and
sanctioned. If that is not done, the Council’s credibility
will be at stake.
The International Criminal Court continues to play
a fundamental deterrent role, one complementary to the
roles of tribunals at national and international levels, by
holding perpetrators accountable and by investigating
and prosecuting those responsible for committing
atrocities against children.
With regard to peacekeeping operations, Portugal
would like to emphasize the importance of including
child-protection advisers in the mandates of missions. In
addition to child-protection advisers, it is fundamental
to ensure appropriate predeployment training in child
protection for peacekeepers and to provide effective
screening of peacekeepers to ensure that individuals
who have committed grave violations against children
do not serve the United Nations. United Nations
peacekeepers are the face of the Organization on the
ground and must reflect the values of respect and the
protection of human rights.
The harmful and widespread impact of armed
conflict on children and its undeniable long-term
consequences for durable peace, security and
development are widely recognized. In 1996, Graça
Machel said,
“The impact of armed conflict on children
must be everyone’s concern and is everyone’s
responsibility” (A/51/306, para. 317).

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

It still is our responsibility to take collective action to
overcome this scourge and to prevent children from
being affected by conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Winid (Poland): At the outset, let me join
other delegations in congratulating the delegation of
the United States on assuming the presidency of the
Council for September and to thank for it for organizing
this important open debate.
Poland aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union.
We commend Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for her continuous work as
reflected in the reports on children and armed conflict.
Also, let me thank the organizers of the Children,
Not Soldiers campaign, which aims to eliminate child
recruitment by Government security forces by 2016.
It goes without saying that children are often the
ones to suffer most in the course of and after armed
conflicts. Growing up in an environment of hostility
has an immense impact on a child’s development and
future adult life. It reflects on one’s health, physical
integrity, education and social abilities, as well as the
advancement of one’s talents.
Although a lot has already been done to prevent
the engagement of children in armed conflicts, there
is still concern about persisting threats. The recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/339), presented
by Ms. Zerrougui, rightly highlights the worsening
situation in a number of countries where children are
severely victimized — sexually assaulted, hurt or even
killed — in attacks against schools, hospitals and other
civilian facilities. Often orphaned, they are frequently
deprived of health care and medical attention and
suffer from the denial or lack of humanitarian help
and assistance. We must also not forget that, in some
parts of the world, children are abducted or recruited
as soldiers.
Under such tragic circumstances, they become
both the victims of and the actors in armed conflicts.
Their recruitment occurs in a number of ways that are
often violent and cruel. However, in some instances
and for various social and economic reasons, they enter
military service voluntarily, simply to escape poverty
or to protect their local communities. In that context,

S/PV.7259

let me recall that resolution 2143 (2014) underscores the
importance of mainstreaming child protection issues
when undertaking security-sector reform, including
through age-assessment mechanisms to prevent
underage recruitment and through the establishment of
child-protection units in national security forces.
Poland, as the prime mover of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, adopted almost exactly 25 years ago,
does its utmost to raise awareness of children’s rights
and to ensure that the rights of children are respected
in our own country and internationally. By way of
example, I will simply mention our co-sponsorship of
resolutions 2068 (2012) and 2143 (2014) on children and
armed conflict.
In our opinion, it is of utmost importance that all
countries sign, ratify and effectively implement the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict
in order to preserve children’s dignity. Furthermore,
violators of those provisions should face international
accountability mechanisms, such as the International
Criminal Court. I hope that this open debate will
contribute to real action that will save children’s lives.
The President: I now
representative of Canada.

give

the

floor

the

Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
Allow me to congratulate the United States of America
for assuming the presidency of the Council during this
month.
(spoke in English)
We also wish to thank the United States for holding
this open debate and take this opportunity to reaffirm
our support for the work undertaken by the Security
Council to protect children in armed conflict.
(spoke in French)
The horrifying situations in Syria, Nigeria, South
Sudan and Iraq are brutal reminders of the actions
and violations being committed against children and
the need to take additional measures to protect them.
The rights and protection of children are priorities in
Canada’s foreign policy and development assistance.
Canada is a party to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and its first two Optional Protocols. Canada
recognizes and firmly supports the need to prevent the
recruitment and use of children in conflicts and the
need to work for the rehabilitation of children who have
been recruited and used in hostilities.

14-5281055/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

08/09/2014

Beyond the international framework for protecting
children in armed conflict, it is critical to ensure
the implementation of that protection. That is why
Canada consistently calls for the Security Council
to systematically impose sanctions and adopt
targeted measures to hold perpetrators accountable
for committing their depraved acts. We call on the
Security Council, the Secretary-General and the
Special Representative to continue to consider ways to
increase pressure on those individuals who persist in
committing violations and to ensure compliance with
international obligations.

ethnic origin, wealth quintile and other factors. That, in
turn, would contribute to establishing age-verification
procedures for military recruitment. Informal systems
include active participation by families, communities
and the children themselves in the creation and
fostering of protective environments that contribute to
preventing recruitment and other violations. Capacitybuilding is an essential element of the protection of
children. Experience has shown that the protection of
children in conflict situations is complex and requires
the application of diverse and specialized medical,
psychological and social skills and knowledge.

(spoke in English)

(spoke in English)

One such example is the Security Council’s
monitoring and reporting mechanism. In the light of
the mass kidnapping of schoolgirls in Nigeria by Boko
Haram, we encourage the Secretary-General to add
abductions as a formal trigger for the monitoring and
reporting mechanism on children in armed conflict and
for the listing of the armed groups involved.

We recognize that actions speak louder than words.
Canada has therefore made concrete contributions
to efforts to protect children in situations of armed
conflict. Since 2008, Canada has contributed over
$27 million to initiatives relating to the prevention of
the recruitment and demobilization of child soldiers. In
addition, we recently provided $10 million to UNICEF
to implement the monitoring and reporting mechanism
under resolution 1612 (2005). That project will improve
child protection in countries experiencing armed
conflict, including, among others, Afghanistan, the
Central African Republic, Chad, Colombia, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Sudan, South
Sudan and Syria.

Canada sees education as essential to security,
stability and development. Education is, in fact,
intertwined with the children and armed conflict
agenda. The military use and targeting of schools
deprives children of access to education, while putting
the lives of students and teachers at risk. It also
impedes the future of the country by preventing the
next generation from developing its full potential. We
deplore in the strongest terms the ongoing use of schools
by armed parties as bases, barracks, weapons caches
and detention centres, or for other military purposes.
In March, Canada co-sponsored resolution 2143 (2014),
which called for increased efforts to protect children
in armed conflict and, among other things, expressed
deep concern at the military use of schools and attacks
on schools.
(spoke in French)
We should also support effective predeployment
training in child protection for personnel involved in
field missions, including military and police personnel.
It is also crucial that such personnel be screened to
prevent individuals who have committed violations
against children from serving with the United Nations.
That goes to the heart of the United Nations mandate.
Canada is convinced that both formal and informal
child protection systems are important. Formal systems
include donor support for civic registration and vital
statistics, with data collection disaggregated by gender,
56/77

On 24 January, Prime Minister Harper announced
that an additional $50 million in humanitarian funding
will be allocated for education and child-protection
activities that support the No Lost Generation initiative.
With the support of the Government of Canada for that
initiative, it is expected that our partners will be able to
reach 660,000 children with protection and education
interventions to help restore hope to children affected
by the crisis in Syria. Let me assure you, Sir, that
Canada will continue to fight against the unspeakable
violations that threaten the safety, dignity and lives of
girls and boys in situations of armed conflict in every
corner of the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC).
I wish to begin by expressing my deep appreciation
to the United States delegation for convening this
critical open debate on children and armed conflict. We
14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

also express out thanks to the Secretary-General for his
latest report (S/2014/339).
Before proceeding further, I would like to just
mention how Islam teaches us to treat children. Like
all major religions and faiths, Islam sees children as
a blessing from God, and they must be received with
joy and gratitude. They are to be loved, nurtured and
safeguarded with great care. Islam accords children
certain rights that must be observed by their parents
and the community. Among the most sacred of these
rights are the right to life and the right to be educated
properly. These teachings resonate strongly in the
Charter of our organization, which calls for the creation
of conditions conducive to the sound upbringing of
children and the youth. Following these teachings, it
is thus deeply appalling to acknowledge that civilian
populations, in particular children, tend to bear the
heaviest consequences of armed conflicts.
It is in this context that I reiterate the OIC’s firm
opposition to violence as a way of settling disputes.
We repeat our consistent objection before the Council
over the deliberate targeting of and indiscriminate
or disproportionate attacks against civilians, in
particular children. The perpetrators of such violations
must be held accountable. It is pertinent to note that
the Secretary-General’s latest report contains the
opportune message that more must be undertaken at
all levels of cooperation to ease the impact of armed
conflict on children. It should be noted, however, that
global efforts to eradicate violence against children in
times of armed conflict rest upon our ability to settle
conflicts in an expeditious and peaceful manner.
The OIC resolves to continue to play an important
role, together with the international community, in
the prevention and resolution of conflicts. Guided by
its own charter, the OIC stands ready to strengthen
its partnership and to enhance cooperation with the
United Nations, aimed at identifying early warnings
for potential conflicts and to respond effectively to
such identified situations. On its part, the OIC has
made persistent efforts for the maintenance of peace
and security, as well as conflict prevention and conflict
resolution, in its member States. In that respect, we
are pleased to mention our close cooperation with
the United Nations in the efforts to restore peace and
security in such places as Somalia, Afghanistan and the
Sudan.
In 2013, the OIC opened a peace, security
and mediation unit with a view to increasing the

S/PV.7259

organization’s capacity to deal with the increasingly
challenging issues of peace and security. The OIC is
grateful to note that this unit was set up with United
Nations assistance. In the context of the promotion
and protection of human rights, the OIC is steadfastly
committed in its support for its Independent Permanent
Human Rights Commission. That support is an
unequivocal signal of our determination to consolidate
the political, security, economic, social and cultural
concerns of our members.
As the Security Council plays an instrumental
role in ensuring States’ compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law, it should step up
its efforts to ensure accountability for violations. It
is clear that observing the principle of accountability
strengthens the protection of children in armed conflict,
as it deters the occurrence and recurrence of violations
and crime.
The OIC therefore reiterates its call on the Security
Council to uphold its responsibilities pertaining to
the children victimized by the Israeli occupation in
Palestine. The Secretary-General’s report describes
how Palestinian children continue to be affected by the
prevailing military occupation. Similar accounts and
reports issued by various United Nations mechanisms,
especially the Human Rights Council, continue to
document serious violations of the human rights
of Palestinian children. As witnessed by the entire
world during Israel’s recent military aggression in
Gaza, the brutality that was inflicted on families,
including children playing in the open, was selfevident. That demands robust international attention,
accountability and political resolve. The OIC considers
these highly serious incidents to be part of a failure
of the international community to ensure the broader
protection of civilians, including children, in armed
conflict.
International conflict resolution depends primarily
on the ability of the Council to fulfil its responsibilities,
as mandated by the Charter of the United Nations. The
OIC therefore reiterates its call on the Security Council
to act decisively on situations posing a threat or already
impinging on international peace and security. It is
incumbent upon us and the Council to ensure that the
basic rights of children are fulfilled. That also means
that there must be zero tolerance for children being
recruited or dragged into warfare or killed and maimed
in hostilities. It is high time that the international
community made the protection of children in armed

14-5281057/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

conflict a priority issue for every Government and all
multilateral organizations. The OIC is committed to
this challenge.
I shall end my statement by re-emphasizing the
importance and urgency for all countries, in concert
with the Security Council and relevant United Nations
entities, to fully uphold the protection of children and
their rights in armed conflict. Since the preferred
approach is to ensure that violence does not occur in the
first place, the peaceful settlement of disputes must be
enforced consistently in accordance with the Charter,
as well as established international human rights and
humanitarian law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate, which bears witness to your
country’s commitment to and ongoing focus on this
topic.
I wish to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui for her briefing,
dedication and passion in carrying out her mandate,
as well as Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Ms. Yoka Brandt and
Mr. Forest Whitaker for their briefings. I would also
like to thank Ms. Uwiringiyimana for her very moving
and courageous testimony.
Children are often doubly victimized in armed
conflict because of their vulnerability. On the one
hand, they are the first victims of violence, in particular
sexual violence, and their most basic rights are violated;
on the other, they are recruited by parties to conflict
as child soldiers, in blatant violation of international
law. That is why this debate is particularly important in
mobilizing the international community to strengthen
the existing legal instruments for the protection of
children. Through its consistent commitment, the
Council has clearly demonstrated that combating
violence and abuse against children in armed conflict
is not only a moral and humanitarian obligation, but an
imperative for international peace and security.
Morocco welcomes the commitments made by
various States parties to the conflict to ensure the
protection of children’s rights, the progress achieved in
liberating child soldiers from the ranks of armed forces
or groups, and the growing number of national action
plans on this topic that have been signed or are being
negotiated.

58/77

08/09/2014

Morocco also welcomes the efforts undertaken
in the framework of the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign launched by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and UNICEF. My delegation
hopes that initiative will achieve its goal of halting
the recruitment of children by 2016 and of supporting
national initiatives in this area.
Morocco condemns all forms of violence against
children, including their use as shields at stockpiles or
barracks, taking them as hostages, or their recruitment
in refugee camps. Morocco also condemns attacks
on schools and hospitals and the use of such sites for
military ends.
Although today’s debate has the merit of galvanizing
all stakeholders in the international community, it is
unfortunate to note that efforts made until now to end
children’s participation in armed conflict have fallen
short. In fact, the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict, child trafficking and their
exploitation in prostitution and pornography, various
Security Council resolutions and the Paris Principles
have been unable to achieve their noble goals. That
is why my delegation believes that the efforts of the
international community to deal effectively with this
problem would benefit from the following multifaceted
approach.
First, the approach should be global and
implemented with an exhaustive understanding of
the root and structural causes of the problem, such as
poverty, discrimination, social exclusion and social and
economic inequality.
Secondly, it should be a strategic approach that
deals not only with current conflict situations but
also emphasizes prevention, in particular by allowing
democracy and human rights, the strengthening of
good governance and the promotion of sustainable
development to take root.
Thirdly, the approach should be cross-cutting and
involve all stakeholders, in particular Governments,
civil society, non-governmental organizations and
organizations protecting human rights.
Fourthly, it should be flexible and take into account
the multifaceted and evolving nature of armed conflicts,
as well as the specificities of each conflict.
Lastly, the approach must be practical and combe
both incentives and specific measures, in particular to

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

deal with acts of reprisals and to plan for redress when
violations are committed, as well as for reintegrating
child soldiers into society in the framework of
appropriate national reconciliation processes.
In parallel, national strategies for the protection of
children continue to depend on the capacity-building of
Governments and on available material, financial and
human resources to allow such strategies to be longlasting. That is why it is important to rapidly respond
to the appeal of the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2014/339), which calls upon donors to meet the
funding needs for the implementation of action plans
and national programmes.
The Kingdom of Morocco was one of the first
countries to sign and ratify the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. We have
also complied with our obligations under the Paris
document with regard to this issue. Morocco’s legal
arsenal regulating enlistment and military recruitment
is in full conformity with international law. It prohibits
all military integration under the age of 18 and stipulates
measures to support young soldiers in all the training
process and integration.
As was pointed out by Ms. Zerrougui this morning
in her statement, the ongoing nature and increasing
number of children recruited in armed conflict, in
particular by armed jihadist groups, including the
Islamic State in Syria and Iraq, as well as the kidnapping
of dozens of girls by the Boko Haram terrorist group,
challenge us all and calls for coordinated efforts by the
international community.
Resolute action must be urgently taken to ensure
accountability for all of those who continue to flout
international law and child-protection standards.
Coordinating these efforts among various parties in
the United Nations system is a guarantee of efficiency
and success. However, the primary responsibility is
borne first and foremost by the parties to the conflict,
who must comply with their internationals obligations
under Security Council resolutions and the relevant
international conventions.
In conclusion, it is time that crimes against
children in armed conflict be considered crimes
against humanit. For children are the future of their
respective countries — something that the international
community has a responsibility to protect.

S/PV.7259

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to express Uruguay’s gratitude to the Permanent
Mission of the United State of America for holding this
open debate on children and armed conflict. We would
also like to wish that delegation every success in its
presidency of the Security Council. Uruguay would
also like to thank the Secretary-General and to express
its gratitude for the work of his Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui.
We reiterate to her our country’s full support for her
mission. Uruguay would also like to underscore the
role of the Executive Director of UNICEF, whose joint
efforts with Ms. Zerrougui is extremely important to
ending child recruitment by security forces or armed
groups by 2016.
During the Council’s previous debate on 7 March
(see S/PV.7129), organized by the presidency of
Luxembourg, Uruguay stated its alarm and repulsion at
the impact of armed conflicts on children. Even more
shocking is the confirmed increase of serious violations
of the rights of children. In that regard, Uruguay would
like to thank Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report of 15 May (S/2014/339). We urge countries to
fulfil the recommendations set out in paragraph 4 of
the report, in particular the call to Member States that
have not done so to sign and ratify the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its three Optional Protocols.
Many children, whose number is both alarming
and increasing, are day after day the targets of killings,
sexual violence, rape and recruitment by armies or
armed groups. Added to that are the unacceptable
attacks on schools and the deliberate use of schools for
military purposes, which puts the life and security of
children and their right to education in danger. Even
worse is the confirmation that most children who take
part in armed conflicts are recruited by the very States
of which those children are nationals.
The topic that we are discussing is also on the
agenda of the General Assembly, where my country
tries to play an active role every year. Notwithstanding
that, Uruguay would like to underscore the role that the
Security Council has been playing through the adoption
of various resolutions with the goal of determining
and implementing concrete action to end the illegal
recruitment and exploitation of children in areas of
armed conflict.

14-5281059/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

It is important to remember, just as in the previous
open debate on this topic, that thanks to the action plans
that arose from the mandate of the Security Council
in this area, in the past 20 years or so thousands of
children have been released from exploitation that
tramples on the human dignity of each human being.
Uruguay would like to underscore once again the value
of resolution 2143 (2014), on the rights of children
during armed conflicts. In particular, we would like
to reiterate our deep concern at the lack of progress
in situations of armed conflict where parties continue
violating with impunity provisions of international law
that provide protection to children.
The Council emphasizes it grave concern in that
resolution, and it demands that the parties involved in
armed and armed groups to respect the norms set out in
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional
Protocols of 1977, as well as to refrain from using
schools for military purposes. My country considers
this aspect essential for respecting the rights of the
child enshrined in various instruments, in particular
in article 28 of the Convention on the Rights of Child,
which obliges States to respect their children’s right to
education.
It is also important to once again acknowledge the
contribution of the International Criminal Court with
regard to various actions on this topic, in particular by
classifying as war crimes those activities that lead to
sexual violence against children, or the recruitment
or isolation of minors under 15 years, or their use in
hostilities or armed conflicts. Other international
tribunals that have assumed the responsibility to protect
children under their purview merit broader recognition.
Uruguay considers it essential that we support
efforts to fight impunity for all who are responsible
for serious violations against children and urges the
Security Council to refer cases of such violations to the
International Criminal Court. Uruguay also believes
that cooperation with national and international courts
is a basic and essential part of efforts to ensure that
such cases are tried effectively.
Another crucial aspect is ensuring that due
attention is given to the effective reintegration of
children who have been linked to armed groups. In
that regard, effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes are vital to enabling these
children to reintegrate sustainably and successfully
into society.

60/77

08/09/2014

In conclusion, my delegation would like to repeat
what we said in the previous debate on this subject on
7 March (see S/PV.7129), which is that reintegrating
children into society also involves considering situations
where children have been accused of committing
crimes during their enforced association with armed
groups. Children in such situations should above all be
considered victims themselves, and should be treated
as such under international law in the framework
of a judicial system that makes their complete social
rehabilitation possible.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Anjo (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate the United States of America
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and to thank the delegation for
its work in organizing the Security Council activities
designed to coincide with the start of the sixty-ninth
session of the General Assembly. We are also grateful
to the delegation of the United Kingdom for its work
in leading the Council last month. My delegation also
commends the Secretary-General’s report submitted
to the Council on children and armed conflict for the
period from January to December 2013 (S/2014/339)
and the important role played by the Office of the
Secretary-General in the issue of children and armed
conflict and in monitoring children’s situations and
their protection.
Iraq is confronting enormous challenges resulting
from the vicious attacks aimed at crippling its transition
to democracy and our Government’s efforts to establish
order and stability throughout the country, and
derailing Iraq’s ability to enjoy its economic, social and
political human rights. At this point, we would like to
comment on the section on Iraq in the report. We agree
with the observation in paragraph 70 on the increase
in the number of security incidents in 2013. These are
the result of terrorist organizations’ direct targeting of
residential areas where there are markets, schools and
hospitals, killing and injuring thousands of innocent
civilians, including children. Neither Al-Qaida nor the
Islamic State in Iraq has hesitated to cold-bloodedly
declare their responsibility for these attacks.
Regarding paragraph 71 of the report, on the
association of children with armed groups, we would
like to point out that this phenomenon contravenes
our military service law, which prohibits military

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

service for those under 18. My Government is also
continuing to take every possible measure to prevent
the recruitment of children by armed groups, through
efforts to eliminate all circumstances that might be
conducive to such recruitment. In recent years many
armed groups using terrorism to achieve their goals
have worked to recruit scores of children and exploit
their innocence by using them to plant explosives or
assist others in doing so. The Iraqi Government has
taken various steps to combat such acts, including
developing programmes and enacting legislation aimed
at preventing the exploitation of children, and providing
the financial resources needed for this. Iraq’s penal code
and counter-terrorism laws have established basic rules
designed to punish those recruiting anyone, including
children, into such criminal terrorist activities.
The Government of Iraq has continued to protect
its citizens in general, and in particular to address the
negative effects of terrorism on children and provide
them with protection from its attacks. We have worked
to encourage a culture that promotes and protects
human rights, based on international standards. Within
the framework of the United Nations, the Government
is working relentlessly to draft and endorse resolutions
on counter-terrorism, as well as working with its
international partners on providing security to the
Iraqi people and protecting our children from terrorist
attacks.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to thank the United States delegation for convening
this open debate to further consider the role of the
Security Council in the issue of children and armed
conflict. I would also like to express our appreciation
to all of today’s briefers.
As one of the first countries to have signed and
ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child (CRC) on the involvement of
children in armed conflict, Bosnia and Herzegovina is
particularly aware of this issue. In that regard, we call
on all Member States that have not yet done so to sign
and ratify the CRC and its Optional Protocol. Despite
all the steps we have taken at various levels, including
through international law and human rights law,
children are still suffering from the horrors of war. As
the most vulnerable group of all, they are often subject
to rape, sexual violence and abduction. They continue

S/PV.7259

to be recruited, killed, maimed and deprived of their
right to education and health care. Their involvement in
armed conflict, including when violence is perpetrated
against them, constitutes a serious violation of human
rights.
We are deeply concerned about the grave violations
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/339)
and reaffirm that it is the State’s primary responsibility
to provide protection and relief to all children affected
by armed conflict. All parties to conflicts should
comply fully with international law in order to protect
the civilian population. Moreover, the protection of
children in situations of armed conflict should be seen
as a priority that is above politics. We reiterate that both
gradual and more vigorous measures should be directed
against groups and individuals who persistently
commit serious violations against children. In order to
end impunity for violations against children, Member
States must uphold existing international standards
and put into practice their obligations through national
legislative systems. Perpetrators must be brought to
justice.
Protecting children in armed conflict is one of the
duties of the United Nations. The series of relevant
Security Council resolutions demand protection for
children in armed conflict. There have been significant
improvements by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations aimed at better ensuring the protection
of children in conflict zones. We therefore call upon
the Council to continue to support the children and
armed conflict agenda by strengthening provisions
for the protection of children in all relevant mandates
of United Nations peacekeeping, special political and
peacebuilding missions, including the deployment of
child protection advisers. We also need to ensure that
peacekeepers are of the highest quality and that they
uphold the highest standards.
Preventing crimes against children is an important
component of the set of measures developed to promote
post-conflict settlement and recovery. In accordance
with the relevant provisions of Security Council
resolutions, all parties concerned need to ensure that
child protection provisions are integrated into all peace
negotiations and peace agreements. Children affected
by armed conflict must be a priority in the post-conflict
recovery and reconstruction process. They are our
future. Reintegrating such children into communities
is often a difficult task, especially for domestic and

14-5281061/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

international stakeholders dealing in multifaceted
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations.
To resolve such complex issues, there is a need for
efficient coordination among the different actors on the
ground. Particular attention should be given to refugee
and displaced children, children with disabilities and
those who have been subjected to sexual violence.
In addition, education is an essential tool for the
advancement of societies. Therefore, in times of conflict
as well as in post-conflict periods, all steps should be
taken to safeguard the right of the child to education.
We believe that cooperation and exchanges of
information between the Council’s Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and relevant sanctions committees
should be improved. We reiterate the importance of
the Children, Not Soldiers campaign in preventing and
putting an end to the recruitment and use of children by
Government armed forces in conflict. Accordingly, we
also recognize the important contribution of regional
and subregional organizations to conflict prevention,
mediation and peace support operations.
Finally, I would like to reiterate that conflict
prevention is a starting point or prerequisite for
sustainable peace, development and respect for all
human rights. We firmly believe that the Security
Council should remain committed in its determination
to ensure the full implementation of and respect for its
resolutions on this issue. The protection of children
needs to be on the top of any future review agenda for
the sake of our own future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
As the text of my statement will be distributed, I will
deliver a summary of it, highlighting the most salient
points.
First, I would like to express Spain’s gratitude for
the organization of this debate.
Secondly, I would like to say that Spain fully aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the observer of
the European Union and that we thank the SecretaryGeneral for his annual report (S/2014/339) and the
Special Representative for the magnificent job she has
done.

62/77

08/09/2014

I believe we all know that Spain attaches
great importance to the efforts of the international
community to put an end to the scourge of the violations
of children’s rights in armed conflicts. We therefore
wholeheartedly support the incredibly important and
interesting Children, Not Soldiers campaign initiated
by the representative of Luxembourg. We are supporting
it with a substantial financial contribution. Without
neglecting the importance that should be placed on
the work done with armed groups, it is crucial that we
not forget the growing prominence of non-State armed
groups, and the campaign’s objective therefore seems
accurate and realistic.
There are positive and negative elements to the
current situation. In terms of positive elements, we note
with satisfaction that public statements have been made
by the leaders of certain armed groups, who have issued
orders prohibiting the recruitment of children. We
believe that shows that the approach we have adopted
is the right one.
Spain agrees with and supports all the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report. In particular, we share the view that the
protection of the children must be mainstreamed from
the beginning in every action undertaken by the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. It is crucial that that be duly reflected in the
mandates and that we take the necessary measures
to provide appropriate training to peacekeeping
operations for the protection of children. Among the
positive elements, we would also welcome the actions
undertaken by regional and subregional organizations
in this area. We believe it is important to highlight the
work that such organizations do on the ground.
However, we must not deceive ourselves. There
are still negative elements. Recent armed conflicts
have demonstrated the devastating effect of conflict
on children. The attacks on schools and hospitals,
the images of children killed or maimed as a result
of attacks against civilian targets and the continued
use of explosive devices in populated areas are tragic
events that we must put a stop to. Accordingly, Spain
calls on all parties to conflict to fully comply with the
provisions of resolution 2143 (2014) and to cease attacks
on schools and desist from their indiscriminate use for
military purposes. Out of the 3 million refugees from
the crisis in Syria, over 1 million are children. I believe
that proves a point.

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

Spain is currently active in two crises that have
particularly relevant implications for children in armed
conflict: the Central African Republic and Mali. As a
signatory to the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict of 2000 and to the Paris
Commitments, Spain has always ensured that its troops
deployed in both countries receive appropriate training
on the matter.
To conclude, the fight against impunity continues
to be a key and crucial element. I would like to reiterate
that the primary guarantors of children’s safety and
well-being in conflict are Member States themselves,
who have the obligation and responsibility to protect
their own citizens, prosecute perpetrators and care for
victims.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely meeting on children and armed
conflict and for the United States’ able leadership of
the Council this month. I would like to thank Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, and her
Office for their tireless efforts towards mitigating the
devastating impact of war on children, and the other
speakers for their statements.
Afghanistan aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Indonesia on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Children around the world suffer enormously
as a result of war, violence and armed conflict. This
devastating reality is even more widespread today due
to the upsurge of bloody conflict and brutal extremism
in Iraq, Gaza and South Sudan and around the world. In
Afghanistan, children have suffered immeasurably as
a result of over 30 years of war. Their childhoods have
been compromised and characterized by persistent
violence, killing and loss. Today, resurgent conflict
and pernicious extremism continue to cause children
tremendous suffering. They are caught in the crossfire
of military operations, explosions of improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) and deadly suicide attacks.
They are exploited by terrorists who force them to
serve as combatants, suicide attackers, manufacturers
and planters of IEDs, and even sex slaves.
The enemies of Afghanistan, in flagrant violation of
international law, deny Afghan children — particularly
14-52810

S/PV.7259

girls — their fundamental right to education. The
Taliban threaten girls and their teachers with acid
attacks, killings, injury and abduction to prevent them
from attending school. Terrorist groups attack schools,
plant IEDs inside school premises, and detonate IEDs
and suicide bombs close by. In 2013, schools were
attacked in at least 73 such incidents, resulting in the
deaths and injuries of dozens of children. In parts of
the country, the fragile security situation has forced
the closure of hundreds of schools, affecting 115,000
children in 2013 alone.
The Government of Afghanistan deplores the use
of children in war and affirms that child recruitment
is unacceptable in all cases. It is tragic that Afghan
children attempt to join the national and local police
and army, and that they are compelled to lie about
their age in order to serve and earn money for their
families. Noting this terrible reality, my Government
has established a series of policies and practices aimed
at mitigating child recruitment.
In 2010, Afghanistan launched an inter-ministerial
steering committee on children and armed conflict. In
2011, the committee developed a national action plan
to end and prevent the recruitment of children into the
Afghan National Security Forces. Since then, among
other reforms, my Government has established child
protection units within the Afghan National Police
and Afghan local police recruitment centres; those in
the western region rejected 132 boys from voluntary
enlistment in 2013. High-level focal points have been
assigned to promote the protection of children within
the Afghan National Police, the Afghan local police,
and the Afghan National Army. In addition, the
Government has pioneered age-verification procedures
in Heart, in the western part of the country, and aims to
extend this good practice throughout the country and to
share similar good practices with developing countries
elsewhere in the world.
On 1 August, Afghanistan reaffirmed its commitment
to ending child recruitment into the Afghan security
forces by endorsing a road map towards compliance,
with the support of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary General for Children
and Armed Conflict, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, and UNICEF. My Government
looks forward to continuing its efforts to implement the
national action plan and uphold the commitments laid
out in the road map.

63/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

Afghanistan faces profound challenges in its fight
to find peace, but we are committed to doing our utmost
to end child recruitment and enhance child protection
in the country. We cannot do this alone; we call on
our international partners to maintain their support
in order to help us achieve our goals. As Afghanistan
looks towards a bright new future with the conclusion
of the elections process, we hope to strive towards
an Afghanistan in which all children are able to live
in freedom and in peace, and the horrors of war and
violence are but distant facts of history.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand thanks
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui, Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and
Ms. Brandt of UNICEF for their particular presentations.
We commend Sandra Uwiringiyimana for so bravely
sharing her experiences; and we acknowledge Forest
Whitaker’s very real contribution to the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign.
The report of the Secretary-General before us
(S/2014/339) makes solemn and disturbing reading.
Globally, armed conflicts continue to take a significant,
disproportionate and grave toll on children; that should
be of alarming concern to every single United Nations
Member State. New Zealand therefore urges State
and non-State actors to stop violations and to hold
perpetrators to account. We remain concerned by the
number of persistent perpetrators, and repeat our call
for the Secretary-General’s annual report to detail how
long each persistent perpetrator has appeared on the
list.
There has been some good progress towards ending
the recruitment and use of children in armed conflict.
We commend the work of the Special Representative’s
Office and other partners, and alongside Morocco we
acknowledge those Governments and non-State actors
that are progressing action plans to end that practice.
Nonetheless, engagement with non-State actors must be
intensified further, given that they are the majority of
those recruiting and using children in armed conflict.
We welcome the strengthening of partnerships
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, but more work remains to be done there
as well. Effective action to eliminate violations against
children must start at the national level. We must give
priority to developing a culture that deplores the direct

64/77

08/09/2014

involvement of children in conflict, and condemns all
violations against children. The United Nations itself
must foster that culture, particularly on the front line.
As a first step, New Zealand calls for mandatory child
protection training for all United Nations peacekeepers
that will stay with them throughout their military
service and should be a key influence on culture and
attitudes after they return home.
New Zealand condemns the intentional targeting
and military use of schools, teachers and students. It
is unacceptable that any child should be denied his
or her right to education, and no family should ever
fear sending its child to school. Likewise, hospitals
and medical facilities must not be targeted or used
for military purposes. New Zealand’s Defence Force
operates under a structured framework around the use
of schools, all underpinned by core principles, including
the protection of civilians and children, and respect for
children’s rights to education.
New Zealand endorses the development of the
Lucens Guidelines and encourages other States do
likewise. We stress the need to address violations
and abuses against children in all mediation efforts
and peace agreements. Mandates for all relevant
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
should include robust child protection provisions, and
child protection advisers should be deployed to any
conflict that severely impacts children.
Issues such as reintegration, as mentioned earlier by
the representative of Uruguay; forced suicide attacks,
as mentioned just a moment ago by the representative
of Afghanistan; abductions; casualty reporting; the
impact of explosive weapons with wide-area effect; and
overall accountability measures, among others, also
deserve attention and further consideration.
New Zealand is committed to the protection of
children affected by armed conflict. It will only be with
a shared sense of that duty that we will bring an end
to the unconscionable violations against those whom
Indonesia earlier described as a blessing from God.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Ms. Mogobe (Botswana): As this is the first
time Botswana addresses the Security Council since
your assumption of the presidency for the month of
September, Mr. President, allow me to join other
delegations in congratulating you on that and to

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

reiterate our standing pledge to constructively engage
with the Council on the work before it. We also wish to
thank the United States delegation for organizing this
important thematic debate.
Botswana attaches great importance to the
promotion and protection of the rights of children.
We therefore take this opportunity to reaffirm our
strong commitment to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, as well as to the full implementation of
our obligations under the Convention. We take those
obligations very seriously and continue to establish
national strategies and mechanisms aimed at the
promotion and protection of the rights of children.
As we have on previous occasions shared with
the Council, Botswana has and continues to prioritize
education, which we deem a fundamental constituent in
the promotion and protection of the rights of children. In
that regard, we have succeeded in achieving universal
access to education, and now strive to ensure its quality
and relevance.
We also continue to strive to implement other
programmes intended to safeguard the rights of
children in early childhood, including access to healthcare services and child-health interventions. However,
such interventions are still far from being enough. As
found in most parts of the developing world, there are
still significant challenges to those efforts, mainly due
to resource and capacity constraints.
While we continue to address the challenges with
the means currently available to us, we also look to the
elaboration and adoption of the post-2015 development
agenda to provide clear direction on the means of
implementation on issues relating to the protection
of children. We believe that those should also be
mainstreamed into international security operations.
We wish to acknowledge the support of the relevant
United Nations agencies, in particular UNICEF and
other partners, including civil society organizations and
the private sector, in their facilitation of our national
efforts to uphold both our international and domestic
responsibilities to advance, as well as defend, the safety,
security and general well-being of the world’s children.
Botswana welcomed the Secretary-General’s report
in May (S/2014/339) on children and armed conflict,
which highlights global trends on the impact of armed
conflict on children, as well as the main activities
and initiatives regarding the implementation of the

S/PV.7259

relevant Security Council resolutions, and other work
on children and armed conflict.
The Secretary-General’s report clearly illustrates
the negative and disproportionate impact of armed
conflict on children, and calls on all of us to play our
part to prevent grave violations against children and
to make violators accountable in order to expedite the
promotion and protection of the rights of children.
In that regard, we also wish to commend the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, who
earlier this year delivered a statement (see S/PV.7129
) to the Council detailing the efforts her Office has
embarked upon to better protect children in conflict
situations. The Special Representative reiterated her
intention to work towards child-free Government
armed forces by the end of 2016. To that end, the Office
of the Special Representative, together with UNICEF,
launched the Children, Not Soldiers campaign, which
aims to end and prevent the recruitment of children by
Government armed forces. Botswana fully supports
those initiatives and it hopes to see some results in the
near future.
Botswana welcomed the Security Council
endorsement of those intentions in its resolution 2143
(2014), and we wish to add our voice to the Council’s
support for the initiative and all the other work that the
United Nations carries out in that regard. We believe
that the international community as a whole has the
wherewithal to successfully end and prevent grave
violations against children in armed conflict. However,
action has to be timely and effected in a peaceful
manner and should conform to the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as to established
international humanitarian law.
I wish to conclude by reaffirming Botswana’s
commitment to the promotion and protection of the rights
of children and to ensuring the full implementation of
our national obligations under the Convention on the
Rights of the Child.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Kyaw Tin (Myanmar): First of all, my
delegation wishes to express its appreciation to the
United States presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this important open debate. Our thanks also
go to Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the

14-5281065/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, for
her briefing and her dedication to protecting children in
armed conflict. We also extend our appreciation to all
other briefers for their presentations.
My delegation shares the international community’s
concern over the suffering of a growing number of
children affected by armed conflicts unfolding in
many parts of the world. Myanmar therefore welcomes
the noble undertakings of the United Nations to end
grave violations against innocent children through a
cooperative approach, especially the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign.
We also thank the Secretary-General and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the annual report (S/2014/339) describing global
trends in the impact of armed conflict on children.
With regard to the assessment of Myanmar, we feel
that it needs greater balance, as it mainly focuses on
reported isolated incidents of individual violations and
complaints received from various sources. It should have
provided adequate space for the response taken by the
country concerned to those complaints. As the report’s
coverage is for 2013, some of the its contents have been
overtaken by the recent positive developments in the
country.
In Myanmar, we have a long-standing, sound legal
basis and directives that prohibit forced conscription, as
well as the recruitment of minors under 18. Yet, in the
past, there have been unfortunate incidents of minors
finding their way into military service for various
reasons, including a lack of proper documents to verify
age and weaknesses in recruitment procedures, minors’
own relationship problems and the lack of employment
opportunities in rural areas.
But Myanmar today is different. Those issues are
being addressed more seriously and are being rectified.
Soon after embarking on the democratic transition in
2011, Myanmar took bold steps to address the issue
with strong commitment by signing a plan of action.
Myanmar is one of the few countries that is making
important progress in implementing its plan of action,
as highlighted by the Special Representative in her
statement this morning. I thank her for that. Among
the concrete actions taken are the establishment of a
complaint mechanism, a public awareness-raising
campaign against child recruitment, including erecting
billboards across the nation. Human rights education
training for trainers has been organized for senior-level

66/77

08/09/2014

military officials. The number of complaints, which
include both factual complaints and some fabricated
ones, has of course risen owing to the rising public
awareness and greater media freedom. Those who
commit underage recruitment are punished according
to the law. Since the launching of the action plan,
legal action has been taken against a total of 229
military personnel, including 40 officers, for wrongful
recruitment of underage individuals into the military.
The Myanmar Government army is fully committed
to preventing underage recruitment and has indicated its
firm determination to finalize the full implementation
of the action plan during the six-month extension period
in order to be delisted from the report of the SecretaryGeneral. To that end, Myanmar’s committee to prevent
underage recruitment in the military is meeting more
frequently every month with the country task force on
monitoring and reporting of grave violations of child
rights in armed conflict. The list of suspected recruits
received from the complaint mechanism is being
jointly verified fortnightly. That led to the release, on
1 August, of another group of 91 underage soldiers
from the military services, bringing the total number
of discharged underage recruits to 363 since the launch
of the action plan. Even before the signing of the
action plan, 597 underage soldiers had been released
since 2004 through our own voluntary verification
procedures.
Myanmar has taken many other tangible steps
this year to prevent underage recruitment. Access for
monitoring visits is now granted for visits not only
to Government armed forces, but also border guard
forces. To prevent underage recruitment, infantry
units are no longer allowed to recruit directly. Only
recruitment centres are tasked with recruitment duties.
Procedures for proper recruitment have also been
strengthened and improved by introducing new layers
of scrutiny. More than 3,000 seminars and lectures on
the prevention and protection of children in conflict
have already been conducted for military personnel
throughout the country. The controversial directive
exempting matriculated students over the age of 16
from recruitment to non-combat training has also been
abolished, as recommended by the Security Council
Working Group.
One of the major developments contributing to
our efforts to protect children in conflict has been the
unprecedented progress of the Government’s peace
negotiation process to end the six decades-long ethnic

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

conflict. A nationwide ceasefire agreement is now
within arm’s reach. The return of peace and stability
to every corner of the country augurs well for the
Government’s efforts to achieve rural development, as
well as for the efforts to protect children in areas of
conflict.
Myanmar believes that enhanced cooperation
through a clear work plan between the country task force
on monitoring and reporting of grave violations of child
rights in armed conflict and the Government armed
forces will eventually pave the way for its delisting
by the Office of the Special Representative. We are
therefore prepared to collaborate with the country task
force on monitoring and reporting of grave violations
of child rights in armed conflict and the Office of
the Special Representative to review the progress on
the implementation of the action plan and to identify
remaining key areas requiring further progress for full
compliance and delisting. Our aim is to reach that goal
even before the targeted date set by the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign. We are also hopeful that our serious
effort to address the issue will receive encouragement,
fair assessment and an equally positive response from
the United Nations. Through our collective efforts, we
can achieve our shared goal of making our Government
armed forces free of underage recruits before 2016.
Such an achievement will also serve as a good example
for the remaining non-State actors to follow.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Somalia.
Mr. Kullane (Somalia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on children and armed
conflict.
I would like first of all to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Hervé Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy Executive Director of
UNICEF, and Mr. Forest Whitaker, UNESCO Special
Envoy for Peace and Reconciliation, as well as our sister
Sandra Unwiringiyimana, for all their prior remarks.
The Somali Federal Government commends the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict for all her efforts. We
also commend the resilient system of child protection
established by the Security Council, which is now
being implemented in Somalia through the Somali
Federal Government. Somalia is firmly committed

S/PV.7259

to the protection of children in armed conflict. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
recently visited Somalia and met with the President,
His Excellency Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, and with
the Prime Minister of Somalia. The President renewed
Somalia’s commitment to taking concrete steps to
move forward on the implementation of the two action
plans signed in 2012 to end the recruitment and use of
children, as well as to end their killing and maiming,
by armed forces. The Somali Federal Government
also strongly reiterates its commitment to achieve the
objectives of the Children, Not Soldiers campaign and
to take all concrete measures to prevent and end child
recruitment by all forces in Somalia. We also reaffirm
Somalia’s intention to be the next campaign country to
be delisted.
At the national level, the laws governing the armed
forces, the police and the security services categorically
prohibit the recruitment of children to their ranks.
The ongoing political, constitutional and security
sector reform process offers unique opportunities to
join efforts and marks significant progress towards
improving child welfare and protection after 25 years of
conflict that has deeply affected the people of Somalia.
The Somali Federal Government welcomes the
support of the United Nations, in particular that of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and UNICEF, to Government institutions
aimed at facilitating implementation of the action plan
that has been signed.
Key steps taken towards compliance with the
action plan include the establishment in May of a
joint military-civilian child-protection unit within
the Ministry of Defence. The unit is charged with
coordinating the activities of the action plan at the
headquarters level and with mainstreaming child
protection in policies and activities within the Somali
National Armed Forces and across Government
institutions. The Government of Somalia will soon
appoint focal points at the sector level. Furthermore, in
March, the Government adopted a standard operating
procedure for the handover of children separated from
armed groups. The Government welcomes the joint
screening of troops and new recruits. which we just
resumed and will continue. The mobile screening team,
comprised of representatives from the Somali National
Armed Forces, the United Nations, AMISOM and the
European training team, was established on 14 May and
has been conducting systematic screening of Somali

14-5281067/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

military units, including the Somali National Armed
Forces and the Somali police force. With respect to the
separation of children, as part of the activities set out
in the action plan, 250 Somali National Armed Forces
soldiers were screened at the Jazeera Training Camp
in Mogadishu on 29 June, In addition, some 900 new
recruits were screened. No child was found among the
soldiers.
Somalia is committed to strengthening child
protection by expediting the ratification process of the
Convention of the Rights of the Child and its Additional
Protocols concerning the involvement of children in
armed conflict. That policy will be implemented based
on the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of
the Child.
In our protracted civil war, we have learned that
the first casualties are hope, culture, values, principles,
dignity and integrity. Today Somalia stands for healing,
restoring and repairing all the sectors that have been
affected by the protracted civil war, so that our children,
who are our future, can learn from our mistakes. We
must provide them with an environment that allows
them to reach their potential and we must ensure that
they and we are not defined by the horrors of the civil
war, but by the speed with which we are overcoming
them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Pavlichenko (Ukraine): On behalf of the
delegation of Ukraine, I wish to thank you, Sir, for
organizing this important meeting. I would also
like to acknowledge Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and thank her for introducing the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/339) on that issue.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement made
earlier in this debate by the observer of the European
Union. My delegation would like to make the following
statement in its national capacity.
Ukraine strongly believes that the full and effective
implementation of the obligations undertaken by
Member States in accordance with the basic documents
in the field of the protection of children’s rights must
be a priority at the national, regional and international
levels in daily life, let alone armed conflicts. We fully
share the Secretary-General’s concern over the impact
that ongoing armed conflicts have on children. Although
not on a scale as large as in some other parts of the
68/77

08/09/2014

world, but no less dramatic, the issue of children and
armed conflict has, unfortunately, become pertinent to
Ukraine.
Since the beginning of the conflict provoked
by the Russian Federation — and more recently
Russia’s unconcealed military aggression against
Ukraine — there have been repeated abductions of
children by Russian-sponsored terrorist groups in
eastern Ukraine, including from orphanages and
medical facilities. They have been illegally moved
outside the country. Children are being killed and
wounded as a result of the activities of armed groups
active in eastern Ukraine. According to the latest report
of Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights on the human rights situation in
Ukraine, at least 23 children have been killed since
mid-April, while and at least 38 have been wounded in
eastern Ukraine.
The protection of civilians, particularly children
as the most vulnerable group, has been a top priority
to the Government of Ukraine while conducting
its anti-terrorist operations. The Government has
taken a number of practical steps in order to enhance
coordination in evacuation activities. A significant
number of children has already been evacuated from
the zone of the security operation. Several groups of
children who had been forcibly moved outside Ukraine
by illegal armed groups were successfully returned to
Ukraine and are now safe.
According to the latest official statistics, 35 per cent
of the the internally displaced persons (IDPs) registered
by the Government are children. In order to facilitate
their enrolment in schools, the Government of Ukraine
allowed school administrations to enrol IDP children
based only on a written request by their parents.
Authorities are also working to simplify the procedure
for children to obtain medical care. On 8 August, the
President of Ukraine signed a law that allows for the
transfer of State property to local authorities in order
to establish new kindergartens. The Government
of Ukraine is also addressing the need to provide
psychological assistance to children who have been
affected by the atmosphere of fear and intimidation.
In that light, we deem it necessary to increase
Member States’ commitments to the topic under
discussion today by acceding to, and effectively
implementing, the relevant universal and regional
instruments, in particular the Convention on the

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.
Ukraine commends the work of UNICEF and
other specialized United Nations agencies in the area
of children and armed conflict. We greatly appreciate
the assistance provided to us by the United Nations
and the relevant humanitarian organizations aimed
at addressing the adverse implications that Russian
aggression continues to inflict on children in Ukraine.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Montenegro.
Ms. Pajević (Montenegro): We thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. We also
thank today’s briefers for their valuable presentations.
Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier today by the observer of the European
Union. I would like, however, to highlight some points
of particular importance to my country.
As stated in the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral, armed conflict has continued to have a
disproportionate impact on children. It is worrisome
that
“More than 4,000 cases were documented by
the United Nations in 2013, but thousands more
children are estimated to have been recruited and
used.” (S/2014/339, para. 9)
We fully share the concerns presented in this report
with regard to grave violations against children.
The Security Council has indeed made substantial
progress in advancing the children and armed conflict
agenda, but more action is needed to protect the
rights of children in situations of armed conflict and
to ensure that perpetrators of grave violations against
children are held to account. It is in that context that we
emphasize the importance of fulfilling the objectives
of the Children, Not Soldiers campaign, launched
earlier this year as a new effort to end the recruitment
and use of children by Government forces in conflict
by 2016. To that end, we welcome and recognize the
positive developments and achievements by some
Governments listed in the annexes to the reports of the
Secretary-General. We urge all others to demonstrate
the necessary willingness and determination to end the
recruitment and use of children in armed forces.
Thousands of boys and girls around the world are
still being recruited into Government forces and armed

S/PV.7259

opposition groups to serve as combatants, cooks, porters,
messengers or in other roles. Girls, and sometimes
boys, are also recruited for sexual purposes. That is
simply unacceptable and it has to come to an end once
and for all. Therefore, we call on all States to become
party to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict.
We expect that the campaign will make a significant
difference with its two-fold contribution — first, to
the full implementation of action plans to end and
prevent recruitment; and, secondly, to the release and
reintegration of children into civilian life to ensure that
children released from armed forces or groups are able
to become productive members of their societies and
are no longer at risk of recruitment in the future.
We remain gravely concerned about attacks on and
the increasing use of schools for military purposes. That
does not only have a devastating impact on children,
but it is a violation of international humanitarian law.
Schools can be converted into a military targets, and
students, teachers and learning facilities can indeed be
made vulnerable to attacks and other forms of violence
by parties in conflict. In line with resolution 2143
(2014), we call on parties to armed conflict to respect
the civilian character of schools, while encouraging
States to take measures to prevent the use of schools by
armed forces and non-State armed groups.
As this year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, we
have to remind ourselves that the right and access to
education is a fundamental human right. Children must
be provided education, even in situations of armed
conflict. We have to ensure that all measures are taken
to protect students, teachers, schools and universities
from attack and military use. Against that backdrop,
we welcome the development of the Lucens Guidelines
for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military
Use during Armed Conflict as a practical measure in
protecting schools against military use. We support
the work towards the finalization of the Lucens
Guidelines and the process leading towards their broad
endorsement.
With respect to United Nations peacekeeping
and political missions and the indispensable role they
play, Montenegro would like to advocate for strong a
child-protection component to be incorporated in the
missions’ mandates. That would require peacekeepers,

14-5281069/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

military and security personnel to receive specialized
child protection predeployment training.
Montenegro is also concerned about the use of
explosive weapons with wide area effects in populated
areas. We would like to call on all parties to conflict
to refrain from the use of such explosive weapons so
as to ensure that civilians are protected, in particular
children, against death, injury and psychological harm.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) has
a key role in fighting impunity. When crimes of
an international scale are committed and national
judiciaries are unwilling or unable to deal with them,
State parties to the Rome Statute should pay due
consideration to referring those situations to the ICC.
It is also vital that the Security Council, to the extent
possible, use the option to refer situations to the ICC.
In conclusion, let me point out that it is for
everyone — the international community, regional
and subregional organizations, non-governmental
organizations and the entire United Nations system —
to contribute to our common and noble objective, that
is, to prevent any future occurrence of children being
involved in armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Elbahi (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of my country welcomes this open debate on
the topic of children and armed conflict.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier today by the representative of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The issue of the rights of children and the
protection of those rights is a top priority for the
Government of the Sudan, as evidenced by the efforts
and policies it has continued to implement. With regard
to the Government’s achievements at the international
level, for example, my country has acceded to the
international Convention on the Rights of the Child and
of its two Optional Protocols, on the involvement of
children in armed conflict and on the sale of children,
child prostitution and child pornography.
My Government has also ratified two relevant
conventions of International Labour Organization
Convention No.138 concerning the Minimum Age for
Admission to Employment and Convention No. 182
concerning the Prohibition of and Immediate Action for

70/77

08/09/2014

the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour.
The delegation of my country has expressed its support
for the campaign launched by the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict in cooperation with UNICEF. We
also took part in the inauguration ceremony of that
campaign.
Secondly, at the level of national legislation, the
law on the armed forces, the law on the police and
the law on security formally prohibit the recruitment
of children under 18 years into the ranks of the
armed forces. Furthermore, our country has set up a
comprehensive system of justice for minors as well as
a corrections system for minors. We are also involved
in the promulgation of the law of 2010 on the protection
of children, as well as the establishment of a special
prosecutor for the rights of minors.
Thirdly, in terms of a mechanism for the protection
of minors, the Government has established a unit for the
protection of children within the armed forces, as well
as a department within the Ministry of the Interior for
the protection of children and families. Furthermore,
the Government has tasked the Prosecutor General of
Darfur to investigate the crimes committed in Darfur
since the start of the conflict there in 2003, in particular
allegations pertaining to violations of the rights of
children. The Government has also established a factfinding commission with regard to the abduction and
recruitment of children in Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile states. Furthermore, last July the Government
inaugurated a national ten-year comprehensive plan for
the promotion of human rights in the Sudan.
Fourthly, regarding the level of cooperation with
United Nations agencies involved in the rights of
children, the Government of my country in Khartoum,
through the Permanent Mission of the Sudan to the
United Nations, is in constant cooperation with the
Office of the Assistant-Secretary-General and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, as well as with UNICEF,
in order to address all the concerns related to children.
On that point we would like to underscore the very
successful visit carried out by a mission of the UNICEF
Executive Board to the Sudan last May. We expect it to
have a positive impact on the situation of children in
the Sudan.
The Government of my country is pursuing its
efforts aimed at promoting the rights of children.

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7259

On that point, the National Council for Children in
the Sudan established a national task force last April
in charge of dealing with the situation of children in
emergency situations. It has been tasked with protecting
children, focusing on the situation of children that
find themselves in emergency situations, also in
coordination with the UNICEF office. In the same
context, the National Council for Children organized
a seminar in May on local cultures and their impact on
the protection of children, using as an example the issue
of the recruitment of children.

training. Furthermore, it is important to participate in
assisting their reconstruction efforts.

The seminar sought to achieve the following goals.
First, it sought to raise awareness of the international
standards and principles regarding the rights of
children, and to step up the role of the media with regard
to the local cultures that encourage the recruitment of
children, while reiterating the important role of civil
society organizations and scientific organizations in
that area.

Fifthly, the delegation of my country, while being
fully committed to continuing its cooperation with
United Nations bodies mandated to protect the rights
of children, would like to call for efforts to ensure that
reports of the Secretary-General be based on confirmed
and reliable information. Sudanese rebels often
wear uniforms that are very similar to the uniforms
of the regular army in order to conceal themselves.
Furthermore, we would like the information in question
to be circulated to Member States before it is reflected
in reports of the Secretary-General. The report before
us today includes very important statistics and figures
and is very sensitive, and the fact that Governments
have not been shown the information means that the
information should be treated as allegations and not be
included in the report of the Secretary-General. Such
reports should be characterized by transparency and
credibility.

Secondly, the goal was to prepare the launch of a
media campaign to announce and outline the goals of
the seminar. That campaign will be coordinated with
the UNICEF office in Khartoum and will be sending
awareness-raising messages through local community
leadership, including through women. The campaign
will involve coordination with the parties involved in
the recruitment of children in order to put an end to
such recruitment. All of those institutions are involved
in those efforts. Thanks to the policies I have just
mentioned and thanks to the concrete policies that we
have been implementing, we would like to call for the
Sudan to be dropped from the list in the annex to the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/339).
As part of our comprehensive approach to the
protection of the rights of children, my country would
like to draw the Council’s attention to the following
points. First, there is a need to assist the Governments
of countries in conflict in their efforts to put an end
to those conflicts by persuading or forcing the rebel
parties to lay down their arms.
Secondly, we need to remedy the deep-rooted
causes for the enrolment and recruitment of children
by focusing on the causes of conflict, in particular
poverty and the impact of climate change. It is also
important to put an end to the unilateral economic
sanctions that have been imposed on certain countries,
forgive the debts of the developing countries, provide
those countries with technical assistance and help them
develop their capabilities in the area of education and

Thirdly, it is essential to involve the Governments.
Fourthly, the signature by rebel movements of
action plans that seek to put an end to the recruitment
of children is not enough to ensure the end of the
violations that they commit. Those violations have to
be accompanied by the condemnation of those rebel
movements and by forcing those rebel movements to
lay down their arms and negotiate.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and expressing our
satisfaction to see you preside over the Security Council
in September. You are the representative of the United
States of America, a country with which my country,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, enjoys excellent
relations, marked by reciprocal respect. I would also
like to thank you for convening this important Security
Council meeting on children and armed conflict, a
subject that gives my country, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the opportunity to speak on an issue that
is now one of my Government’s top priorities.
My delegation takes due note of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on children and armed conflict
(S/2014/339). I also note that it is my country’s continued
relapses into war that have produced the phenomenon of
child soldiers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

14-5281071/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

However, with time and on the initiative of our Head of
State, my Government decided to end this phenomenon
within our armed forces by taking various actions,
including setting up biometric files for identifying
military personnel in order to keep better track of army
units’ personnel data, including their age. For the same
reasons, and to clearly express our political commitment
and firm determination to eradicate the phenomena
of sexual violence and child soldiers, on 9 July the
President of the Republic, Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange,
appointed Mrs. Jeannine Mabunda to be his personal
representative on combating sexual violence and the
recruitment of children. Last week Mrs. Mabunda ended
a visit to New York to consult with key stakeholders
from the international community in this area.
My country supports the United Nations Children,
Not Soldiers global campaign launched earlier this
year by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, together
with UNICEF, aimed at eradicating the recruitment and
use by Government security forces of children in armed
conflicts by the end of 2016. It should be emphasized
that the objectives of this campaign, as outlined in
resolution 2143 (2014) of 7 March, are already part of
a series of initiatives that my Government is working
to implement effectively. The progress that has been
made on the ground in this area no doubt figured in the
Secretary-General’s commendation, in his report, of my
Government’s efforts to combat this phenomenon, and
in his encouraging my country’s military authorities
to further strengthen the procedures for verifying the
age of prospective recruits during future recruitment
drives.
It is important to emphasize that my Government’s
efforts are supported by various international partners,
including the United Nations. In October 2012, in
fact, the Congolese Government and the United
Nations signed an action plan consisting of a series of
commitments aimed at ending the recruitment and use
of children by the armed forces and security services
as well as sexual violence against children. To ensure
the plan’s effective implementation, my Government,
together with its partners, has committed to assessing
the progress made in this situation every six months.
I would point out that significant progress has indeed
been made since the plan was signed.
Furthermore, the Congolese authorities have
issued two directives, of which the first, decreed by the
Minister of National Defence and Veterans’ Affairs, is

72/77

08/09/2014

intended for the armed forces. It instructs commanders
of military training centres to facilitate access to
military encampments for the United Nations special
Task Force on children and armed conflict and for child
protection agencies for the purpose of verification. It
also instructs the military leadership to take severe
disciplinary and punitive action against anyone
committing a serious violation of children’s rights. It
also provides for awareness and traning campaigns
in every military garrison in the country in order to
enable all military personnel to absorb the action plan’s
directives and resulting obligations.
The second directive, issued by the DirectorGeneral of our national intelligence agency, grants
members of the United Nations special Task Force and
child protection agencies access to the intelligence
service’s staff, documents, sites and facilities and
authorizes the release of all children associated with
armed groups and their referral to child protection
agencies. Thanks to these orders, the United Nations
Task Force and child protection agencies have been
able to visit five military training centres and to
identify without hindrance about 5,000 recruits. Two
coordinating bodies have also been set up to monitor
implementation of the action plan, with encouraging
results. According to the Government’s interim report
on the plan, covering the period from 4 October 2012 to
30 June 2013, 2,894 children were separated from the
military and from armed groups by June 2013, while
during the same period 2,824, including 365 girls, were
taken in charge through transitional host centres.
Combating impunity for serious crimes against
children has entered a new phase with the establishment
of new juvenile courts in 10 of the country’s provinces.
Again with the aim of strengthening the protection of
children, the Government has decided to disqualify
anyone who has committed six serious violations
of children’s rights during a conflict from joining
the armed forces. These strong measures targeting
children’s rights have had significant results.
To avoid confusion, my delegation would like to
make it clear to the Council that since the defeat of
the Mouvement du 23 mars, and in accordance with
President Kabila’s appeal to the armed groups to lay
down their arms, some of the national armed groups
have responded to that appeal. The findings show that
as these groups give themselves up, their ranks include
children, whom our armed forces systematically remand
to child protection services. This could be interpreted

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

to mean that these children have come from our army,
when in fact there are no more child soldiers in the
ranks of our armed forces today.
Among major actions taken by the authorities to
combat sexual violence was the law of 20 July 2006. This
law, by comparison with the old Congolese criminal
code, has made important innovations, including raising
the age threshold for victims of sexual abuse from 14
to 18. It severely punishes practices such as forced
marriage and prostitution, exploitation of children,
sexual slavery, bestiality and genital mutilation, which
are subject to stiff penalties. Nonetheless, the new law
on sexual violence both retains these offences and adds
16 more, based on international humanitarian law.
In conclusion, my Government is determined to
build on the efforts already made in implementing its
action plan for eradicating sexual violence and the
recruitment and use of children in armed forces and
groups, as well as other serious violations of children’s
rights. In that regard, my country would like to thank
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and Ms. Sylvie Lucas, the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg and Chair of the Council’s Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, for their dedication to
the cause of children. My country also welcomes the
excellent cooperation that has evolved with the Office
of the Special Representative, the United Nations
special Task Force, the child protection division of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and UNICEF.
To all these partners, my country is extremely grateful.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Bahah (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
at the outset, to congratulate the United States on its
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I also thank the members of the Council
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, and by the representative of Indonesia, on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Yemen is working to build a sound foundation for
a democratic civil society based on comprehensive

14-52810

S/PV.7259

national dialogue among actors in the economic, social
and political fields. That process seeks to prevent
the recruitment, criminal exploitation and use of
children and minors. There is a national consensus that
recognizes that children associated with armed forces
are victims rather than culprits and that they must not
be subject to criminal sanctions, in accordance with the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
the Convention on the Rights of the Child and legal
norms with respect to juvenile offenses.
Yemen has made great progress in the dialogue
among the parties concerned. In April 2012, the
Minister of the Interior ordered the implementation of
legislation requiring that recruits into the armed forces
be a minimum of 18 years of age. In her visit to Yemen
in November 2012, Special Representative Zerrougui
met with members of the Government, the President
and representatives of non-State armed groups. The
Government committed to developing a plan to end
the recruitment and use of children. Following her
visit, we established a joint coordination committee to
implement the action plan. The Council of Ministers
endorsed the draft action plan drawn up by the United
Nations and my Government in order to prevent the
recruitment and mobilization of children in the security
and military forces.
In spite of its modest resources and complex
situation, Yemen is cooperating with its international
partners to prevent the recruitment of children and to
ensure the demobilization of all others from within
the ranks of the army. My Government reiterates
its commitment to strengthening the promotion of
the rights of children and highlights the need to step
up efforts to end their recruitment. We thank all the
organizations and partners working with us, including
UNICEF.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mrs. Natividad (Philippines): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate and
for this opportunity to speak before the Council. We
join others in congratulating the United States on its
assumption of the presidency.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/339)
describes exhaustively and in detail the dire situation
of children recruited, killed, maimed and violated by
groups in situations of armed conflict. My Government
reaffirms its resolve to protect children and their rights

73/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

in situations of armed conflict. We note the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Children and Armed Conflict. The international
community must exert its utmost efforts to protect
children, particularly those in extremely difficult
situations.
My Government continues to work steadfastly
to protect our children. Last march, the Philippine
Government under the Aquino Administration signed
with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front the historic
Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro,
presaging greater peace, progress and prosperity for
the southern Philippines. That concrete result of our
commitment to the peace process was achieved through
hard work with our domestic stakeholders and with the
support of the international community. We must all
do our part to ensure that the vision of the Bangsamoro
is fully achieved. The Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, working with the Philippine
Government, can help build on that achievement by
working closely to delist the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front.
President Aquino also signed executive order
No. 138 in 2013, which provides for the establishment
of the Monitoring, Reporting, and Response System for
Grave Child Rights Violations in Situations of Armed
Conflict. The Response System serves as a monitoring
arm of the children and armed conflict programme
framework. Its primary objective of prevention and
timely response falls squarely within the overall agenda
of the Philippine Government to protect Filipino
children.
We acknowledge the due recognition given to the
positive developments that have taken place in the
Philippines. Those institutional and legal developments
need to be appreciated within the larger context of
inclusive and sustainable growth and the peace and
development agenda of my country. The United Nations
should be mindful that the work for children should
also support the good work that is being done on peace
processes such as those in my country.
The Philippines continues to work very closely
with the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. More frequent and regular
interaction and deeper engagement by the Special
Representative with stakeholders, including with
Member States Missions to the United Nations, may

74/77

08/09/2014

help move the relevant processes forward and help
identify possible solutions to outstanding issues. Such
interaction may further help the Special Representative
in the preparation of a balanced, impartial and candid
report.
In the same vein, the Philippines reiterates the
Non-Aligned Movement’s position that we should all
continue to work closely to ensure that the reports issued
by the Special Representative and that the documents
emanating from the Working Group are based on
clear, accurate, current and verifiable data. It is, after
all, that data that provide the basis for the SecretaryGeneral’s reports and upon which all comments and
recommendations are based.
My Government has stressed this before and will
continue to stress this point: gaps in the monitoring
process should be addressed and efforts be made
continuously to improve the reporting process, including
through enhanced cooperation and coordination
between the countries concerned and the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict and the Working Group.
Likewise, the listing and delisting criteria for parties
should be clear, transparent, objective and balanced. As
the Philippines has stated before, the Security Council
may wish to assess the level of commitment, the reach
of mechanisms and the efforts and outcomes on the
ground as indicators for the delisting of parties. As we
remain focused on those goals, the Security Council
may wish to consider a stronger focus on how delisting
can work to encourage and sustain the efforts to protect
children in armed conflict.
It would in fact be an indication of failure on the part
of the Security Council and the United Nations if the
lists continued to expand. There should be movement
in, and subsequent graduation from, the lists so that the
Council and the Office of the Special Representative
can dedicate precious resources and energy to those
situations requiring urgent utmost attention. Let the
appropriate United Nations agencies do their job in
securing the improvement of situations for children.
It is important as well that the discussion of the
issue of persistent perpetrators be in keeping with
the mandate of the Security Council and its Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. The current
monitoring efforts also must be in keeping with
paragraph 2 (d) of resolution 1612 (2005), which

14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

“stresses that any dialogue established under
the framework of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism by United Nations entities with
non-State armed groups in order to ensure protection
for and access to children must be conducted in the
context of peace processes where they exist and
the cooperation framework between the United
Nations and the concerned Government”.
Allow me to reiterate the position of the Philippine
Government. We value the sanctity of every human
life. We need to protect each life, particularly those
of our children and youth. Our position is unchanged.
The situation in the Philippines does not warrant any
inclusion or mere mention in the report. It is our hope
that the concrete developments and the concerns we
have expressed, particularly on data and reporting, will
be taken into full account in subsequent reports. The
Philippines offers more positive lessons learned and
points to advancements — not setbacks — that warrant
our exclusion from the list.
For its part, the Philippine Government will
continue to do its utmost to sustain its accomplishments
in advancing and protecting the welfare of our children,
and to work even more vigorously to help ensure that our
children grow up safely and without fear to become the
people they want to be. The children are our posterity
and need all our help. Let us help them in the best way
that we can.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): As it
is late, I will be brief. First I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. I also
thank Luxembourg for its tireless efforts in chairing
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Without question, we also welcome the important
work of Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, and firmly support the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign to end the recruitment and use of children by
Government security forces in conflict by the end of
2016. Her work has already yielded significant results,
for example in Chad.
Despite such progress, hundreds of thousands of
children still suffer the effects of armed conflict in the
Central African Republic, South Sudan, Syria, Gaza
and elsewhere. In Nigeria, Boko Haram systematically
attacks schools and in Iraq, the scale and brutality of the

S/PV.7259

violence against civilians have achieved unprecedented
levels. That is why Switzerland welcomes the work of
the Global Coalition to Protect Education from Attack
under the Lucens Guidelines.
It is also urgent that we all mobilize to strengthen
respect for international law and put an end to grave
violations against the rights of children, especially
their recruitment and use by non-State actors. The
commitments made by such actors remain very limited
and the adoption of action plans with these groups
faces several obstacles, including their ephemeral
nature, governmental opposition or access restrictions
under legislation relating to the fight against terrorism.
Member States must always allow the United Nations
access to those groups with the aim of adopting and
implementing action plans. Switzerland continues
to support the critical work of the non-governmental
organization Geneva Call.
Serious violations of children’s rights, particularly
sexual violence, too often remain without consequence
in armed conflict. Serious international crimes must
be judged primarily by national judicial institutions,
but if those are unable or unwilling, the Security
Council should use its power to refer matters to the
International Criminal Court. In addition, it is essential
to train peacekeepers on issues related to the protection
of children and to include related provisions in the
standard operating procedures and rules of engagement.
That programme should be mandatory for any troopcontributing country. Switzerland will make a financial
contribution to a review of the impact of the deployment
of child protection advisers in peacekeeping missions.
Finally, Switzerland encourages States that have
not yet done so to ratify the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I would like to
thank your delegation, Mr. President, for convening
this debate and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the other briefers for the information and analysis
they have provided to us. I also would like to extend
special thanks to Ambassador Lucas, Chair of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, for
her presence in the Chamber and the work she has been
doing throughout the year.

14-5281075/77

S/PV.7259

Children and armed conflict

08/09/2014

While we welcome the Secretary-General’s annual
report (S/2014/339), we are once again appalled by its
findings. Children around the world continued to suffer
serious violations of their rights, including unlawful
recruitment and use as soldiers, killing and maiming,
rape and other forms of sexual violence, abductions and
denial of humanitarian access in 23 conflicts in 2013.
Since then, the plight of children has gone from bad to
worse in several situations, including in Gaza, Syria,
Iraq and Nigeria. Liechtenstein particularly condemns
the unspeakable violence committed by Boko Haram
and fully supports its listing in the annex to the report,
as well as its inclusion in the Council’s Al-Qaida
sanctions list. We are also shocked by the atrocious
abuses of children by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham, as evidenced in the statement of the Special
Representative.

We cannot continue to tolerate inaction and
impunity with regard to the atrocious crimes committed
against children every day. Liechtenstein believes
that the Council should make more frequent use of its
power to refer situations to the International Criminal
Court, which can play an important role in that regard.
Furthermore, efforts aimed at resolving conflicts must
take greater account of children’s needs. Mediation
processes and peace negotiations and their outcomes
should include the perspective of children at the earliest
possible stage; that will lead to broader understanding
and acceptance and ultimately better implementation.
We therefore call on the Council, the relevant United
Nations entities and the Member States concerned
to consistently integrate and address the needs of
children in all relevant decisions and policies and, most
important, in their work on the ground.

We would like to congratulate the Special
Representative and UNICEF for the success of the
Children, Not Soldiers campaign. We commend the
Government of Chad for having implemented the Action
Plan and for its delisting from the Secretary-General’s
report. We are also pleased to see the progress achieved
by the Governments of Yemen, Myanmar, Afghanistan
and South Sudan. At the same time, we note that 51
of the 59 parties listed are non-State actors. Most of
them have been listed for at least five years and are
hence considered persistent perpetrators. We therefore
continue to support the Special Representative’s efforts
to engage with all relevant parties to conclude action
plans and promote their implementation. We welcome
in that regard the commitments made by non-State
actors in South Sudan, the Philippines and in Syria.
We hope that those will soon be followed by action and
tangible progress on the ground.

The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.

Of the 23 conflicts profiled in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, 17 included targeted attacks on
schools, students and teachers. In 15 conflicts, parties
used schools for military purposes. Liechtenstein
reiterates its condemnation of those practices, which
gravely endanger civilians and deprive children of
their education. We urge States to take steps nationally
and internationally to end those serious violations
of international humanitarian law and to protect
children’s right to education. We therefore welcome
the draft Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict,
and hope for their widespread implementation. We
commend the leadership role that Norway has taken in
that respect.
76/77

Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have had to take the floor once again
with regard to the statement made by the representative
of Ukraine. Our Ukrainian colleagues’ attempts to
use any United Nations context to spread trumpedup accusations about the Russian Federation are not
surprising. It is clear that their assertions are nothing
more than attempts to blame on others what is being
done by Ukrainian armed forces radicals to the
citizens of eastern Ukraine under the pretext of socalled anti-terrorist operations. The facts show that the
Ukrainian side is fully responsible for the suffering of
children in Donetsk and Luhansk.
Attempts to depict the goal of providing assistance
to children and the efforts to ensure security as some
sort of wrongdoing are particularly cynical. Dozens
of children’s lives were taken not because of Russian
aggression, but as a result of the massive artillery and
rocket fire by the Ukrainian armed forces on civilian
targets, including schools and kindergartens. There
have been many eyewitness accounts of that. It is
unfortunate that the Ukrainian delegation does not
understand the futility of trading in the suffering of its
civilians, including the youngest ones.
Once again, we call upon the representatives
of Ukraine not to engage in fruitless politicking and
instead work towards peace and overcoming the
rampant and dire humanitarian crisis in the east of the
country.
14-52810

08/09/2014

Children and armed conflict

The President: The representative of Turkey has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
call on her.
Mrs. Sucuoğlu (Turkey): We feel obligated to take
the floor once more as we are astonished by the baseless
allegations, made by the Syrian regime’s representative,
of organ trafficking related to Turkey. The organs
that he mentioned sadly belong to the Syrian children
indiscriminately killed by the regime. The operations
he mentioned are conducted in cooperation with the
United Nations to save those children who are seriously
injured. We just want to set the facts straight.
Just today the press reported that 30,000 Syrian
children have been born in safety in Turkey. Turkey’s
opening of its doors to Syrians escaping conflict not
only saves the lives of men, women and children, but
also inspires hope for the future of Syria through those
newborns.
The President: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now call on her.
Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We are forced to take the floor again to
respond to the allegations in the statements made by
the representatives of Qatar and Turkey.
As usual, the representative of Qatar made
allegations against my country’s Government in order
to cloak his country as the protector of freedoms. In
referring to the state of Syrian children, he completely
disregarded his country’s role in the financing of
terrorism and its support for terrorist groups operating
in my country.
The facts regarding the Qatari regime’s involvement
in providing support to jihadist extremist groups in

S/PV.7259

Syria have been documented and verified in various
international reports, including a report by CNN in
June. Its role has been described as that of a key ally
of the United States in financing Wahabist terrorist
groups, including groups linked to Al-Qaida, such as
the Nusra Front and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. Other reports refer to the involvement of the
Qatari regime and the connection of some of its sheikhs
to Al-Qaida.
The children that the representative of Qatar
referred to died because of Qatar’s support for
terrorist groups. That clearly reflects the hypocrisy
of Qatar’s approach with regard to the fate of children
in Syria. The Syrian people will never forget the
crimes committed by the sheikhs, supported by their
petrodollars in Qatar. Those responsible for those
crimes should be brought to justice. The Syrian people
will not forgive the hypocrites who contributed to their
suffering — those who shed crocodile tears for Syrian
children while giving the green light to those who kill
children in Syria.
As for the representative of Turkey, we are puzzled
by her feigned surprise with regard to the fate of
children in our country. But perhaps Turkey believes
that the constant attacks against Syrian civilians by
terrorist groups supported by Turkey and the facilitation
of access to Syria across Turkish borders for thousands
of terrorists is the best way to protect Syrian children.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

14-5281077/77
