United Nations

A/S-19/PV.11

General Assembly

Official Records

Nineteenth Special Session

11th Meeting
Friday, 27 June 1997, 9 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Razali Ismail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order on Saturday, 28 June
1997, at 12.45 a.m.
Agenda item 8 (continued) and agenda item 9
Overall review and appraisal of the implementation of
Agenda 21
Report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of
the Nineteenth Special Session (A/S-19/29)

(Malaysia)

We have been engaged in a complex and detailed
review of what has happened since the Rio Conference.
This review marks the first time that we have tried to hold
ourselves accountable for the commitments we have made
and to make a frank appraisal of our progress. At the
intergovernmental level, this review has involved Heads of
State or Government, ministers, ambassadors and
Government policy-makers. It has also involved a wide
range of civil-society groups, including business leaders and
representatives of all other major groups and sectors of
society.

Adoption of the final document
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency Mr.
Mostafa Tolba of Egypt, Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Whole of the Nineteenth Special Session.
Mr. Tolba (Egypt), Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Whole of the Nineteenth Special Session:
As members know, the nineteenth special session of the
General Assembly was convened to review and appraise
progress made in implementing the agreements reached at
the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, held in 1992. The session has provided us
with a unique opportunity to further promote and energize
local, national, regional and international efforts to
implement Agenda 21, the Rio Declaration on Environment
and Development and the Non-legally Binding Authoritative
Statement of Principles for a Global Consensus on the
Management, Conservation and Sustainable Development of
All Types of Forests (Forest Principles). We were
challenged to rededicate and recommit ourselves to further
advancing the implementation of those historic agreements.

97-85792 (E)

Our negotiations have been long and, at times,
difficult. I wish to extend a word of sincere thanks to you
personally, Mr. President, for intervening at some crucial
moments to get things done. The negotiations were carried
out not only during the special session itself, but over
several weeks previous to it, during the meetings of the
Commission on Sustainable Development and its intersessional working group.
During this special session, ministers have been
actively involved in discussions on issues of significant
political importance, such as finance, climate change and
forests. The outcome that I will be presenting is a
programme for the further implementation of Agenda 21. It
represents our best collective effort to understand what has
happened over the past five years and to provide advice on
what needs to be done to ensure full and effective
implementation of Agenda 21 in the future. It includes a
statement of commitment expressing the collective will fully
to implement the programme and thereby accelerate
implementation of Agenda 21. We were successful in
reaching early agreement on many paragraphs in the
document.

This record contains the original texts of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches
only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a
member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, Room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
A/S-19/PV.11
However, quite a few points could not be fully
resolved except at the eleventh hour. The document contains
agreed language related to finance and international
cooperation as well as the transfer of environmentally sound
technologies. Yet these issues remain underlying currents of
concern running throughout our negotiations. Developing
countries are justifiably preoccupied with the overall
downward trend in official development assistance since
1992. They certainly expect an immediate halt and reversal
of that trend.
Consensus has been achieved in recognizing the
critical importance of our scarce freshwater resources and
on the actions proposed to address this problem on an
urgent basis. A good foundation has also been laid to
continue the intergovernmental policy dialogue on forests
through the establishment of an ad hoc open-ended
intergovernmental forum on forests. Negotiations on
atmosphere and energy have been lengthy and difficult.
Nevertheless, there is now a strong signal to developed
countries to commit at the upcoming Kyoto meeting on
climate change to legally binding, meaningful, realistic and
equitable targets for greenhouse gas emissions. The text on
energy in the document before members should provide the
basis for useful international cooperation in coming years.
Clearly the eradication of poverty and the relationship
between trade and the environment will remain issues of
great concern to all countries as we seek fully to implement
Agenda 21.
I believe that the work of the Commission on
Sustainable Development should be strengthened by the
results of this special session, since we now have a new
agreed multi-year programme of work that focuses attention
on the key sectoral and cross-sectoral themes that have
dominated much of our discussion during these negotiations.
I believe that this programme of work will assist the
Commission in further advancing our understanding of these
issues and in formulating action-oriented proposals.
We have accomplished much, through our negotiations,
in a relatively short time to advance the implementation of
Agenda 21. Clearly, a great deal remains to be done, but I
commend to the Assembly our programme and report,
which will be presented by the Rapporteur and
recommended to the plenary of the special session of the
General Assembly.
The President: I now request Ms. Idunn Eidheim of
Norway, Vice-Chairperson of the Ad Hoc Committee of the
Whole of the Nineteenth Special Session, acting as
Rapporteur, to introduce the report.

2

11th meeting
27 June 1997
Ms. Eidheim (Norway) Vice-Chairperson of the Ad
Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Nineteenth Special
Session, acting as Rapporteur: I have the honour to present
the report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the
Nineteenth Special Session, which is contained in document
A/S-19/29 as well as in document A/S-19/AC.1/L.1 and
Addenda 1 to 33.
As the Assembly will recall, the Ad Hoc Committee
was entrusted with the finalizing of a document for
consideration by the special session under agenda item 8,
“Overall review and appraisal of the implementation of
Agenda 21”. The Ad Hoc Committee held a discussion on
the item over the course of two meetings and devoted a
third meeting and a number of informal consultations and
exchange of views on the document. I should like to take
this opportunity to finalize the report by adding information
that is not included in the printed text before the Assembly.
In document A/S-19/AC.1/L.1, the word “three” should
be inserted in the first blank in paragraph 2; the second
blank, before the word “June”, should be filled in with the
number 27.
In paragraph 12, the first line should read: “At the 3rd
meeting, on 27 June 1997”, with the rest of the sentence
continuing as is. Paragraph 13 will read as follows:
“At its third meeting on 27 June, the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Whole considered its report.
Statements were made by the representatives of many
countries. The Ad Hoc Committee then adopted this
draft report, as orally revised and corrected during the
discussion.”
Turning to document A/S-19/AC.1/L.1/Add.10, in the
chapeau of paragraph 22, the third sentence was deleted and
replaced by the following:
“All countries should strive to promote sustainable
consumption patterns; developed countries should take
the lead in achieving sustainable consumption patterns;
developing countries should seek to achieve
sustainable consumption patterns in their development
process, guaranteeing the provision of basic needs for
the poor, while avoiding those unsustainable patterns,
particularly in the industrialized countries, generally
recognized as unduly hazardous to the environment,
inefficient and wasteful in their development
processes. This requires enhanced technological and
other assistance from industrialized countries. In the
follow-up of the implementation of Agenda 21, the

General Assembly
A/S-19/PV.11
review of progress made in achieving sustainable
consumption patterns should be given high priority.”
After the word “priority”, a footnote should be added:
“See, inter alia, A shared vision — conclusions from
the Chairperson of the Brasilia Workshop on
Sustainable Production and Consumption Patterns and
Policies, held from 25 to 28 November 1996'
(E/CN.17/1997/19)”.
In paragraph 14 of A/S-19/AC.1/L.1, the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Whole recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft report to which is annexed
the programme for further implementation of Agenda 21, as
orally revised.
The President: I thank the Vice-Chairperson of the
Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Nineteenth Special
Session.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of
procedure, I shall take it that the Assembly will not discuss
the report.

11th meeting
27 June 1997
We would like to make this statement for the record in
order to explain our position on paragraph 29 and
subparagraph (a) of paragraph 30 of the draft “Programme
for the further implementation of Agenda 21”, which we are
going to adopt.
Paragraph 29 of the proposed outcome of the special
session, the general thrust of which we agree with, contains
a new initiative on water where a reference is made to
“customary uses of waters”, as if this had a legal value in
the uses of water resources. Even acquired right has not
been accepted in international law as a criterion in
evaluating and determining the relevant uses of water
resources. Therefore, this initiative, which we consider to be
very important, may fail to reach successful results when
States start building up on customary uses of water.
My delegation would like to state that customary use,
as reflected in paragraph 29, does not have equal value and
cannot be considered on the same level as existing
principles, instruments, arrangements and programmes of
action on fresh water. My delegation would therefore like
its reservation with respect to paragraph 29 to be registered
in the final document and this statement to be duly reflected
in the records of the meeting.

It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited to
explanations of vote or position.
The positions of delegations regarding the various
recommendations of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole
of the Nineteenth Special Session have been made clear in
the Committee.
May I remind delegations that, in accordance with
General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of vote or
position are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Burhan (Turkey): First of all, we would like to
make a small correction in connection with the explanation
of vote that we are going to make. A correction should be
made to subparagraph (b) of paragraph 2 of document A/S19/AC.1/L.1/Add.15. We should strike the sentence that
reads,
“In paragraphs 29 and 30 (a) the asterisks and
corresponding footnote were deleted.”

Subparagraph (a) of paragraph 30 of the proposed
outcome of the special session states that there is an urgent
need for all Governments to ratify the Convention on the
Law of the Sea. My delegation cannot agree with this
statement. Turkey supports all efforts to establish a regime
of the sea which is acceptable to all States. However, the
Convention on the Law of the Sea does not make adequate
provisions for special geographical situations and as a
consequence does not establish a satisfactory balance
between conflicting interests.
Furthermore, the Convention on the Law of the Sea
makes no provision for registering reservations on specific
clauses. Although we agree with the Convention in its
general intent and in most of its provisions, because of
these shortcomings Turkey is unable to become a party to
the Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Mr. Semakula Kiwanuka (Uganda): On behalf of the
delegations of Burundi, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda
and Uganda, I wish to make the following statement in
explanation of our position on paragraph 29 of the report of
the Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD)
contained in document A/S-19/14.

These are the two paragraphs about which we are going to
make our explanation of vote.

3

General Assembly
A/S-19/PV.11
We agree on the need for enhanced international
cooperation in the field of fresh water. However, this should
be based on the universally accepted norms and principles
of international law, in particular on the recognition of the
sovereign rights of States to exploit their natural resources,
including their water resources, and the principle of
equitable and reasonable utilization of such resources.
I regret to say that paragraph 29 of the CSD report
does not mention these universally accepted principles of
international law. On the contrary, it refers to secondary and
ambiguous notions and concepts, such as existing
instruments, existing arrangements and existing programmes
of action. Most regrettably, it contains a new term:
“customary uses of water”. This is not included in Agenda
21 and has neither been agreed upon nor adopted.
Any dialogue on fresh water should be based first and
foremost on the acceptance and recognition of the relevant
universally recognized principles of international law, in
particular the principle of equitable and reasonable
utilization of water resources. Unfortunately, paragraph 29
of the CSD report fails to express this in clear terms. By so
doing it seeks to influence or pre-empt the outcome of any
future dialogue on fresh water in favour of a certain
category of water uses or water users at the expense of
others. Such an approach would clearly impose a fait
accompli and thereby defeat the very purpose of seeking
new and universally acceptable ways and means to deal
with the important issues of fresh water, especially in the
context of transboundary rivers.
For this reason, our delegations cannot subscribe to the
content of paragraph 29 and wish unequivocally to state that
the notions and concepts contained therein will not affect
our rights and obligations in the use of our water resources,
in particular our transboundary waters. We cannot accept
the paragraph as a basis for the future work of the CSD or
of any other forum discussing the issue.
Accordingly, we register our strong objection to
paragraph 29 and request that our views be fully reflected
in the record of this meeting and its proceedings.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan): I would like at the outset to
endorse the statement the Ambassador of Uganda made on
behalf of his country and other African sister countries.
However, my delegation would like to state the following
regarding paragraph 29 of the report of the Commission on
Sustainable Development (A/S-19/14).

4

11th meeting
27 June 1997
My country remains fully committed to arriving at a
negotiated agreement on the issue of freshwater uses, which
is one of the foremost and most important aspects of the
overall issue of sustainable development.
It was only about one month ago that the General
Assembly adopted the Convention on the Law of the NonNavigational Uses of International Watercourses.
We believe that the existing principles and instruments
mentioned in paragraph 29 must be qualified by a reference
to international norms and principles which provide for both
equitable and reasonable utilization and which cause no
harm. These principles are being developed and codified, a
process that should be encouraged and recognized.
It is agreed that harmonization is the applicable tool
for doing away with inconsistencies and incompatibilities.
We also favour using the phrase “vital human needs”,
which is more elaborate and more to the point than the
relevant phrases in paragraph 29. With its present wording,
paragraph 29 will create contradictions in the work of
different organs of the United Nations. It is not only a
duplication, but a step backwards that will definitely, as we
see now, cause differences and controversies.
We therefore reserve our position regarding this
paragraph and ask that this be reflected in the record.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position before action is taken on the draft
resolution.
The Assembly will now proceed to take a decision on
the draft resolution contained in the report of the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Whole of the Nineteenth Special Session.
The draft resolution, entitled “Programme for further
implementation of Agenda 21”, was recommended by the
Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Nineteenth Special
Session for adoption.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution S-19/2).
The President: I now call on the representative of
Malta, who wished to make a statement in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted. May I remind
delegations that explanations of vote or position are limited

General Assembly
A/S-19/PV.11
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Pace (Malta): In welcoming the adoption of the
resolution entitled “Programme for the further
implementation of Agenda 21”, the delegation of Malta
would like to state the following.
Malta’s interpretation of the references in the
document to the platforms and programmes of action
adopted by United Nations conferences is consistent with
the reports of those conferences.
With respect to paragraph 24, the Malta delegation
would like to state the Government of Malta is fully
committed to the provision of reproductive-health-care
services, excluding abortion. Malta reserves its position on
the use of the term “reproductive health care”. The
interpretation given by Malta is consistent with its national
legislation, which considers the termination of pregnancy
through induced abortion illegal.
The delegation of Malta requests that this statement be
reflected in the record of this meeting.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position.
I now call on the representative of the United Republic
of Tanzania.
Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania): At
this late hour, one has to be brief.
On behalf of the Group of 77 and China, I should like
to express sincere appreciation, Mr. President, for the
excellent manner in which you have presided over the
deliberations of the nineteenth special session of the General
Assembly. Your persistence, sense of humour and tireless
efforts have resulted in a successful outcome.
I should also like to pay tribute to the Chairpersons of
the various ad hoc negotiating groups for their contributions
to the process.
The negotiations were tough and in some areas quite
protracted. They could not have been otherwise, given the
strong views and interests among Member countries. The
lively debate in plenary underscored the convergence of
views on the linkage between the environment and
development. Indeed, it has become obvious that they are
two sides of the same coin.

11th meeting
27 June 1997
It was quite evident in the debate and from published
reports that progress has been made in the implementation
of Agenda 21, particularly at the national level, and most
especially in the developing countries. Internationally, some
progress has been registered in institutional development.
The adoption of three major Conventions — the Framework
Convention on Climate Change, the Convention on
Biological Diversity and the Convention to Combat
Desertification and drought — are cases in point.
What has been glaring is the poor implementation of
the commitments made in Rio, particularly regarding
financial flows and technology transfer, which are very
important factors for the developing countries.
We have debated for many hours and have negotiated
into the small hours of the night. For the Group of 77 and
China, I can state quite categorically that we had expected
significant movement. The outcome has been contrary to
our expectations.
It can be asked, “Where do we go now?” The answer
is not easy. The reality of poverty is a growing
phenomenon. Globalization and liberalization: though
global, they are not universal in terms of their beneficial
impact on each and every society and country.
Marginalization is a concept that was mentioned in many of
the interventions. The world is crying out for positive
answers. This session has not provided them.
I could go on lamenting the non-achievement of the
Rio goals, but we have all been witnesses to and
participants in the unfolding drama. There are no easy
answers; nor can we brush aside the problems. The Group
of 77 and China believes that the problems facing our
planet are real and urgent. The future is bleak for all if
genuine answers are not sought and implemented. The
majority of the members of the developing world are on the
receiving end of marginalization. Something has got to be
done to reverse that trend.
In conclusion, I should like to thank all delegations,
particularly those of the Group of 77 and China, for their
tremendous support and solidarity. We value the counsel
and encouragement they provided, even when the situation
was very critical. I extend our thanks also to all the
supporting staff, who have made a significant contribution
to the work of the session. Finally, I wish the President, and
all others, bon voyage.

5

General Assembly
A/S-19/PV.11
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands, who will speak on behalf
of the European Union.
Ms. De Boer (Netherlands): The second summit on
sustainable development is over, and looking back, we can
come to several conclusions.
First, we can say that our high ambitions were not
completely fulfilled. We did not make much progress on,
for example, the issue of desertification. We did not make
much progress on the issue of finance.
But, as Mr. Tolba said a few moments ago, another
conclusion is that we did make progress on several subjects,
such as climate change, forests, energy, eco-efficiency and
water, and we clearly recognized poverty eradication as our
most important common task.
But the most important thing is that we all worked
together — countries from all over the world, each in our
own way — in order to support and obtain sustainable wellbeing in world. We met each other, we made friends and
we discussed and argued together, and that will lay a basis
for further negotiations. There can be no environmental
improvement without better mutual understanding, and no
better world without friends all over the world. We can
change the world with words, but that will take time.
We would like to thank you, President Razali, for your
leadership, and also for making it possible for the nongovernmental organizations to become full participants in
this process. Of course, we want to thank Chairman Tolba
and the Bureau for their impressive leadership of this long
process, and especially for Mr. Tolba’s enthusiasm and
humour. We want to thank Mr. Osborn, Ambassador
Amorim and Ambassador Ashe for their leadership and for
their informal consultations, and we want expressly to thank
the Secretariat staff for the tremendous tasks they
undertook. They, too, made it possible for this meeting to
come to a very good conclusion.
The President: We have thus concluded our
consideration of agenda items 8 and 9.

11th meeting
27 June 1997
The Secretary-General: All of you have had a long
and exhausting day, and I do not wish to take more of your
time. You have met here over the past week taking stock of
what has been achieved and not achieved. You have
grappled with the difficult task of setting priorities. You
have sought to deepen and strengthen the commitments that
you made in Rio.
As is to be expected, in certain areas you have
succeeded. In others, more time and political will are
needed. You have moved forward in several areas, such as
the management of forests and fresh water, in the
commitment to discuss energy and transport from the
perspective of sustainable development and in more specific
actions, such as the phasing out of leaded gasoline and the
ambitious work programme you have set for the
Commission on Sustainable Development.
There are areas where work remains to be done,
notably in the case of climate change, which you will
discuss in Kyoto. There are other areas, such as finance and
technology transfer, where much needs to be done to close
the gap between promise and performance.
You have worked hard, and I ask you to focus on what
you have achieved and what you need to do to consolidate
these achievements. I urge you now to move beyond the cut
and thrust of negotiations to the cooperative resolve needed
for implementation.
The instant judgements of today are seldom the same
as the judgements of tomorrow. I have no doubt that as we
implement the commitments made here, the hard labour you
have put in will be judged to have been worthwhile.
Let me end by thanking you, Mr. President, for the
leadership you have shown, not just at this special session,
but from the very beginning of the Rio process. Let me
thank Mr. Mostafa Tolba, who shouldered the onerous task
of steering the negotiations. To these two, to the members
of the Bureau, to the Ministers who helped shape the
consensus and to the non-governmental organizations, who
have kept us on our toes and kept us honest: to all of you,
a big thank you, and bon voyage. I know the President is
staying here with me, but to the rest, bon voyage.

Statement by the Secretary-General
The President: I now give the floor to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Kofi
Annan.

6

The President: I thank the Secretary-General of the
United Nations for his statement.
Closing statement by the President

General Assembly
A/S-19/PV.11
The President: We are meeting to conclude the
nineteenth special session of the General Assembly, for the
overall review and appraisal of the implementation of
Agenda 21, and to adopt a programme for its further
implementation. Everyone has worked tirelessly, down to
the wire.
All speakers in the plenary underlined the paramount
importance of a development process that is sustainable and
equitable and protects the environment for present and
future generations. We have reaffirmed the continuing
vitality and relevance of the agreements reached at Rio, and,
for the first time, non-governmental organizations stood
alongside Governments in the General Assembly as partners
in our task of implementing sustainable development. There
was a clear acknowledgement by all who took part that
progress to operationalize sustainable development remains
insufficient.

11th meeting
27 June 1997
of us: for international organizations, for Governments and
for non-governmental organizations alike.
For the United Nations, these results are telling. The
United Nations must deal with the hard-core issues of
economics and the driving forces of unsustainability, such
as financial resources and their availability and the
implications of an unequal playing field and their effect on
implementation of global programmes. The United Nations
cannot be allowed to deal only with the so-called soft
issues. The political and financial marginalization of the
United Nations will weaken not only its ability to ensure
implementation of the Rio commitments, but the ability of
other summits as well.
Our focus at this special session has been to accelerate
the implementation of Agenda 21 and to unlock the means
to do so.

The overall results of the special session are sobering.
They point to the enormous difficulties of overcoming
short-term and vested interests in order to bring about
concrete commitments to specific targets and to global
programmes. Our words have not been matched by deeds.
Such an honest appraisal is a result in itself. Having
recognized this lack of progress, this special session will at
least go down as an honest attempt to appraise the
implementation of Agenda 21.

The simple reiteration of our mutuality, of being tied
to a common destiny, will no longer suffice. Let the
message go back to the various capitals, to nongovernmental organizations and to all stakeholders that the
achievement of sustainable development requires nothing
less than action that integrates economic, environmental and
social components into decision-making and programmes,
and the resurgence of a true global partnership based on
common but differentiated responsibilities.

Among the important conclusions of the special
session is the reassertion of the need to support efforts of
developing countries to achieve sustainable development by
means of international cooperation. This includes an appeal
to intensify efforts, to reverse the declining trend of official
development assistance and to implement commitments on
concrete measures for the transfer of environmentally sound
technologies to developing countries. Poverty eradication
was reasserted as an essential and fundamental requirement.
We have advanced our understanding of the need for action
on fresh water, forests, climate and energy.

I extend my thanks to all concerned, particularly Mr.
Tolba and his team, the Bureau, and all those who have
assisted me in the special session. I am very grateful for all
their assistance.

Many important lessons have been learned at this
special session. These have balanced our lofty expectations
with the reality of an absence of political will to tackle
critical issues in the long term. International cooperation
continues to be bedevilled by constraints. However,
delegations have not allowed a renegotiation of Agenda 21
or a fudging of responsibilities. Neither have we
overemployed the tactics of glossing over lack of progress
for media consumption. The issues of sustainable
development are too critical to be blurred for political
expediency. These results will have a salutary effect on all

Minute of silent prayer or meditation
The President: I invite representatives to stand and
observe one minute of silent prayer or meditation.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
Closure of the nineteenth special session
The President: I declare closed the nineteenth special
session of the General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 1.30 a.m.

7
