S/2015/172

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 March 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 39 of Security Council
resolution 2147 (2014). It covers major developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo since my reports of 30 December 2014 (S/2014/956 and S/2014/957),
including with regard to the implementation of national commitments under the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region and progress made by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in
implementing its mandate.

II. Major developments
A.

Political developments
2.
Controversy over the revision of the electoral law marked the extraordinary
session of Parliament that concluded on 26 January. The Government submitted to
the Parliament a draft electoral law that conditioned the holding of the 2016
presidential and legislative elections on updated demographic data to be obtained
through a population census. The last census was undertaken in 1984. The political
opposition interpreted the clause as an attempt to delay the 2016 elections and allow
the President, Joseph Kabila Kabange, to remain in power beyond his second and
last term according to the Constitution. Opposition parties boycotted the vote on the
draft law on 17 January. The National Assembly nevertheless passed the text. In
protest, the political opposition called for demonstrations.
3.
On 19 January, student protests and street demonstrations broke out in various
neighbourhoods in Kinshasa and other cities, including Bukavu, Goma,
Lubumbashi, Mbandaka and Mbuji-Mayi. Demonstrations continued during the
following days, evolving into a larger protest movement, spearheaded by youths,
against the controversial clause in the law.
4.
In Kinshasa, police stations, town halls and Chinese businesses were looted
and vehicles burned, and some administrative buildings were set on fire in Goma.

15-03388 (E)

130315

*1503388*

S/2015/172

The Government promptly deployed riot police and troops, including the Republican
Guard, to respond to the protests. Disproportionate force was used in some instances
and there were reports of alleged human rights violations committed by the national
security forces. MONUSCO documented the killing of at least 20 civilians and the
wounding of 64 others by the police and the Republican Guard from 19 to
23 January in Kinshasa and Goma. Figures from the Government and various human
rights non-governmental organizations were higher, putting the number of deaths at
27 and 42, respectively. At least 480 individuals across the countr y, many from the
political opposition, were arrested. The police reportedly prevented several leaders
of the opposition from leaving their party headquarters to join the demonstrations.
In Goma, demonstrations resulted in clashes between the police and demonstrators,
killing four civilians. In Bukavu (South Kivu), the police used tear gas to prevent
demonstrators from marching. In Lubumbashi (Katanga), the police reportedly
arrested 13 members of the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social at the
party’s local headquarters.
5.
On 20 January, the Catholic archbishop of Kinshasa, Cardinal Laurent
Monsengwo, urged the Government to stop using disproportionate force against
demonstrators, while calling on the population to continue opposing the
modification of the electoral law through peaceful means. On the same day, the
Government suspended Internet, social media and text messaging services in an
effort to prevent the organization of further demonstrations. Internet and text
messaging services were restored on 8 February, but major social media services
remained suspended. The Government also ordered the temporary closure of two
private television stations in Kinshasa and suspended the broadcasting of Radio
France Internationale.
6.
From the outset, MONUSCO leaders worked actively with key political and
civil society stakeholders and in close coordination with other international partners
to restore calm. In a statement issued on 21 January, MONUSCO called for all
political actors to refrain from violence and for the national security forces to abide
by the principle of proportionate use of force. On 22 January, I called on all key
stakeholders to resume the political dialogue to discuss election -related matters in
an inclusive and peaceful fashion and in the appropriate forums. The Security
Council and my team of special envoys and special representatives echoed the
appeal on the same day.
7.
On 22 January, the Senate passed the bill after having removed the clause
referring to the population census. The protests subsided nationwide following the
announcement by the President of the National Assembly, Aubin Minaku, on
24 January, that there was agreement on removing the contentious clause. The
revised text of the electoral law was adopted by both houses of Parliament on
25 January and was promulgated by the President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on 12 February.
8.
The debate on the electoral law and the final decision of the Parliament to
adopt the law without the controversial provision accentuated divisions within the
ruling presidential majority coalition. On 9 February, following earlier calls by
some key stakeholders from within the ruling coalition against a constitutional
revision, former Prime Minister Antoine Gizenga from the Parti lumum biste unifié
condemned the violence and killings during the demonstrations in January and
called for elections to be held within the constitutional time frame. At the same

2/16

15-03388

S/2015/172

time, some parties of the ruling coalition held peaceful demonstrations in Beni
(North Kivu) and in Bukavu and Uvira (South Kivu) in support of the President.
9.
Representatives of the political opposition and civil society continued to voice
concerns about the lack of political space and about cases of arbitrary arrest and
detention. At least 300 people remain in detention as a result of mass arrests carried
out during the protests in January. Of those people, at least 11 are believed to be
held in detention incommunicado. Prominent civil society representative Christopher
Ngoyi Mutamba was arrested on 21 January in Kinshasa. On 11 February, he was
charged with 10 criminal offences, including with threatening the internal security
of the State. On 28 January, the Supreme Court of Justice in Kinshasa declared itself
competent to decide on the merits of a defamation case against the President of the
opposition party Union pour la nation congolaise, Vital Kamerhe. The decision to
move forward with the trial was perceived by his supporters as a deliberate attempt
to prevent him from running in the 2016 presidential elections and provoked some
spontaneous demonstrations in Bukavu (South Kivu).
10. On 12 February, the national independent electoral commission published a
global electoral calendar. In accordance with that calendar, combined local and
provincial elections are to be held on 25 October 2015, while presidential and
legislative elections are scheduled for 27 November 2016. The publication of the
calendar was well received by national stakeholders and international partners as an
important step towards the holding of timely elections, although some opposition
parties questioned its feasibility.

B.

Progress in the implementation of national commitments under the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region
Decentralization
11. The most significant progress in the implementation of national commitments
under the Framework was made in the area of decentralization. In December 2014, a
minister in charge of decentralization was appointed and, on 25 January, the
Parliament passed two essential laws, one delimiting the new boundaries of the
25 provinces and one establishing the new provinces. In accordance with the
Constitution, the provinces of Bandundu, Equateur, Kasai occidental, Kasai oriental,
Katanga and Orientale will be split, while the other provinces will maintain their
current delimitation.
12. The law envisages the setting up of a commission charged with establishing
the new entities in each new province. The commissions were given some 120 days
to complete the process. The Government will have five years to conduct the
necessary rehabilitation and infrastructure work for the new provincial
administrations to become operational. At the provincial level, the adoption of the
legislation increased political tensions, particularly in Katanga, where the
delimitations of the new provinces were contested by some key political
stakeholders and certain local communities. Others were vehemently in favour.

15-03388

3/16

S/2015/172

Consolidation of State authority and stabilization
13. Some progress was made in the development of provincial stabilization
strategies and action plans for North Kivu, Orientale and South Kivu under the
framework of the International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy. In all
three provinces, consensus was reached on concrete steps to be taken by the
Government and international partners, based on a joint vision, to increase the
effectiveness and sustainability of stabilization activities in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In Mambasa (Orientale), the second pilot project under the
Strategy, funded by the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund, was launched by the
governor on 10 February.
Governance reforms
14. Efforts to further financial reforms and economic development continued with
the adoption of important legislation. On 14 January, the Parliament passed a bill
liberalizing the insurance sector that is expected to improve the business climate in
that sector. The Parliament adopted other legislative texts, including a hydrocarbon
law, a law on leasing and a set of five laws ratifying bilateral treaties on the Grand
Inga Dam project and on the protection of investments.

C.

Security situation
15. In North Kivu, the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) and other unidentified
armed elements continued to pose a significant threat to civilians in the area of
Beni. Although progress was made by the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo — FARDC)
against ADF in Beni territory, where the group was forced out of most of its
positions, the ADF command structure appeared to remain intact. ADF is now
dispersed in small groups and its combatants are resorting to guerrilla warfare
tactics. On 3 February, 24 civilians were brutally killed by machete by suspected
ADF elements. On 16 February, one civilian was killed and one was kidnapped by
alleged ADF elements north-east of Butembo. Since October 2014, MONUSCO has
documented the brutal killing of at least 269 civilians by suspected ADF elements
and other unidentified armed elements in Beni territory. In response to the most
recent killings, the Governor of North Kivu temporarily relocated to Beni to
coordinate the Government’s response to the continued attac ks on the civilian
population.
16. In anticipation of FARDC operations, increased movements by elements of the
Forces démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda (FDLR) were observed in North
Kivu and South Kivu. It was reported that those elements continu ed to commit
human rights violations, including looting, kidnapping and forced recruitment of
children. On 11 February, FDLR elements ambushed a FARDC patrol near
Nyamilima, killing two soldiers and wounding three. The redeployment of FARDC
units in preparation for operations against FDLR created security vacuums in certain
areas of Masisi and Walikale territories. This situation was exploited by other armed
groups and caused the displacement of some civilians.
17. During the reporting period, Mayi-Mayi Raia Mutomboki factions in South
Kivu continued to operate in the vicinity of mining sites in Shabunda territory,
causing the displacement of civilians. In the southern part of the province, FARDC,

4/16

15-03388

S/2015/172

with the support of MONUSCO, continued to carry out operatio ns against the
Forces nationales de libération du Burundi (FNL) and other armed groups.
18. In Orientale, renewed activity by elements of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)
was reported in Dungu territory, Haut Uélé district. Six people, including two FARDC
soldiers, were reportedly killed during 10 separate attacks and, as at 15 February,
dozens of civilians were allegedly abducted. Most of the attacks consisted of road
ambushes carried out by small groups of highly mobile, armed LRA elements who
moved together with abducted women and children. It is believed that much of LRA
has been present in a wide area of Haut Uélé and Bas Uélé districts since mid -2014.
LRA continued to be active in and around Garamba National Park and is involved in
poaching activities and ivory trafficking.
19. On 2 January, the Congolese authorities arrested the leader of the Forces de
résistance patriotiques de l’Ituri (FRPI), Justin Banaloki (alias Cobra Matata), while
he was attempting to escape house arrest in Bunia, Ituri district (Orientale). On
5 January, Cobra Matata was transferred from Bunia to Kinshasa with MONUSCO
support and is currently detained at N’dolo military prison. He is accused of desertion,
forming a rebel movement, crimes against humanity, war crimes, child recruitment
and attempting to escape from detention. Negotiations with the Government for his
surrender and the surrender of 812 combatants failed, as Cobra Matata insisted on a
general amnesty for himself and his men as well as FRPI integration into FARDC
with recognition of those men’s ranks. Two weeks after the expiration of a deadline
given by the Government for FRPI to surrender, on 15 January fighting broke out
between FARDC and some 900 armed elements of FRPI. The clash resulted in the
killing of seven FARDC soldiers and 24 FRPI elements. One civilian was killed and
four other civilians, including three women, were seriously injured. Around
15,000 people were displaced from their homes. FRPI subsequently left its position in
Aveba, splintering into several groups and resuming hit-and-run attacks on villages,
thereby posing a renewed threat to civilian life and property in the area. Between
16 and 17 February, FRPI carried out several attacks on a number of villages. In
Rwampara-Manje, three persons were injured, while in Mbetsi two women were
killed. FRPI also reportedly abducted and raped 10 women in Walendu.
20. In Katanga, the security and humanitarian situation deteriorated further owing
to the continued activities of Kata Katanga militia, in spite of continuing FARDC
operations against the group, and as a result of intercommunal clashes between the
Twa and the Luba communities in several territories of Tanganyika district. On
13 February, during intercommunal attacks in Manono, nine civilians were kil led
and several women were abducted. In Katanga, approximately 560,000 persons
remain internally displaced.
21. In Equateur, the security situation in the border area remained tense owing to
the spillover from the conflict in the Central African Republic. Some 10 anti-balaka
and ex-Séléka elements were arrested by the Congolese national police and
repatriated to the Central African Republic.

D.

Humanitarian situation
22. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 7 million people require humanitarian
assistance to meet their basic needs, of whom nearly 2.8 million are internally
displaced. About 85 per cent of internally displaced persons live with host families.

15-03388

5/16

S/2015/172

The rest live in camps. On 5 February, a humanitarian action plan was launched in
Kinshasa, requiring $692 million to address the prioritized needs of 5.2 million people
affected by four types of crisis: conflict; malnutrition; epidemics; and natural
disasters. The humanitarian community continues to provide aid to people in need. In
the area of Beni (North Kivu), 8,000 of the 17,700 families displaced as a result of
atrocities committed by ADF received humanitarian assistance.
23. As at 31 December 2014, an estimated 6.5 million people in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo were in a situation of acute food security and livelihood
crisis. In addition, 43 per cent of children under the age of 5 were stunted because
of chronic malnutrition.
24. Some 443,000 Congolese continue to live as refugees and asylum seekers in
neighbouring countries, while the Democratic Republic of the Congo hosts some
122,000 refugees, including more than 68,000 from the Central African Republic,
40,000 from Rwanda, 9,000 from Burundi and 4,000 from other countries. As at
5 February, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) registered 19,289 additional refugees from the Central African Republic
in Equateur. Efforts are under way to identify and register an estimated 245,000
Rwandan refugees in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The id entification
exercise conducted by the National Commission for Refugees between November
2013 and January 2014 resulted in the registration of 245,298 Rwandan refugees.
The Commission and UNHCR are now planning a biometric registration exercise
that will enable better protection and assistance. It is estimated that the registration
will cost $2.4 million. The United States Bureau of Population, Refugees and
Migration has pledged $1 million in support of this process.

E.

Economic developments
25. Macroeconomic performance remained stable and inflation at below 2 per
cent. Growth continued to be driven essentially by increases in mining output and,
to some extent, higher production in the agricultural sector. The main risk to the
economic outlook arises from reduced inflows of foreign direct investment owing to
political instability and a decline in copper and cobalt prices, which account for
about 98 per cent of exported goods and 44 per cent of nominal gross domestic
product. On 31 December 2014, the President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo promulgated the 2015 budget law, with a budget amounting to $9.07 billion,
which represents an increase of 2 per cent compared with the 2014 budget.

F.

Regional developments
26. Relations in the region remained strained over the issue of FDLR and the
implementation of the Nairobi Declarations of 12 December 2013. The deadline that
was set by the International Conference for the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) and
the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and endorsed by the
Security Council for the voluntary disarmament of FDLR expired on 2 January. In a
statement issued on that date, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo noted that since only 26 per cent of the estimated 1,400 FDLR elements in
the country had surrendered, military operations had become inevitable. The
ICGLR, SADC and international partners echoed that conclusion. South Africa and

6/16

15-03388

S/2015/172

the United Republic of Tanzania confirmed their full support for military operations
against FDLR in separate statements issued on 9 and 13 January.
27. There was limited progress in implementing the Nairobi Declarations. The
coordinator for the Movement of 23 March (M23), René Abandi, resigned on
12 January, accusing the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo of
having violated the agreements. By the end of the reporting period, 182 of an
estimated 1,678 ex-M23 elements had been voluntarily repatriated to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Following the repatriation of a first group of 120 ex-M23
elements on 16 December 2014, some 1,100 ex-M23 elements remained in the
Bihanga cantonment camp in Uganda, with the majority of them reportedly reluctant
to being repatriated. As part of efforts to expedite the repatriation of the 453 registered
ex-M23 elements and their weapons from Rwanda, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo dispatched a technical team to Kigali from 2 to 4 February to
discuss the modalities. In a joint communiqué issued on 3 February, both
Governments reiterated their willingness to respect the international obligations
contained in the Framework and the Nairobi Declarations.
28. The third evaluation meeting on the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations
was held in Kinshasa on 11 February under the chairmanship of the Executive
Coordinator of the National Oversight Mechanism of the Framework. It was agreed to
dispatch a Government-led multidisciplinary team to Uganda with a view to
expediting and concluding the repatriation of ex-M23 elements and their weapons.
The participants in the meeting reiterated the need for measures envisaged in the
Declarations to build confidence between the parties, including through the creation
of commissions on expropriated property and national reconciliation and the release
of ex-M23 detainees by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

III. Mandate implementation
A.

National processes and the good offices role of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
29. MONUSCO continued to support the Government in implementing its national
commitments under the Framework. The controversy over the electoral law and the
violent protests in Kinshasa and elsewhere in the country underscored the
importance of the Mission’s good offices role and quiet diplomacy efforts in the
context of the electoral process. Political parties from the opposition and the ruling
coalition, as well as civil society actors, called upon MONUSCO to facilitate a
political dialogue with a view to de-escalating tensions and creating conditions
conducive to the holding of credible and timely elections. To that end, MONUSCO
intensified contacts and exchanges with stakeholders across the political spectrum.
30. MONUSCO continued to provide support to the National Oversight
Mechanism in monitoring, implementing and evaluating the national commitments.
31. MONUSCO strengthened its capacity to provide advice and support to the
Government on security and justice sector reform with specialized expertise in the
areas of internal security sector governance, private security companies, internal
accountability and police reform, parliamentary oversight, and defence reform.

15-03388

7/16

S/2015/172

Regular meetings were held with key international partners with a vi ew to enhancing
coherence in both the assistance and advice that is being provided to the Government.
32. With regard to the reform of the national police, a national training strategy
was developed and submitted for the approval of the Commissioner Gener al. Sixty
national police officers deployed in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
completed a training programme aimed at preventing sexual violence with the
support of MONUSCO and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
The Mission continued to provide support to the inspectorate general of the police
with a view to enhancing its capacity to process complaints. MONUSCO and UNDP
also continued to support the implementation of a joint justice support programme,
the main objectives of which are the development of a national action plan for the
reform of the Congolese justice system and the provision of assistance for the
establishment of an effective constitutional court that will be in charge of settling
disputes arising from the general elections scheduled for 2016. Funds to support the
programme will be mobilized in the framework of the Global Focal Point for the
Police, Justice and Corrections arrangements.
33. Continuous advocacy led to the national authorities agreeing to revise the prison
reform plan and develop a nationwide curriculum for prison officers. A quarterly plan
was developed focusing on prison staff capacity-building, following the validation of
11 training modules on 12 February. Efforts are under way for the establishment of a
steering committee on prison matters and MONUSCO continues to provide technical
advice and assistance on the general management and operation of prisons in areas
freed from armed groups. The lack of adequate resources and capacity within the
Government and the United Nations country team on corrections-related matters
remains a concern. In that regard, given the critical role of the Mission in the
handover of corrections-related tasks, MONUSCO continues to support the Congolese
authorities in efforts to establish functional, professional and accountable judicial and
security institutions, including safe, secure and humane prisons.
34. MONUSCO continued its efforts in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
to support the extension of State authority to areas freed from armed groups through
the provision of assistance to the provincial authorities. These early stabilization
efforts are supported by 72 quick-impact projects with a value of approximately
$4.2 million, focusing on the restoration of State authority.

B.

Neutralization of armed groups
35. In support of the national authorities, MONUSCO carried out targeted joint
offensive operations to prevent the expansion of armed groups and to neutralize and
disarm them. MONUSCO focused its efforts on operations against ADF, FDLR,
FNL, FRPI and Mayi-Mayi groups.
36. In the area of Beni (North Kivu), MONUSCO supported FARDC operations
targeting ADF elements. Between 5 and 16 January, five ADF elements surrendered
and three were arrested. Between 1 and 12 January, MONUSCO and FARDC forces
mounted Operation Umoja II, which resulted in the killing of seven ADF elements,
the seizure of five weapons and the recovery of several documents that provided
information on the group. The operation also dislodged ADF from five different
camps around Medina, where the armed group used to have its headquarters.
Operation Umoja III, which was launched by MONUSCO and FARDC on 25 January,

8/16

15-03388

S/2015/172

is ongoing. The MONUSCO framework brigades and the Force Intervention Brigade
are engaged in these operations.
37. On 29 January, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
announced the launch of military operations against FDLR. The Mission supported
FARDC in planning operations against FDLR and prepositioned MONUSCO troops
and its Force Intervention Brigade with a view to better assisting FARDC operations.
Joint mission planning covered military, police and civilian activities, coordinated
with humanitarian contingency planning, taking into account lessons learned from
previous operations. On 11 and 13 February, MONUSCO notified the Government
that, in view of allegations of human rights violations against generals recently
appointed to lead the operations, it would not be in a position to support them, in line
with the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support to non -United
Nations security forces. On 15 February, the President of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo indicated that FARDC would carry out military operations against FDLR
without MONUSCO support. Towards the end of February, FARDC launched
operations against FDLR in various parts of North Kivu and South Kivu. The Minister
of Information and Spokesperson of the Government, Lambert Mende, announced on
1 March that FARDC had captured several FDLR combatants, including two majors.
A number of FDLR combatants were also reportedly killed.
38. An operation against FNL in South Kivu was planned and executed jointly by
FARDC and MONUSCO in January, as a precursor to operations against FDLR. The
operations forced FNL and Mayi-Mayi groups in South Kivu out of their stronghold
in the Ruzizi plain. The operations resulted in the surrender of 64 Mayi -Mayi Raya
Mutomboki and seven FNL elements. On 24 February, in follow-up to those
operations, FARDC launched operations against FDLR in Uvira territory (South
Kivu). Three FDLR elements were reportedly captured.
39. In Ituri district, Orientale, MONUSCO planned and executed, jointly with
FARDC operations targeting FRPI after the arrest of Cobra Matata on 2 January. In
Orientale, MONUSCO continued to provide logistical, operational and information sharing support to FARDC troops operating under the African Union Regional Task
Force against LRA. MONUSCO conducted joint operations with FARDC and the
Task Force — with support from the United States Africa Command — in the
western part of Garamba National Park and provided logistics and information gathering assistance. Following the operations, 15 LRA dependants escaped and five
LRA commanders are currently negotiating their surrender.

C.

Protection of civilians
40. MONUSCO continued its efforts to protect civilians in key areas of concern in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, including by conducting patrols, both
during the day and at night, and providing escorts to humanitarian actors, United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes and non-governmental organizations.
41. MONUSCO also stepped up efforts to protect civilians through increased
interaction with the local population and advocacy efforts with loc al and national
authorities. The United Nations system revised its strategy for the protection of
civilians in December 2014 with the aim of better coordinating activities between
MONUSCO and the United Nations country team and supporting the Government’s
efforts to fulfil its obligations with regard to the protection of civilians.

15-03388

9/16

S/2015/172

42. More than 50 local protection committees in five provinces received around
270 early warning alerts. MONUSCO responded in 21 per cent of the cases; 46 per
cent of the alerts were conveyed to the national security forces and 14 per cent to
local civilian authorities. In the remaining 19 per cent of cases, the alerts proved
either false or were received after the incident. In approximately 40 per cent of
cases, violations against civilians were prevented.
43. In North Kivu, MONUSCO established a provincial early warning analysis
and response cell to enhance its efforts to protect civilians, and placed human rights
investigation teams on standby to be deployed within 48 hours of notice. Alerts
from the cell contributed to the redeployment of FARDC soldiers in some areas of
concern in Walikale and Masisi territories, and enhanced monitoring and patrolling
activities by MONUSCO. The Mission conducted awareness-raising activities on
the early warning networks in areas that could be affected by military operations
against FDLR and worked with some 90 communities in North Kivu to improve
local early warning systems. Two joint assessment missions, including
representatives of the Mission’s civilian and police components and the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), were conducted on the Kiwanja -Nyamilima
and Nyanzale-Kibirizi axes, Rutshuru territory, to assess protection concerns
relating to Operation Sukola II and to monitor the imp lementation of relevant
contingency plans. The findings were shared with the FARDC command.
44. In Beni (North Kivu), MONUSCO increased its patrolling activity along the
Beni-Boikene-Mavivi-Oicha-Eringeti road, the axis affected by ADF activities,
while readjusting the deployment of MONUSCO forces in the area with a particular
focus on strategic locations such as Butembo, Eringeti, Kamango, Lubero and
Similiki bridge.

D.

Safety and security of United Nations personnel within the context
of operations of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
45. In Beni, a United Nations formed police unit was pelted with stones during a
night patrol on 16 February, seriously injuring one police officer. In other parts of
the country, MONUSCO military operations did not result in any discernible
increase in threats to United Nations personnel.

E.

Monitoring the implementation of the arms embargo
46. The FARDC and MONUSCO recovered 487 automatic weapons and 1,251
rounds of 7.62-mm ammunition, which were handed over or left behind by elements
of various armed groups, including Mayi-Mayi Nyatura, the Forces de défense des
droits humains, the Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain and
Mayi-Mayi Lafontaine. Most of the weapons used by armed groups in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo were reportedly acquired from within the
country or trafficked from Burundi, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania.
On 25 February, the MONUSCO Force Intervention Brigade carried out a
verification mission of 190 weapons recovered from armed groups to ascertain their
origin, serial number and serviceability. Information related to the identification of

10/16

15-03388

S/2015/172

arms and ammunition recovered was systematically shared wit h the Group of
Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo for traceability purposes.

F.

Disarmament, demobilization, reintegration, repatriation
and resettlement
47. As at 19 February, 98 members of Congolese armed groups and 102 members of
foreign armed groups participated in the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
repatriation and resettlement programme. Of those, 80 were combatants, including
70 from FDLR, while 70 were children associated with armed groups, 40 were
dependants and 10 were civilians. The children associated with armed groups were
released and placed in transit centres pending their family tracing, reunification and
social integration by UNICEF and its partners. As at 19 February, 339 FDLR
combatants, including 17 officers, and 1,119 of their dependants had voluntarily
disarmed. MONUSCO continued to provide food, water and medicine to the
combatants and dependants in the assembly camps in Kanyabayonga (North Kivu)
and Walungu (South Kivu), while the Government is responsi ble for the
management of the transit camp in Kisangani (Orientale).
48. Funding for the third national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
plan remains a concern. The Government has yet to make available the full
$10 million it has pledged. On 27 January, the Government indicated it would make
a first disbursement of $1.5 million, but has yet to do so. The disbursement of
contributions from the World Bank and other donors is conditional upon the
contribution of the Government. MONUSCO plans to contribute $6 million. The
delay in launching the programme has prolonged the long -term cantonment of
former combatants at pre-disarmament, demobilization and reintegration camps in
Kamina, Kitona and Kotakoli, thus delaying their demobilization and reinteg ration
and preventing other armed elements from laying down their weapons.

G.

Mine action
49. The Mine Action Service of the United Nations undertook 376 operations in
North Kivu, Orientale and South Kivu. A total of 1,500 items of explosive remnant s
of war were destroyed, as were 30 weapons and 80 rounds of small arms
ammunition collected from former FDLR combatants in Walungu (South Kivu). In
keeping with the revised concept for the protection of civilians from explosive
remnants of war, the Mine Action Service assisted the MONUSCO Force
Intervention Brigade in providing operational support to FARDC -led operations.

H.

Promotion and protection of human rights and the fight
against impunity
50. MONUSCO also supported the transfer of 29 inmates at high risk of escaping,
including Lieutenant Colonel Bedi Engangela (alias Colonel 106), who was
sentenced on 15 December 2014 by the South Kivu military court to life
imprisonment for war crimes and crimes against humanity, to more secure facilities
as a measure to address the persistent prison security concerns.

15-03388

11/16

S/2015/172

51. In accordance with the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations
support to non-United Nations security forces, MONUSCO screened the human rights
records of 124 FARDC and national police commanders and deputy commanders,
including 116 FARDC officers and eight police elements upon the receipt of requests
for support to their respective units. Of the 124 records screened, those of seven
officers and the members of units under their command were deemed ineligible for
support because of their background and because there were substantial grounds for
believing that they might commit grave human rights violations. Twelve requests
pertained to joint military operations in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
while 26 were related to other forms of support, such as transport on United Nations
assets, fuel, rations and training. Effective 13 February, MONUSCO suspended the
provision of support to FARDC units involved in Operation Sukola II (against FDLR)
owing to concerns about the human rights records of two generals assigned on
25 January to lead operations in North Kivu, including operations against FDLR.
While FARDC has, for the time being, ceased to cooperate with MONUSCO on
operations against FDLR, MONUSCO cooperation with FARDC on operations
against other armed groups, in particular ADF, has continued. Cooperation with the
Congolese national police is also ongoing.
52. Through its prosecution support cells, MONUSCO continued to pro vide
technical and logistical support to military justice authorities to investigate and
prosecute for war crimes, crimes against humanity and other serious crimes alleged
to have been committed by rebel groups and FARDC elements, including
commanders in Katanga, North Kivu, Orientale and South Kivu provinces.
MONUSCO facilitated investigation missions and the convening of mobile courts in
Beni-Butembo, Bunia, Eringenti, Gety, Kasenyi, Kitchanga, Kolwezi, Likasi,
Lubero, Mambasa, Mbau, Oicha, South-Irumu and Uvira. MONUSCO also
monitored the criminal proceedings in Katanga against 67 followers of the political
opponent and religious leader Pasteur Mukungubila, who were arrested in
connection with attacks against government facilities in Kinshasa, Kindu and
Lubumbashi on 30 December 2013.

I.

Sexual violence
53. In January, MONUSCO recorded 15 cases of sexual violence in conflict,
including eight cases in North Kivu alone. The main perpetrators were elements of
armed groups, who were reportedly responsible for sexual violence against 10 of the
15 women victims. FDLR and FRPI were responsible for three and four cases,
respectively. FARDC was reportedly responsible for sexual violence against the
remaining five victims.
54. MONUSCO supported the establishment of the committee overseeing the
implementation of the FARDC action plan against sexual violence. In the
framework of a joint project on preventing and responding to sexual violence in
North Kivu, Orientale and South Kivu, MONUSCO and UNDP funded and
organized a three-month training programme on the instruction and investigation of
sexual violence cases for 60 judicial police officers assigned to a special force for
the protection of women and children. On 18 and 19 February, in Kinshasa, the
FARDC Commission on Sexual Violence held a technical meeting with the support
of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, UNDP

12/16

15-03388

S/2015/172

and MONUSCO to review and adopt the FARDC action plan on combating conflict related sexual violence.

J.

Child protection
55. As at 13 February, MONUSCO had documented 298 cases of children
(18 girls and 280 boys), including one Rwandan, who had escaped or were separated
from armed groups. Sixty-nine were separated from the Forces démocratiques pour
la libération du Rwanda-Forces combattantes Abacunguzi, 43 from Mayi-Mayi Raia
Mutomboki and 30 from Mayi-Mayi Nyatura. Furthermore, five children formerly
associated with armed groups who had been detained by FARDC, were released. In
line with the joint action plan of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the United Nations on ending and preventing child recruitment by armed
groups, the Mission screened 154 FARDC troops and no children were identified.
Four children were killed and four others were maimed by parties to the conflict in
North Kivu, South Kivu and Orientale.
56. Having received reports that at least 35 per cent of FRPI elements were
children, from 7 to 14 January MONUSCO conducted field visits in Aveba
(Orientale) to advocate for the separation of children from FRPI. Negotiations with
the FRPI leadership aimed at achieving the release of the children failed because the
commanders claimed that there were no children among their ranks.

IV. Observations
57. The violent protests that took place from 17 to 23 January in Kinshasa, Goma
and several other cities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo were a stark reminder
that the electoral process is unfolding in a sensitive political environment fraught with
tensions. I deplore the loss of lives, injury and destruction of property. It is the right of
the Congolese people to demonstrate peacefully. Violence is not acceptable. It is the
responsibility of the Government to allow and guarantee the peaceful expression of
opinion. Demonstrators and their leaders must ensure that political objectives are
pursued by non-violent means. Any response by the national security forces to violent
protests must remain proportionate. I urge the Government to investigate the violence
and take judicial or disciplinary measures against those responsible.
58. Restrictions on the freedoms of expression, association and assembly and the
excessive use of force risk undermining public confidence in the credibility of the
electoral process. I call on the Government to maintain the necessary political
space. I urge all key stakeholders to resume political dialogue and discuss election related matters in an inclusive and peaceful fashion, in the appropriate forums. My
Special Representative stands ready to use his good offices to help narrow the gap
between the main actors. I welcome the publication of a comprehensive electoral
calendar, which is an important tool for keeping the process on track and ensuring
that credible and timely elections will be held in accordance with the Constitution.
It is now essential for the national institutions and all parties and partners to ensure
that elections take place as scheduled and that all stakeholders accept the process.
To this end, I encourage the Government and the political opposition to enter into a
constructive dialogue with a view to building consensus around key electoral
decisions, including funding and preparation of the voters’ list.

15-03388

13/16

S/2015/172

59. There will be no solution to the problems in eastern Democratic Republi c of
the Congo if the regional dimension is not addressed. I am concerned that the lack
of progress in addressing the problem of FDLR and fully implementing the Nairobi
Declarations will further strain regional relations and undermine the resolve of the
signatories to implement their commitments under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
I urge all stakeholders to work with my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region,
Said Djinnit, to restore momentum and recommit to ending once and for all conflict
and instability in the region.
60. FDLR remains a threat to the stability of eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region. I welcome the commitment of the Government, subregional
organizations and key troop-contributing countries to taking decisive action against
FDLR, including through the launching by the FARDC of military operations. I also
welcome the Government’s determination to lead efforts in neutralizing FDLR.
MONUSCO will continue to work closely with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to implement the mandate entrusted to it by the Security
Council. The Mission stands ready to support these operations in accordance with
the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support to non-United
Nations security forces. Respect for international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law constitutes one of the core values of the United Nations and a
cornerstone of all United Nations activity. Neutralizing FD LR is a goal shared by
the Government, the region and the United Nations. There is no purely military
solution to the problem of FDLR, but there will be no solution without effective
military pressure. Achieving results in operations against FDLR will requ ire time
and the continued commitment and effort of all stakeholders, including the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and regional actors.
61. I am appalled by the continued atrocities committed by ADF and other armed
elements in the area of Beni (North Kivu). I commend the determination of FARDC
to neutralize this armed group under difficult conditions and welcome its
cooperation with MONUSCO in operations against ADF. As outlined in my previous
report to the Security Council (S/2014/957), MONUSCO is taking steps to enhance
the effectiveness of both its Force Intervention Brigade and its framework brigades
to better implement its mandate of neutralizing armed groups and protecting
civilians. Offering sustainable alternatives to former combatants and extending State
authority to areas freed from armed groups are an essential part of neutralizing
armed groups. This requires the commitment of the Government to work in
partnership with MONUSCO to address the underlying causes of conflict, such as
governance issues and the illegal exploitation of natural resources by advancing key
reforms and investigating, prosecuting and sanctioning those engaged in the national
and transnational organized crime and illicit trade that fuels conflict.
62. I am concerned about the continued human rights violations and abuses taking
place throughout the country. Armed groups and elements of the national security
forces continue to commit human rights abuses, including rape, extrajudicial
killings, violations against minors, arbitrary arrest, torture and abduction. I
encourage the Government to expedite ongoing initiatives to protect and promote
human rights and address impunity in cooperation with MONUSCO and other
relevant partners.

14/16

15-03388

S/2015/172

63. As I recommended in my previous report, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should enter into a strategic dialogue with the United
Nations aimed at jointly developing a gradual exit strategy for MONUSCO based on
mutually agreed targets for the consolidation of the gains made over the past decade
and the long-term stabilization of the country. This dialogue should be viewed as an
opportunity to redefine the partnership between the United Nations and the
Government and improve cooperation between the two. It is hoped that the dialogue
will contribute to facilitating the transfer of tasks from MONUSCO to the
Government and accelerate the Mission’s exit, taking into account the primary
responsibility of the Council for the maintenance of international peace and security
and the sovereign rights and responsibilities of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
64. In conclusion, I wish to extend my gratitude to my Special Representative for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of MONUSCO, Martin Kobler, and
my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, Said Djinnit, their staff, the United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, as well as other international and regional
organizations and the troop- and police-contributing countries for their active
engagement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region.

15-03388

15/16

S/2015/172

16/16

Map

15-03388
