S/2017/21

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 January 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 22 of Security Council
resolution 2275 (2016) and paragraph 44 of Council resolution 2297 (2016). It
provides information on the implementation of those resolutions, including on the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and
challenges faced by the United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS) in
carrying out its mandate. It covers major developments from 1 September to
31 December 2016.

II. Political and security overview
A.

Political developments
2.
The most significant development was progress in the electoral process.
Following prolonged negotiations over the details of the electoral model, together
with some technical delays, federal parliamentary elections were launched on
15 October. As at 31 December, 43 members of the 54-seat upper house and 258
members of the 275-seat lower house had been elected. The new Federal Parliament
was inaugurated on 27 December in a joint session of the two houses. Preparations
began thereafter for the election of the Speakers and the country’s President.
3.
Overall, and notwithstanding delays and cases of malpractice, inclu ding
bribery and intimidation of delegates, the electoral process was more peaceful and
inclusive than in 2012. Disruption by Al-Shabaab did not come to pass, thanks to
the effective security arrangements put in place by the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali security institutions. The National Leadership
Forum, comprising federal and regional leaders, played a key role in dealing with
election-related issues, such as endorsing a code of conduct for all parliamentary
and presidential candidates and establishing an independent electoral dispute
resolution mechanism. Verified cases of electoral malpractice prompted the Forum
to order re-runs for five parliamentary seats. In all, close to 13,000 delegates
nationwide voted for the members of the lower house, while regional assemblies
elected the members of the upper house. As at 31 December, the representation of
women stood at 24 per cent in the lower house and 23 per cent in the upper house, a

16-23183 (E)

120117

*1623183*

S/2017/21

significant improvement on the previous composition of the Federal Parliament
(14 per cent in the lower house), although short of the target of 30 per cent set by
the Forum. Of the cost of the electoral process ($14 million), 60 per cent was
covered by international donors, 10 per cent by the Federal Government and 30 per
cent by candidate registration fees.
4.
The federal state creation process was completed upon the merger of the
Hiraan and Shabelle Dhexe regions into the new HirShabelle Interim Administration
on 9 October. Jawhar was designated as the capital of the new state; the newly
established State Assembly then elected a regional president, vice -president, speaker
and deputy speaker. After intense engagement by the Federal Government and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), most clan elders who had
earlier opposed the process agreed to join it, with the exception of the leader of the
Habar Gidir-Hawadle subclan.
5.
On 18 September, after nearly eight months, “Somaliland” concluded a voter
registration exercise in preparation for its own parliamentary and presidential
elections. Some 850,000 voters were registered, including, for the first time ever, in
the disputed territories of Sool, Sanaag and Cayn, notwithstanding the clashes
between “Somaliland” and Puntland forces in eastern Sanaag on 18 July that killed
five people. Official talks between the two sides led to de -escalation and the
successful completion of voter registration. Parliamentary and presidential elections
were initially scheduled for 28 March 2017. Nevertheless, the regional President,
Ahmed Mohamed Mohamoud “Silanyo”, issued a decree on 10 September to
postpone the parliamentary elections to an unspecified date, giving the main reason
as the need to review the allocation of seats in the Awdal, Sool and eastern Sanaag
regions. The “Somaliland” authorities have since ignored calls from opposition
parties, civil society and the international community to reverse the decision.
6.
On 13 September, IGAD held the twenty-eighth extraordinary summit of
Heads of State and Government in Mogadishu, the first such summit on Somali soil
in 42 years. This significant event reflected growing confidence in the country’s
future.

B.

Security developments
7.
In Mogadishu, Al-Shabaab stepped up the use of car bombings with the
intention of perpetuating a sense of insecurity among the public during the electoral
period. On 18 September, a suicide bomber drove his vehicle into a Somali forces
convoy, killing a senior commander and seven soldiers. On 1 October, an explosive laden vehicle detonated outside a restaurant, killing 4 people and injuring 10 others.
On 5 November, a suicide bomber drove into a Somali and AMISOM convoy,
killing four troops and injuring nine others. On 11 December, a minivan exploded at
the port of Mogadishu, killing more than 35 people. Two suicide bombers failed to
hit their targets on 10 and 15 December, but their vehicles exploded, killing a
National Intelligence and Security Agency officer and injuring 12 other people.
Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility for a mortar attack that caused minor damage to
the United Nations common compound on 29 September. Suspected Al -Shabaab
operatives gunned down six clan elders and two electoral delegates on 20 October,
2, 6, 9 and 29 November and 11 and 28 December.

2/20

16-23183

S/2017/21

8.
In central and southern Somalia, Al-Shabaab continued to engage in guerrilla
warfare and occasionally deployed fighters to carry out complex attacks. On
16 September, some 150 fighters raided a Somali army base in Ceel Waaq, Gedo
region, killing eight soldiers. On 18 October, more than 100 Al-Shabaab fighters
attacked multiple government locations in Afgooye, Shabelle Hoose region, killing
14 people, including two senior military officials and the Director General of the
Ministry of Finance of the Interim South-West Administration. On 25 October, an
explosives-laden truck targeted Djiboutian positions in Beledweyne, Hiraan region,
leaving four people dead and eight injured.
9.
Al-Shabaab made some territorial gains following the withdrawal of Ethiopian
and Somali forces from Muqakoori, Ceel Cali and Halgen, Hiraan region, on
15 September and 11 and 23 October. The group also regained control of
Tayeeglow, Bakool region, following the withdrawal on 26 October of Ethiopian
and Somali troops. Somali forces sought to recover the town on 15 November, but
did not succeed. In Bay region, Somali forces twice lost Goof Guduud Shabelow to
Al-Shabaab, on 1 and 23 November, but regained control of the town with the
support of AMISOM on 7 December.
10. The security situation in Puntland deteriorated following the outbreak on
7 October of armed clashes between forces loyal to Puntland and those loyal to
Galmudug in Gaalkacyo. Heavy fighting occurred almost daily until a ceasefire was
agreed on 18 November. Sporadic gunfire continued nonetheless, and heavy clashes
broke out again on 23 December. The conflict triggered significant population
displacement and left more than 74 people dead and 220 injured.
11. On 26 October, between 50 and 100 militiamen belonging to an Al -Shabaab
splinter group that declared allegiance to Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
seized the coastal town of Qandala, Bari region. Puntland security forces launched
coordinated ground, sea and air operations early in November with the support of
bilateral partners, but encountered resistance and were forced to retreat. On
3 December, they launched a fresh ground offensive and retook control of the town
on 7 December. The media reported more than 30 fatalities among pro -ISIL fighters,
while an unspecified number of people retreated to surrounding areas and remain at
large.
12. There were some violent incidents relating to the electoral process. In Baidoa,
Bay region, militias supporting rival candidates for the lower house clashed on
29 October and 12 November. In Cadaado, Galguduud region, clan tensions
escalated around 14 November and resulted in a civilian being shot dead by a
Somali soldier. In Garoowe, Puntland, sporadic gunfire was reported during polling
sessions on 5 November.
13. On 8 and 9 October, the Under-Secretary-General for Safety and Security
visited Somalia and met the President, Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, the Minister for
Internal Security and the Director General of the National Intelligence and Security
Agency. He noted some improvement in the general security situation since his
previous visit, in August 2014. He reiterated the importance of the host Government
in providing security support to United Nations personnel, assets and operations,
given the attacks carried out against the United Nations.

16-23183

3/20

S/2017/21

III. Support for peacebuilding and state-building efforts
A.

International coordination and political support
14. My Special Representative continued to strengthen international efforts aimed
at enhancing the country’s peacebuilding and state-building process. He regularly
met Somali leaders, key international partners, members of the ad hoc electoral
bodies and other stakeholders as part of his drive to ensure coherent and effective
support for the electoral process. His office issued joint statements with
international partners, including to express concern about the nomination of
candidates with a known history of violence and alleged criminal involvement and
to urge that reports of intimidation and corruption be prope rly addressed.
15. On 19 and 20 November, my Special Representative and international partners
jointly visited Gaalkacyo, Boosaaso, Baidoa, Jawhar and Cadaado, urging the
leaders of those regions to expedite the electoral process and honour their
commitment to ensuring 30 per cent representation of women.
16. In the wake of the aforementioned intermittent fighting in Gaalkacyo, my
Special Representative led a joint mission of the United Nations and international
partners to the city on 12 and 15 November. He held consultations with the Federal
Prime Minister and the Presidents of Puntland and Galmudug, as well as with key
stakeholders from both sides, to listen to their concerns and submit proposals for a
lasting peace. On 19 November, at the request of the Federal Government, he
deployed two United Nations advisers to the Gaalkacyo Ceasefire Team Advisory
Group, which is led by IGAD and mandated to advise on ceasefire monitoring. This
development helped to calm tensions.
17. The “Security Six”, a forum established by my Special Representative at the
request of the Federal Government and aimed at bringing coherence to the work of
the principal international stakeholders in the Somali security sector, continued to
meet regularly. Comprising the European Union, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America and the United Nations, the forum has established a secretariat to
coordinate the work of its members on the comprehensive approach t o security. It
has also made progress in reframing the international approach to supporting the
country’s security as a political rather than purely technical challenge. This progress
was evident at a ministerial meeting held on the margins of the United N ations
Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial: London 2016, held in London in September
2016, at which all members of the forum and AMISOM troop -contributing countries
present committed themselves to supporting a security solution that took into
account the need for a comprehensive approach to security, recognizing that
partners must reenergize efforts to support the emergence of effective security
institutions in Somalia.
18. In the context of the comprehensive approach to security, UNSOM brought
together key international partners to agree on how to best engage with the African
Union to secure mutual commitments for AMISOM operations in 2017. Another
point of focus was on how to coordinate support for accelerating the capacity
development of the Somali security institutions and developing a common strategy
for preventing and countering violent extremism.

4/20

16-23183

S/2017/21

B.

Inclusive politics
19. The Federal Indirect Electoral Implementation Team and state -level indirect
electoral implementation teams continued to oversee the electoral process. They
received support from the Integrated Electoral Support Group (comprising UNSOM
and United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) personnel) in procuring
electoral materials and equipment and delivering them to polling sites. In add ition,
the Group provided capacity-building to the teams in the form of training in
candidate registration, polling, vote counting and result tabulation.
20. In line with its mandate to conduct universal elections in 2020, the National
Independent Electoral Commission launched technical preparations to begin
registering political parties in 2017. Accordingly, the Integrated Electoral Support
Group provided technical expertise to enable the operationalization of the political
parties legislation, including by sharing good practices and lessons learned from
other countries in the region and through the review of relevant legal provisions that
require amendment. The Ministry of the Interior and Federal Affairs and the
Commission have been reviewing, with the support of the Group, the pre-civil war
electoral legal framework with a view to drafting the future electoral law.
21. The electoral model emerged from 18 months of public consultations and
political negotiations. Designed with a view to ensuring a peacefu l transition of
power, it was unique and suited to the country’s institutional, political and cultural
realities. The electoral process included important electoral features typically
associated with a more conventional election, such as codes of conduct, secret
ballots and the establishment of ad hoc implementation and dispute resolution
bodies. In a sign of progress, it also featured an expanded electorate, the conduct of
elections around the country for the first time in almost 50 years and the election of
an upper house on the basis of geographical, not simply clan, representation.
22. UNSOM engaged with civil society actors countrywide, including women, to
ensure their participation and representation in the electoral process and conducted
public outreach campaigns through social media, radio and television. The
campaign included the provision of communications support to the Federal Indirect
Electoral Implementation Team; the promotion of women’s representation; civic
education activities to promote the credibility of the process, with extensive use of
the mission’s social media platforms; capacity-building workshops to prepare
Somali journalists to cover the voting process; outreach to international media; and
ensuring that the international community spoke with a unified voice on issues and
concerns relating to the process.
23. On 21 September, key stakeholders in the political process, including
international donors and Somali partners, endorsed a report presented by the United
Nations on lessons learned in the constitutional review process since 2012. Among
other things, the United Nations took stock of the main achievements and
shortcomings of the 2012-2016 review process. UNSOM, United Nations agencies
and international partners subsequently agreed on priorities for the next cycle of
review of the Provisional Federal Constitution, which offers a historic opportunity
to shape the legal architecture of a federal Somalia. Following the electoral process,
UNSOM has identified the constitutional review as a priority for the country’s
transition to a constitutional democracy.

16-23183

5/20

S/2017/21

24. UNSOM held extensive meetings with representatives of non-governmental
organizations and with traditional elders from the Hiraan and Shabelle Dhexe
regions in order to advance the state formation process. UNSOM also engaged with
clan elders from the Banadir region to hear their concerns about the final status of
Mogadishu and their representation in the electoral process and in political
institutions, especially the two houses of the Federal Parliament.

C.

Rule of law and security institutions
25. The federal security architecture will be discussed by the Federal Government
and representatives of the existing and emerging federal member states at a
workshop to be convened by the United Kingdom and the United States in January.
The objective is to reach a final agreement on the federal security structure at the
London Conference on Somalia, currently scheduled to be held in May 2017.
26. Delays in regular salary payments to Somali security personnel remain a key
concern and a major incentive for personnel to desert or, worse, defect. Salary
arrears are currently estimated at between 6 and 13 months for soldiers and
15 months for police officers. Donor-funded stipends, however, are paid regularly to
the national army, the federal police and 1,000 regional police officers in Baidoa
and Kismaayo.
27. The Federal Government reached an agreement with the Puntland authorities
on the integration of 3,000 Puntland militiamen into the na tional army on 1 August.
A mechanism for funding the delivery of a non-lethal support package to those
troops by the United Nations Office for Project Services will need to be put in place
before the Office can conduct an initial project assessment.
28. UNSOM and UNDP continued to support the implementation of the new
federated policing model that was endorsed by the National Leadership Forum in
June. While there is strong commitment on the part of the existing and emerging
federal member states to developing a decentralized policing model, the momentum
that existed at the federal level stalled during the second half of 2016. International
advocacy and support will be provided to the incoming Federal Government to
promote the implementation of the model and to reinvigorate commitment.
29. The Interim Jubba Administration is authorizing explosive ordnance disposal
capacity training for selected members of its police service, with assistance from the
Mine Action Service and UNSOM. The initiative supports the c omprehensive
approach to security, in line with the new policing model. A total of $2 million was
received from Germany for a non-lethal support package for the Somali police. An
amount of $1 million has been assigned to the technical committees for the
implementation of the new policing model in each state. The remaining $1 million
will be used to build a police training facility in Kismaayo; the land has been
secured and it is expected that construction will begin early in 2017.
30. Discussions continued among Somali stakeholders at the federal and state
levels on the design of an effective and affordable justice and corrections system,
including at a technical workshop in December, supported by the United Nations.
Steps were also taken to strengthen the delivery of justice services and expand
access to justice. A legal clinic, intended for vulnerable groups, especially women

6/20

16-23183

S/2017/21

and internally displaced persons, was established at Mogadishu University, and
plans are under way to deploy legal aid providers in southern and central Somalia,
and for the first time to Baidoa and Kismaayo. The participants in a workshop on
justice priorities, held in November, agreed that the Somalia Joint Rule of Law
Programme would accord priority to institutional support and access to justice at the
subfederal level, as well as to the finalization and implementation of the justice and
corrections model, in 2017.
31. As part of the effort by the Custodial Corps to ensure security nationwide,
UNSOM provided support for prison incident management training to more than
200 regional prison officers. In a related development, the Baidoa prison pilot
rehabilitation project for high-risk Al-Shabaab prisoners concluded on
31 December. It had been intended to collect data on the prisoners and to design and
implement a rehabilitation programme. The results and lessons learned will support
the development of the second phase, which will be focused on the rehabilitation
and reintegration of Al-Shabaab inmates.
32. Efforts continued to reintegrate former Al-Shabaab combatants. A fourth
rehabilitation facility for low-risk disengaged combatants, located in Kismaayo and
funded by Germany, is scheduled to be operational by the first quarter of 2017.
Meanwhile, the Elman Peace and Human Rights Centre is partnering with UNSOM
on reintegration projects for disengaged Al-Shabaab combatants in Mogadishu,
Baidoa, Kismaayo and Beledweyne. This eight-month programme, which began in
September, is expected to be completed by April 2017. The programme provides
employment opportunities for 500 disengaged combatants and 500 vulnerable
community members and is supported by a public information campaign. The
projects include the expansion of four transition centres and the rehabilitation of a
school, hospital, court and prison in each location. UNSOM also supported the
National Intelligence and Security Agency in developing draft standard operating
procedures and criteria for the uniform screening and profiling of disengaged
Al-Shabaab combatants.
33. As part of its evolving counter-terrorism platform, the Federal Government
announced its national strategy and action plan for preventing and countering
violent extremism in September. Identified therein are key areas for development,
with a focus on ensuring an inclusive process, involving Somali civil society, youth
and women’s groups, religious leaders and the private sector. Since the launch, the
Federal Government has aimed to further devolve the strategy for implementation
by the countering violent extremism coordinators at the subfederal level. On
1 December, Puntland held a stakeholder consultation meeting, which UNSOM
attended. UNSOM is developing a separate strand on countering and preventing
violent extremism in the comprehensive approach to security to ensure a
coordinated and inclusive approach among all stakeholders. This will be done in
close cooperation with the Federal Government and existing and emerging federal
member states, as endorsed by the Federal Government’s countering viol ent
extremism coordinator on 21 November.

16-23183

7/20

S/2017/21

D.

Economic foundations
34. The gross domestic product (GDP) was projected to reach $6.2 billion at the
end of 2016 and GDP per capita $450. Consumption remains the key driver, with
investment accounting for 8 per cent of GDP in 2016. The economy is highly
dependent on imports, with the share of exports to GDP currently at 14 per cent.
Imports account for more than two thirds of GDP, creating a large trade deficit,
mainly financed by remittances and international aid.
35. According to the latest World Bank poverty survey, about half of the country’s
population (51.6 per cent) is currently living below the poverty line. Remittances
remain a key safety net; of every three people who receive remittances, one is poor.
Inequality remains high and driven by the gaps in urban poverty incidence.
36. In the light of the expiration of the Somali Compact, Somalia finalized its first
national development plan in more than 30 years. The plan, which is aligned with
the Sustainable Development Goals and the interim poverty reduction strategy
policy, provides the country with full ownership of its development agenda. While it
will need to be revalidated by the new Federal Government, the plan provides the
basis for addressing key development priorities, especially infrastructure, the
provision of social services and overall poverty reduction. A new mutual
accountability framework between Somalia and the international community is
under development and expected to be signed at a high-level partnership forum to
be held in London during the first half of 2017, thereby aligning international
support with national development priorities.

E.

Revenue and services
37. The fiscal situation is improving. Nevertheless, there is a need to mobilize
greater domestic revenue. According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), real
GDP growth for 2016, projected at 3.7 per cent, is driven by the
telecommunications, construction and service sectors. Consumer price inflation is
projected to remain low, at about 1.0 to 1.5 per cent, mainly reflecting weak
commodity prices. For 2017, growth is projected to decelerate to about 2.5 per cent,
owing to the impact of poor rains on the agricultural sector. The national budget is
only $240 million. Poor tax collection capacity, a narrow tax base, the absence of
legal and regulatory frameworks and a lack of territorial control continue to hinder
full revenue mobilization.
38. Notwithstanding the progress made in meeting IMF structural benchmarks,
Somalia continues to struggle to respond to basic fiscal challenges. An IMF mission
in November concluded that the country had met all structural benchmarks and six
out of seven quantitative performance targets for the first review of the staff monitored programme. Nevertheless, the benchmark on non-accrual of new arrears
had not been met. It is expected that the staff report for the article IV consultation
held in 2016 and the first review under the staff-monitored programme will be
discussed by the IMF Executive Board in late January 2017.
39. The country’s capacity to deliver services remains limited and largely
dependent on assistance from the international community, especially in terms of

8/20

16-23183

S/2017/21

health, education, nutrition and water, sanitation and hygiene. W hile Somalia ranks
among the world’s worst cases of malnutrition, progress is being achieved. A
national survey conducted by the United Nations Children’s Fund, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the Ministry of Health in 2016
showed a rise to a 33 per cent in the rate of exclusive breastfeeding and to 83 per
cent in the number of newborn children being breastfed within the first hour of
birth. Social and human development will be key priorities for Somalia to address
through its national development plan, to which the international community has
committed itself to aligning future support.

F.

Cross-cutting issues
Community recovery and local governance
40. The Ministry of the Interior and Federal Affairs, alongside its regional
counterparts, continued to promote the Wadajir National Framework for Local
Governance, which is focused on enabling community reconciliation to build
stability. The United Nations Joint Programme on Local Governance and
Decentralized Service Delivery continued to provide support for the formation of
district councils aimed at strengthening local governance and improving service
delivery. On 17 November, the Somalia Development and Reconstruction Facility
endorsed two programmes supported by an amount of $12 million from the
Peacebuilding Fund. The two programmes are designed to enhance community
recovery and the extension of state authority, as well as to catalyse stronger local
governance in line with the Wadajir Framework, with a focus on Jubaland and
South-West. One programme will support efforts around a comprehensive response
to drivers of fragility and the other the provision of durable solutions for internally
displaced persons, returnees, host communities and authorities.
41. Community recovery projects continued to receive support from donors and
the United Nations in Hiraan, Shabelle Dhexe, Galmudug, South -West and
Jubaland. The United States Agency for International Developme nt supported state
authorities and communities in planning projects to promote economic growth and
support social cohesion in Kismaayo, Afmadow, Wanlaweyn, Diinsoor, Baraawe and
Baardheere. The Somalia Stability Fund continued to support similar efforts in
Warshiikh, Mahadday Weym, Cadale, Cadaado, Balanbaley and Hobyo. Following
an evaluation in September of its vocational training programme designed to help to
counter violent extremism among young people, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization is expanding the approach to Dhooble, Mogadishu,
Kismaayo and Baidoa.
Human rights
42. The number of human rights violations increased during the reporting period,
primarily owing to state security operations and continued Al -Shabaab activity.
Reported civilian casualties totalled 623, comprising 260 deaths and 363 injuries.
Security operations generated 242 civilian casualties, of which 55 deaths and 120
injuries were attributed to the Somali security forces and 37 deaths and 12 injuries
to AMISOM. UNSOM continued to engage with AMISOM on reported allegations
of violations of human rights and humanitarian law, including the incident of

16-23183

9/20

S/2017/21

17 July that left 14 civilians dead and 3 others injured in Wardinle, near Baidoa,
which was attributed to AMISOM (Ethiopian) troops. AMISOM is finalizing its
investigation.
43. The conflict in Gaalkacyo represented 53 per cent of the total civilian
casualties attributed to the Somali security forces and resulted in 25 civilians being
killed and 63 injured by crossfire between Puntland and Galmudug forces. Since
September, six death sentences have been pronounced in Somalia, and two have
been carried out.
44. Civilian casualties attributed to Al-Shabaab or unidentified persons totalled
91 deaths and 126 injuries. A total of 46 people were abducted by Al-Shabaab, 35 of
whom were later released. The attacks represent an increase of 1.4 per cent from the
previous reporting period.
45. In September, UNSOM and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights jointly released the first public United Nations
report on the right to freedom of expression in Somalia, covering the period
between 2012 and 2016. Recommended therein are measures towards increasing
protection, enhancing accountability and addressing impunity. The Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Investment Promotion pledged that the Federal Government
would address violations against the media. On 5 September, the Media Association
of Puntland issued a press statement in which it commended the rep ort and urged
stakeholders to abide by the recommendations made. On 8 September in
“Somaliland”, the “Somaliland” Minister of Presidential Affairs accused the
independent media of destabilizing “Somaliland” security, labelling it an “armed
militia that requires disarmament”. Media associations and human rights
organizations called for the Minister to refrain from making such threats.
Gender equality and women’s empowerment
46. In September, the National Leadership Forum reaffirmed its commitment to
ensuring that 30 per cent of parliamentary seats would be held by women, giving
clear guidance in a communiqué on how the goal should be realized. The
implementation of the decision proved to be a challenge, however. Nevertheless,
intense advocacy efforts carried out by women leaders, candidates, goodwill
ambassadors, the Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development and
international partners yielded positive results, with the attainment of greater
representation of women in the lower house of the Federal P arliament (24 per cent)
than in 2012 (14 per cent).
47. During the electoral process, female candidates and advocates faced threats
and intimidation. They also cited corruption as an issue negatively affecting the
ability of women to stage successful candidacies. To address this issue, UNSOM
and UNDP increased their logistical support to women candidates and advocates
and coordinated with civil society organizations, goodwill ambassadors and the
Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development. The United Na tions also
assisted the Ministry with the deployment of situation room teams in seven electoral
locations. This enabled women leaders to effectively mobilize and overcome many
of the challenges that they faced.

10/20

16-23183

S/2017/21

Child protection
48. The country task force on monitoring and reporting recorded 477 incidents of
grave violations against children during the reporting period, affecting 854 children
(157 girls and 697 boys). In addition, 46 incidents of unlawful detention involving
92 children on security grounds and for alleged association with Al-Shabaab were
documented.
49. A joint age assessment exercise by the Puntland authorities and the United
Nations confirmed that 64 of the Al-Shabaab elements captured in Puntland in
March were below 18 years of age. On 17 September, 28 of the children, from 15 to
17 years of age, were sentenced to between 10 and 20 years’ imprisonment by a
military court in Garoowe. Following intensive advocacy by the United Nations and
bilateral partners, the Puntland authorities agreed to release 26 other children,
between 12 and 14 years of age. They were handed over to the United Nations on
5 October to begin their reintegration. UNSOM and the United Nations Children’s
Fund continued to work closely with the Puntland authorities t o ensure that the
death sentences handed down on 16 June against 12 of the children and the lengthy
prison sentences against 28 others are revoked. Currently, 272 boys and 55 girls are
benefiting from reintegration programmes in Baidoa and Mogadishu, inclu ding the
26 children airlifted from Puntland in October 2016.
Prevention of sexual violence
50. UNSOM has been supporting the creation of women and child protection units
in the Somali police force as part of an effort to enhance the response of law
enforcement bodies to cases of sexual violence and to better protect victims and
survivors. Specific steps have been taken since December 2015, including the
adoption of terms of reference for the units on 3 September, following extensive
consultations among key stakeholders, including the United Nations, AMISOM, the
Federal Government and international donors.
51. In September, the United Nations Population Fund conducted a training
session in Mogadishu on the prevention of gender-based violence, with 25 police
officers from various regions participating. This resulted in increased police
engagement with service providers and other stakeholders on gender-based violence
prevention, mitigation and response.
Targeted sanctions
52. On 3 October, my Assistant Secretary-General and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator briefed the Security Council Committee p ursuant to resolutions 751
(1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea on the report submitted
pursuant to paragraph 24 of Council resolution 2244 (2015) (S/2016/827). The
Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea presented its final report on Somalia
(S/2016/919) to the Committee on 7 October. The Federal Government submitted its
second report pursuant to paragraph 7 of Council resolution 2244 (2015) to the
Council on 15 October. On 10 November, the Council adopted resolution 2317
(2016), by which it renewed, until 15 November 2017, the partial lifting of the arms
embargo on Somalia. On 15 December, seven experts were appointed to serve on
the Monitoring Group until 15 December 2017 (see S/2016/1065).

16-23183

11/20

S/2017/21

IV. Humanitarian situation
53. The humanitarian situation deteriorated during the reporting period and is set
to worsen as drought conditions extend beyond Puntland and “Somaliland” to areas
in the south, such as Gedo and Juba Hoose. A continued lack of social safety nets
and basic services increases the country’s vulnerability and the potential for a
broader crisis. The situation is expected to worsen because the current deyr rainy
season has not yielded the expected level of rainfall.
54. The assessments carried out by the Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit
of the post-gu rain were delivered in September and showed that two worrying
thresholds had been surpassed. There are now 5 million Somalis facing acute food
shortages, of whom more than 1.1 million are in emergency and crisis situations.
The nutrition situation has also deteriorated, with more than 320,000 acutely
malnourished children in need of urgent nutrition support, including more than
50,000 who are severely malnourished.
55. The growing humanitarian needs come as resources are dwindling. The
perception that Somalia is on the rise, coupled with competition from other global
crises, has led to diminished humanitarian funding. As at early December, the
Humanitarian Response Plan for 2016, launched in January, was funded at just in
excess of 47 per cent, or $414 million of the $885 million required. Owing to the
limited resources, livelihood and resilience programmes had to be deprioritized in
favour of life-saving programmes.
56. Besides drought, Somalia has seen a sharp increase in conflict -related
displacement, raising protection concerns for those affected, in particular women
and children. The most serious concerns emerged in Gaalkacyo, where 90,000
civilians were displaced by conflict in October, resulting in a lack of schooling for
20,000 children. The withdrawal of foreign military assets in the Bakool, Galmudug
and Hiraan regions displaced at least 5,000 people and exposed those who remained
to retribution at the hands of Al-Shabaab and reduced humanitarian access. Clan
conflict with Al-Shabaab in eastern Shabelle Hoose displaced nearly 30,000 people
and had a negative impact on access.
57. On 6 November 2016, the Interim Jubba Administration officially lifted its
temporary suspension of the voluntary return of Somali refugees from the Dadaab
refugee camp in Kenya. This came after a series of consultative meetings among
parties to the tripartite agreement governing the voluntary repatriation of Somali
refugees living in Kenya. Nearly 35,000 Somalis have returned voluntarily since
December 2014 under the agreement. Partners continued to provide life -saving and
reintegration assistance, the limited resources notwithstanding.
58. In October, an estimated 543,900 people received food assistance, while
1.7 million received seasonal agriculture inputs, including seeds, tools, fishing
equipment, irrigation vouchers, livestock and vaccinations for livestock. Some
43,300 malnourished children under 5 years of age were admitted into nu trition
programmes and more than 700,000 Somalis received basic health services, while in
excess of 1 million people were provided with temporary and/or sustainable access
to safe water. Nearly 312,100 people accessed protection services, while education
partners reached some 90,000 learners with teaching activities and school feeding

12/20

16-23183

S/2017/21

programmes. An estimated 98,100 people were assisted with non-food items and
12,300 with transitional shelter.

V. Support to the African Union Mission in Somalia, the
Somali national army and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia
59. UNSOS continued to provide logistical support to AMISOM and the Somali
national armed forces in support of military operations and in accordance with
Security Council resolution 2245 (2015). In support of the electoral process,
coordination between UNSOS and AMISOM at the strategic and operational levels
ensured the provision of adequate security and logistical support at all pollin g
stations. Of key significance is the case of Cadaado, Galmudug, where, before the
elections, AMISOM had had no presence but, through effective coordination
mechanisms, it was able to deploy swiftly and receive UNSOS logistical support on
a self-sustainment basis.
60. A letter of assist with Kenya for the deployment of three military helicopters
to AMISOM was finalized in November, with the helicopters deployed on
15 December. Discussions continued with Uganda and Ethiopia to facilitate the
deployment of additional helicopters. There is, however, a need for Member States
to support AMISOM with the reimbursement of ammunition, given that this is not
covered by the United Nations.
61. Somali troops continued to receive UNSOS logistical support under an
UNSOS-managed trust fund. The planned assessment of the capability and combat
readiness of the national armed forces to carry out joint operations with AMISOM,
scheduled for September, was not conducted because securing the electoral process
had to take priority. The assessment will be carried out immediately after the
installation of the new Federal Government.
62. The Mine Action Service continued to provide technical support and training
in improvised explosive device detection and destruction as part of it s efforts to
enhance AMISOM operational mobility. Through a United Nations/AMISOM
working group on improvised explosive devices, which was established in
September, a “defeat-the-device” training plan was launched under the guidance of
the Service. It comprises mitigation measures, specifically awareness, increased
search capacity, technical operational equipment, threat/route assessments and
proactive analysis. The combined efforts of the training partners, through the
AMISOM force headquarters, resulted in AMISOM finding an increased number of
improvised explosive devices before they could detonate, as manifested by the
Ugandan military locating and disposing of 16 devices on sector 1 main supply
routes in October.
63. Efforts are under way to enhance security on the main supply routes in order to
encourage trade and the movement of people, facilitate humanitarian access and
ultimately contribute to the expansion of governance and state authority in areas
liberated by AMISOM. Discussions with UNSOS led to AMISOM committing itself
to incrementally providing force protection for road convoys, thereby drastically
reducing the current overreliance on airlifts for logistical support.

16-23183

13/20

S/2017/21

64. The parlous state of the trust funds for AMISOM and the national army is of
grave concern. As at the end of November, the balance of the former was
$400,000 and the latter $13.65 million. Additional contributions from partners are
critical to enabling AMISOM to achieve its mandate and ensuring a smooth transfer
of security responsibilities to the Somali security forces.
65. My newly appointed Assistant Secretary-General and Head of UNSOS, Hubert
Price, assumed office in October. He visited Addis Ababa on 18 and 19 October and
met representatives of the African Union, AMISOM troop- and police-contributing
countries, AMISOM partners and the United Nations Office to the African Union.
He outlined his agenda, which includes improving strategic engagement,
coordination and communication with key stakeholders and enhancing the
operational effectiveness of UNSOS.
66. On 11 November, the Military Operations Coordination Committee met for the
twenty-first time, in Addis Ababa, to review operational progress in support of the
electoral process and to consider options for strengthening the operational
effectiveness of AMISOM to conduct future offensive operations. The Committee
requested support for additional troops to conduct offensive operations, together
with additional support for the Somali army in or der to accelerate the planned
AMISOM exit strategy. The Committee urged the United Nations and partners to
facilitate the deployment of critical enablers and force multipliers, including
capability to counter improvised explosive devices in support of AMIS OM
operations. It rejected the decision by the European Union to differentiate its
payment procedure to the Burundian contingent in Somalia and expressed concern
about the reduction by the European Union of the AMISOM troop allowance by
20 per cent. The Committee requested the United Nations, the European Union and
the broader international community to urgently find ways of bridging the gap.
Human rights due diligence policy
67. On 27 September, the AMISOM/United Nations working group met in
Mogadishu to discuss the implementation of mitigation measures under the human
rights due diligence policy, including status and accountability with regard to human
rights violations and how to strengthen the Civilian Casualty Tracking, Analysis and
Response Cell. While marked progress was noted on formal responses from
AMISOM to allegations, the need to implement mitigation measures, accountability
and remedies for victims was emphasized. AMISOM announced the adoption of a
force commander’s directive and the launch of monthly briefings for commanders
on compliance with international humanitarian law. On 13 October, the human
rights due diligence policy risk assessments for the Ethiopian contingent, the
Kenyan contingent and the Jubaland security forces were approve d by the policy
task force following an African Union request for non-lethal support to enable these
forces to conduct joint offensive operations with AMISOM. The task force approved
the risk assessment for the provision of attack helicopters to AMISOM on
23 November.
68. UNSOS supported AMISOM with the organization of a two -day workshop in
October to develop standard operating procedures for the Civilian Casualty
Tracking, Analysis and Response Cell. The development of the standard operating
procedures provides AMISOM with additional tools for tracking and reporting on

14/20

16-23183

S/2017/21

civilians affected in the course of operations and makes it more compliant with the
human rights due diligence policy, in accordance with Security Council resolution
2124 (2013).

VI. United Nations presence
69. The security risk level for the area protected by AMISOM at Mogadishu
International Airport has remained high since the pre vious assessment, in May 2016.
UNSOS continued to implement recommended risk mitigation measures to improve
the safety and protection of all United Nations personnel. Similar projects are
continuing in the United Nations regional compounds.
70. Following the vehicle-borne improvised explosive device attack on 26 July
near Mogadishu International Airport, UNDP relocated national staff from the
United Nations common compound to the airport. More than 300 United Nations
national staff experience daily difficulties in gaining access to the airport owing to
additional restrictions and challenges at the gate, thus exposing them to multiple
security threats. To mitigate the threat, the pedestrian entry point will be redesigned.
71. The security situation in Gaalkacyo continued to be marred by sporadic
shooting, which had an impact on United Nations activities. The Federal
Government was reminded that it bore primary responsibility for the safety and
security of United Nations personnel, assets and operations. It was also encouraged
to constantly share information and coordinate with United Nations security
officials in order to create safe and secure conditions for personnel and activities.
72. An increasing number of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
operate and maintain a permanent presence of both international and national staff
outside Mogadishu. Insecurity remains the biggest impediment to operations. The
restricted access to some areas poses a challenge to the Organization’s ability to
respond to humanitarian and development needs.

VII. Observations
73. With the inauguration of the new Federal Parliament, Somalia has taken a
major step in its continuing transformation into a functioning federal State.
74. I commend the outgoing parliamentarians for their service and their role in
passing significant legislation. I congratulate the newly elected parliamentarians and
urge them to discharge their duties with the well-being of the people of Somalia at
heart. I urge the new Federal Parliament to proceed as swiftly as possi ble with the
election of the Speakers of the two houses, followed by that of the President.
75. The relatively peaceful electoral process attests to a gradual change in the
country’s political culture, with a move towards non-violent political competition.
The process faced many challenges, however, including the decision to conduct
electoral re-runs for five seats following allegations of misconduct. Unfortunately,
not all reported cases of misconduct were adequately addressed, including the
protection of seats reserved for women. Moving towards universal suffrage in 2020,
lessons must be drawn from the process. Practical measures should be put in place

16-23183

15/20

S/2017/21

to minimize electoral manipulation, the intimidation of candidates and corruption,
including cash for votes and misuse of public resources. The legal framework and
electoral institutions need to be put in place well ahead of the elections to be held in
2020, accompanied by extensive civic and voter education.
76. While the Somali leaders’ target of having women hold 30 per cent of seats
was not achieved, the representation of women has increased by 70 per cent since
2012. A transformation has thus taken place of the political representation and
participation of women in Somalia, and an important precedent has been set for the
political mobilization of women.
77. I welcome the completion of the federal map of Somalia with the creation of
the HirShabelle Interim Administration. The challenges experienced underscore the
importance of inclusivity in any state formation process. The sustainable completion
of the process will require the resolution of the final status of Mogadishu and
endemic conflicts, such as those affecting Gaalkacyo, Sool and Sanaag and pockets
of Shabelle Hoose. The conflicts continue to challenge the prospects for long-term
stability and could create openings for Al-Shabaab to exploit. I urge all existing and
emerging federal member states to continue to reach out to their communities in a
sustained process of reconciliation.
78. Anchoring the country’s emerging political structures on a solid rule of law
framework will be among the strongest guarantors of long -term stability and durable
governance reform. I therefore call upon the relevant stakeholders to carefully
design the next constitutional review phase in a manner that is fully inclusive of
regional actors. The international community’s sustained engagement and financial
assistance remains vital to the early adoption of a permanent constitution. I urge the
Federal Government and the existing and emerging federal member states to ensure
an effective constitutional review process by building consensus through broad based consultations at multiple levels of society.
79. The work of AMISOM continues to be a vital enabler of progress in
peacebuilding and state-building. The sacrifices that AMISOM troops are making
are not in vain. They go far in contributing to lasting peace and stability in Somalia
and the Horn of Africa. I urge the Federal Government and the federal member
states to accord the highest priority to security in 2017, in particular to supporting
the establishment of security institutions that can effectively tackle current security
threats, including Al-Shabaab, and that are accountable to civilian command and
operate with respect for human rights.
80. The decision of the Government of Kenya to deploy three helicopters in
support of AMISOM operations is welcome. I urge other potential contributors,
especially the Governments of Ethiopia and Uganda, to accelerate discussions with
the United Nations to provide AMISOM with the full complement of its air asset
requirements.
81. I applaud the finalization of the country’s first national development plan in
more than 30 years. It is testament to the progress made in the realm of politics a nd
security. I am encouraged by efforts to promote accountable governance and
community recovery. This has taken place through the Government’s Wadajir
Framework, which is underpinned by the United Nations community recovery and
extension of state authority/accountability approach. It is important to maintain such

16/20

16-23183

S/2017/21

progress and ensure that legitimate systems for local government administration and
management are implemented across all districts.
82. To sustain recent political and security gains, I encourage international
partners to continue to ensure that coherent and long -term support is provided to
build the capacity of Somali institutions to deliver good governance and
community-led recovery initiatives. To this end, I welcome the decision of the
Somalia Development and Reconstruction Facility to endorse the priority plan for
Somalia supported by the Peacebuilding Fund.
83. The human rights situation remains a source of concern, in particular the
execution of civilians by Al-Shabaab after the withdrawal of AMISOM and national
forces from areas in the Hiraan and Bakool regions. Since September, 18 people
have been executed and 40 abducted on suspicion of collaborating with government
security forces.
84. While the reintegration of 26 children detained on a ccount of their association
with Al-Shabaab is a positive development, I am concerned that little progress has
been made to commute the death sentences of 10 of the young people who remain in
custody in Boosaaso. Thirteen children now face capital punishme nt in Puntland.
Death sentences issued against children under 18 years of age are contrary to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, which the Federal Government ratified in
2015. I urge the Puntland authorities to follow through on the commitments mad e to
commute those sentences.
85. I am extremely concerned about the worsening humanitarian situation, which
is expected to deteriorate further in the coming months following the rainy season,
which is expected to be poor. The impact of severe drought and demand for
humanitarian resources have been exacerbated by emerging crises, including an
increase in conflict-related displacement. While scaled-up humanitarian assistance
is urgently required to prevent further decline, the United Nations -led durable
solutions initiative provides a viable road map towards addressing the long -term
humanitarian situation, alongside the need for a comprehensive drive towards food
security and increased food production. It is essential that arrangements put in place
to respond to drought-related humanitarian needs be effective, drawing upon the
lessons learned from the response in 2011.
86. I thank the African Union, AMISOM, IGAD, the European Union, Member
States, non-governmental organizations and other development partners for their
continued support for the peacebuilding and state-building process. There remains
much to do in the period until 2020, during which time the partnership must be
sustained. Efforts must continue to create an opportunity for Somalia to attract more
international investors.
87. Looking ahead to the coming four years, the Federal Government and the
international community will need to work in concert on a wide range of priorities,
including the finalization of the Federal Constitution, comprehensive se curity sector
reform, agreement on the sharing of power, revenue and resources between the
federal and regional levels, and sustained support for local conflict resolution and
reconciliation. Consolidating gains in these areas will require placing Somalia on to
a trajectory of sustainable economic recovery and growth. In this vein, further
support will also be required to ensure that the Federal Government is able to attract

16-23183

17/20

S/2017/21

private and public international investment, including through debt relief, and
address corruption and strengthen accountability.
88. I pay tribute to my Special Representative, Michael Keating, my two Deputy
Special Representatives and the staff of UNSOM, the Head of UNSOS and his staff
and also the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes in Somalia for their
continued hard work under challenging conditions. I assure them that their
commitment and sacrifices are not in vain.

18/20

16-23183

S/2017/21

Annex
Results of the electoral process for the lower house of the
Federal Parliament in 2016
Parliamentarians elected to
date who are women
Seats

Parliamentarians
elected to date

Number

Percentage

Remaining seats
to be filled
(including through
re-run elections)

Jubaland

43

42

10

24

1

South-West

69

68

14

21

1

Galmudug

36

35

9

26

1

Puntland

37

36

7

19

1

Banadir

6

4

1

25

2

“Somaliland”

46

36

12

33

10

HirShabelle

38

37

10

27

1

Total

275

258

63

24

17

Region

16-23183

19/20

S/2017/21

20/20

16-23183
