S/PRST/2014/18

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 August 2014
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7255th meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 August 2014, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the recent progress in Yemen’s political
transition, in line with the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
Implementation Mechanism, including the recent meeting of the National
Authority for Monitoring the Implementation of the National Dialogue
Outcomes on 11 August; and the economic reform agenda. The Security
Council supports President Abd Rabbo Mansour Hadi in his efforts to address
the concerns of all parties within the framework of the National Dialogue
Conference Outcomes, urging the Yemeni authorities to expedite the process of
reforms, including Army and security sector reform.
“The Security Council urges all the parties in Yemen to adhere to
resolving their differences through dialogue and consultation, reject acts of
violence to achieve political goals, refrain from provocation, and fully abide
by resolutions 2014 (2011), 2051 (2012) and 2140 (2014). Furthermore, the
Security Council calls on all member states to refrain from external
interference which seeks to foment conflict and instability and instead to
support the political transition.
“The members of the Security Council note with concern that the Houthis
and others continue to stoke the conflict in the north in an attempt to obstruct
the political transition. The Security Council recalls that resolution 2140
(2014) introduced targeted sanctions measures against individuals or entities
engaging in or providing support for acts that threaten the peace, security, or
stability in Yemen. The Security Council supports the efforts of the Panel of
Experts in gathering and analysing information regarding the implementation
of these measures, in particular incidents of undermining the political
transition.
“The Security Council expresses grave concern about the deterioration of
the security situation in Yemen in light of the action taken by the Houthis, led
by Abdul Malik al Houthi, and those who support them, to undermine the
political transition and the security of Yemen. These actio ns include their
escalating campaign to bring down the Government; establishing camps in and
around Sana’a; seeking to supplant the authority of the state by installing
14-60162 (E)

290814

*1460162*

S/PRST/2014/18

checkpoints on strategic routes into Sana’a; as well as on-going fighting in
al Jawf. The Security Council calls on all armed groups to refrain from any
action which might exacerbate this already fragile situation.
“The Security Council condemns the actions of Houthi forces
commanded by Abdullah Yahya al Hakim (Abu Ali al Hakim) who overr an
Amran including the Yemeni Army Brigade headquarters on 8 July.
“The Security Council calls on the Houthis to:
(a) withdraw their forces from Amran and return Amran to Government
of Yemen control;
(b) cease all armed hostilities against the Government of Yemen in
al Jawf; and
(c) remove the camps and dismantle the checkpoints they have erected
in and around Sana’a.
“The Security Council condemns the growing number of attacks carried
out or sponsored by Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, and expresses its
determination to address this threat in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, including applicable human rights,
refugee and humanitarian law, and in this regard, through the Al -Qaida
sanctions regime administered by the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) and reiterates its readiness, under the above-mentioned
regime, to sanction further individuals, groups, undertakings and entities who
do not cut off all ties to Al-Qaida and associated groups.
“The Security Council stresses the need for an initial draft of the
constitution to be passed to the National Authority review in a ti mely manner
in order to conduct a referendum on the constitution without undue delay.
“The Security Council reiterates its call for comprehensive, independent
and impartial investigations, consistent with international standards, into
alleged human rights violations and abuses in line with the outcomes of the
National Dialogue Conference and the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
Implementation Mechanism. The Security Council recalls its reference in
resolution 2140 (2014) to the early adoption of a law on transitional justice
and national reconciliation.
“The Security Council notes the formidable economic, security and
social challenges confronting Yemen, which continue to leave many Yemenis
in acute need of humanitarian assistance. It reaffirms the need to expedite
economic reforms, which are a necessary part of achieving macroeconomic
stability, fighting poverty and addressing the chronic humanitarian
consequences of the crisis in a sustainable manner. It encourages rapid
implementation of Government of Yemen plans to improve social protection,
as well as urging the international community to support the Humanitarian
Response plan which remains underfunded. The Security Council also urges
all parties to facilitate safe and unhindered access for humanitarian actors to
reach people in need of humanitarian assistance. It also reaffirms the need for
all parties to ensure the safety of civilians, including those receiving assistance
as well as the need to ensure the security of humanitarian personnel and United
Nations and its associated personnel.

2/3

14-60162

S/PRST/2014/18

“The Security Council remains closely engaged on the situation in Yemen
and will continue to closely follow the next steps towards a peaceful political
transition. In this regard it welcomes the continued and co -ordinated efforts of
the Gulf Cooperation Council, ‘Group of Ten Ambassadors’, the Secretary General’s Good Offices, including through the Special Adviser Jamal
Benomar, the wider diplomatic community, and the next Friends of Yemen
meeting that will take place on 24 September in New York. The Security
Council underscores the need for continued international support for Yemen’s
political transition, including through the fulfilment of commitments made by
donors to support Yemen.”

14-60162

3/3
