S/PV.7883

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7883rd meeting

Tuesday, 14 February 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Yelchenko. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ukraine)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Arancibia Fernández
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Gee
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (S/2017/111)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-03960 (E)
*1703960*

S/PV.7883

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments
in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (S/2017/111)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Guinea-Bissau and Liberia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Soares Sambú, Political and Diplomatic Adviser
and Special Envoy of the Prime Minister of the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Modibo
Touré, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau, and His Excellency Mr. Mauro
Vieira, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the GuineaBissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/111, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.
I now give the floor to Mr. Touré.
Mr. Touré (spoke in French): It is my honour
to introduce the report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (S/2017/111). I should like to inform
the Council of developments that have arisen since
the report was published. First, however, I should like
to describe the context in which these developments
have unfolded.
2/8

14/02/2017

On 14 October, stakeholders of the political elite
of Guinea-Bissau signed the Conakry Agreement,
paving the way for the country’s return to political
and institutional stability and creating the long-term
conditions necessary for the enactment of key reforms
laid out in the road map of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), which has been
endorsed by the African Union, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, the European Union
and the United Nations. In essence, the Conakry
Agreement was intended to mark a definitive departure
from the recurring episodes of instability and create a
foundation for a political renaissance in Guinea-Bissau.
Four months later, the stalement continues with
each passing day. The dialogue, reconciliation and
mutual concessions that characterized the spirit and
letter of the Conakry Agreement have been superceded
by dissent and the polarization of positions. Following
the Abuja summit of 17 December, the ECOWAS Heads
of Government expressed their serious concern in that
regard and urged the stakeholders to comply strictly
with the provisions of the Conakry Agreement. The
United Nations reiterated that call. Despite that urgent
appeal, the political rifts continue to deepen. In that
context, on Monday, 6 February, the Prime Minister
submitted on schedule the Government’s programme to
the Speaker of the National Assembly. The Assembly’s
timetable for consideration of the programme has
yet to be established. What we are seeing is growing
mistrust among the political stakeholders, fueled
by verbal escalations, reciprocal accusations and
myriad accusations.
(spoke in English)
On 5 January, the Government dismissed all
regional Governors and the Mayor of Bissau. It also
appointed new officials to various governmental and
security institutions. On 20 January, the decision to
rotate the security personnel deployed at the National
Assembly prompted a swift condemnation by the
Permanent Commission of the National Assembly as
being illegal and made without prior consultations with
the Speaker. Four days later, on 24 January, unknown
elements reportedly broke into and took documents
from the Office of the Speaker. Both the Office of the
Speaker and the Parti africain pour l’indépendance
de la Guinée et de Cabo Verde (PAIGC) have blamed
the Government and linked this incident to earlier
accusations made by Mr. Nuno Nabiam, the runnerup in the 2014 presidential election. The latter had
17-03960

14/02/2017

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

alleged that there was a plot to force the convening
of a parliamentary session to adopt the Government’s
programme through the removal of the Speaker and
the replacement of the National Assembly’s Bureau.
The Prime Minister has, however, dismissed these
allegations, stating that no hostile actions would be
taken against the National Assembly and its leadership.
On 8 February, the Bureau of the National Assembly
rejected a request by the Prosecutor General to lift
the parliamentary immunity of PAIGC President and
former Prime Minister Domingos Simões Pereira to be
heard as a witness in connection with past contracts
reportedly signed by his Government with private
banks. The Bureau decided that Mr. Simões Pereira
should be heard by the National Assembly instead.
Yesterday, the African Union Peace and Security
Council convened in Addis Ababa to examine, among
other items, the situation in Guinea-Bissau. The
Council expressed concern over the deteriorating
situation in the country and the lack of progress made
in the implementation of the Conakry Agreement. The
Council reiterated its support for the ECOWAS-led
mediation process and urged all parties to refrain from
any act susceptible of further escalating the situation.
I would like to seize this opportunity to reiterate my
appreciation to the Heads of State of ECOWAS and in
particular to its Chairperson, President Ellen Johnson
Sirleaf of Liberia, for persevering in their mediation
efforts and to the ECOWAS Mediator for the country,
President Alpha Condé of Guinea, for his crucial role.
The United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), in collaboration
with the P-5 partners, will work to support the timely
deployment of a planned high-level ECOWAS mission
to Guinea-Bissau to help advance the political dialogue.
Any breakthrough in the political dialogue will
remain short-lived if the structural causes of the
instability are not addressed. It will therefore be
critical for all national actors to strictly implement the
provisions of the Conakry Agreement, which remains
the framework for any effective and sustainable
resolution of the current political crisis.
Despite the political crisis, Guinea Bissau’s
economic performance has been remarkable. According
to the World Bank, the economy is estimated to have
expanded by 5 per cent in 2016, reflecting the impact
of a bumper cashew harvest. That is consistent with
the level of growth recorded in 2015 and compares

S/PV.7883

favourably to the 2.3 per cent growth in 2014. Sustaining
this economic growth, however, will require stability
and statesmanship. On the social front, the Government
has managed to pay salary arrears of several months,
particularly in the health and education sectors.
On a related note, I am also pleased to report
encouraging steps towards fostering national
reconciliation and social cohesion. From 8 to
11 February, the organizing commission for the national
conference organized an international symposium on
the theme “Facing the past to build the Guinea-Bissau
of tomorrow”, at the National Assembly’s premises.
The symposium was a welcome step forward for
the peace and reconciliation efforts in an otherwise
deadlocked political environment. The President of the
Republic attended the symposium and promised that he
would convene the honorary committee of the national
conference, over which he presides. UNIOGBIS
will continue its day-to-day technical and fmancial
support to national dialogue efforts at various levels, in
collaboration with the Peacebuilding Fund.
In the continued absence of a fully functioning
Government, the United Nations and international
financial institutions must continue to coordinate efforts
towards mitigating risks and reducing socioeconomic
vulnerabilities, including through business-for-peace
initiatives. To that end, we are currently working to take
forward a partnership initiative between UNIOGBIS,
the United Nations country team, the World Bank and
other interested partners to effectively strengthen local
resilience and promote peace in Guinea-Bissau, in line
with resolution 2282 (2016) which calls for a more
integrated political, security and development approach
to sustaining peace.
In the face of this challenging political environment,
UNIOGBIS will review its approach and restrategize in
line with current exigencies. That was why a strategic
review mission, led by the Department of Political
Affairs, travelled to Guinea-Bissau in December
to work with UNIOGBIS and the United Nations
country team to agree on the strategic priorities for
UNIOGBIS in the short to medium terms. The mission
recommended some important structural adjustments
to improve the internal performance of UNIOGBIS
and enhance synergies with the United Nations country
team for better delivery. The main recommendations
of the strategic review mission have been outlined in
the report of the Secretary-General. It is my hope that

17-039603/8

S/PV.7883

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

the Council will give positive consideration to these
important recommendations.
(spoke in French)
Guinea-Bissau being located in a subregion that
faces important security challenges, it is critical that
the international community strengthen the country’s
national capacities to address the complex problems
facing it. The people of Guinea-Bissau are proud,
peaceful, hard-working and aspire only to enjoy better
living conditions. I appeal to the entire political class
to reach beyond all partisan considerations, put the
national interest above all else and focus on the real
problems of the country, including the fight against
poverty and the promotion of sustainable development.
As the political landscape narrows, it is important to
promote dialogue and consultation.
Guinea-Bissau will continue to need the special
attention and support of the Security Council to find
the path to political stability and socioeconomic
development without delay. I take this opportunity to
reiterate my call on all political leaders to ensure that
all their actions and steps conform to the Constitution
and the legislation governing the organs of State.
The President: I thank Mr. Touré for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Vieira.
Mr. Vieira: I would like to start by thanking you,
Sir, for the invitation extended to me in my capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). As you are aware,
Brazil is currently Chair and a State member of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP),
an organization that closely follows the situation in
Guinea-Bissau. The CPLP endorses the remarks I am
about to make.
It is our firm belief that increasing synergies and
complementarities among the relevant international
partners will be beneficial to an effective peacebuilding
endeavour in Guinea-Bissau. I take this opportunity to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/111)
on developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). I also welcome
the briefing made by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of UNIOGBIS,
Mr. Modibo Touré, on the situation on the ground, and
wish to commend his good offices in the search for a
solution to the political impasse in Guinea-Bissau.
4/8

14/02/2017

Since the last time the Security Council deliberated
on Guinea-Bissau, in August 2016 (see S/PV.7764),
there has been a major positive development: the
adoption of the six-point road map and the Conakry
Agreement, which were endorsed at the fiftieth African
Union Assembly of Heads of State and Government.
There should be no hesitation with regard to the
implementation of such landmark agreements. In that
regard, I wish to commend the engagement of regional
actors with Guinea-Bissau aimed at providing a road
map for achieving political stability.
The international community must stay united
in supporting the mediation efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and in
reaffirming that the Conakry Agreement is the only
framework for a peaceful resolution of the political
and institutional instability in Guinea-Bissau. The
international community must also remain united in
providing all support needed for the full and effective
implementation of that Agreement in close coordination
with the authorities of Guinea-Bissau. We welcome,
in that regard, the contribution of the Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF) to the ECOWAS-led mediation efforts in
September and October. We have to continue identifying
concrete measures that can be taken to further facilitate
the full implementation of the six-point road map and
the Conakry Agreement.
The key actors involved in the stabilization process
of Guinea-Bissau — the African Union, ECOWAS,
the CPLP, the European Union and the United
Nations — will have an important role to play. In
that regard, I welcome the declaration on the political
situation in Guinea-Bissau adopted by the CPLP Heads
of State and Government at the eleventh Summit in
Brasilia in November last year. We are considering
reconvening the International Contact Group. I also
plan to visit Guinea-Bissau. Political will, constructive
and consensual dialogue, coupled with courageous
leadership, which, as we know, the people of GuineaBissau are capable of, are needed now more than ever.
It is important to highlight that a solution to the current
institutional and political situation is in the hands of the
people of Guinea-Bissau themselves.
In 2014, the development of the Terra Ranka
programme for the sustainable development of the
country marked a high point and provided hope for
all citizens of Guinea-Bissau. In March 2015, the
international community responded positively to the
efforts of the Government with strong pledges of support
17-03960

14/02/2017

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

at a donor conference to fund that national peacebuilding
programme. We encourage the national stakeholders in
Guinea-Bissau to commit to re-establishing momentum
for progress in the areas outlined in the Terra Ranka
development programme and to invite partners to fulfil
their pledges made there.
I also would like to take this opportunity to express
the configuration’s support for the proposed measures
that have been recommended with a view to enhancing
the operational posture of UNIOGBIS. We welcome the
strengthening by the General Assembly of UNIOGBIS
through the establishment of a post of Political Affairs
Officer to improve coordination with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on drug trafficking
and another post of Rule of Law Officer. An effective
and well-integrated presence of the United Nations on
the ground is essential for coordinating international
initiatives and supporting national actors in their efforts
to achieve stability and development.
We note the recommendation of the strategic
review mission deployed to Guinea-Bissau from
4 to 14 December 2016, led by the the Department
of Political Affairs, that mentions an exit strategy
for UNIOGBIS. We also acknowledge the challenges
posed by transnational organized crime and other
emerging threats, as well as the risks posed by the
security challenges in the West African subregion, as
underscored by the Secretary-General in his report.
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace require longterm engagement and a commitment to prevention.
As per the 2016 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, the enhanced United
Nations engagement with peacebuilding should aim
also at preventing the outbreak, escalation, continuation
and recurrence of conflict, addressing its root causes,
ensuring national reconciliation and moving towards
recovery, reconstruction and development. The United
Nations and relevant international partners should
remain engaged in their support for Guinea-Bissau’s
peacebuilding efforts to build a common vision of a
society and ensure that the needs of all segments of the
population are taken into account.
Let me reassure you, Sir, that the Commission
is committed to continuing its assistance towards
national reconciliation, recovery and the development
of Guinea-Bissau. Tomorrow, we will hold a meeting
of the PBC country-specific configuration to review
the outcome of the deliberations of this meeting of

S/PV.7883

the Security Council and to elaborate on concrete
initiatives to support progress in Guinea-Bissau, in
close consultation with ECOWAS and UNIOGBIS and
the relevant international partners within the GuineaBissau P-5.
I would like to reiterate the configuration’s support
for the National Conference and its programme for
the consolidation of national peace, which would be
entitled in English “Paths towards a consolidation of
national peace”. In addition, I commend UNIOGBIS
for the support that it has provided to the Organizing
Commission for the National Conference with resources
provided by the Peacebuilding Fund. The aim of that
dialogue is to provide a platform that will give a voice
to all stakeholders on the key issues of development and
reconciliation. That inclusive dialogue can be a positive
element in a broader process aimed at developing the
long-term peacebuilding policies that the country
requires. The PBC country configuration could assist
those and other efforts. The upcoming legislative and
presidential elections scheduled for 2018 and 2019,
respectively, will require a consistent preparatory
process and the full engagement of all stakeholders. We
must also examine possible actions to support securitysector reform and institution-building. In that context,
special attention should be given to the empowerment
of youth and women. The configuration will continue
to work to assist in the implementation of the current
Peacebuilding Priority Plan of the PBF in GuineaBissau, which already encompasses those priority areas.
I wish to note with appreciation that the overall
security situation in Guinea-Bissau has remained
stable. We should also highlight the position of the
armed forces. The PBC acknowledges the relevant role
of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau.
Local authorities need to put the best interest of the
nation above all other considerations. The message that
we bring today is simple: all parties must swiftly agree
on concrete steps that will enable the implementation of
the six-point road map and the Conakry Agreement. I
have full confidence that the political actors in GuineaBissau will demonstrate the needed leadership and
determination to work together to build a true consensus
in support of the aspirations of their people and nation.
The President: I thank Mr. Viera for his briefing.
The representative of Uruguay has asked to make
a statement.

17-039605/8

S/PV.7883

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): With
your permission, Mr. President, before discussing the
item on the agenda for our meeting, I should like to
mention an interesting fact. Given that the main task
of the Council is the maintenance of international
peace and security, I recall that 50 years ago today,
on 14 February 1967, in Mexico City, the Treaty of
Tlatelolco, which banned nuclear weapons in Latin
America and the Caribbean, was signed, thereby
establishing the first nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the world. We believe that the establishment of
nuclear-weapon-free zones is a first great step in the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
therefore thought it was worthwhile to recall that, half
a century ago, the political leaders of Latin America
and the Caribbean took that revolutionary step.
I wish to thank you, Sir, for organizing this
briefing. I would like to thank in, particular, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Modibo
Touré, and Ambassador Mauro Vieira, in his capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The political situation in Guinea-Bissau remains
in a stalemate. Still, tireless international and regional
efforts are being made to find a way out of this impasse.
Despite the difficult political situation, fortunately, for
the present time, the security situation in the country
remains calm, and no serious incidents have been
reported. Perhaps we can find in this a positive result
of the adoption of sanctions imposed by the Security
Council in 2012 on those who had undermined the
institutionality of Guinea-Bissau, and perhaps it is a
good reminder about easing tensions that could arise
in some areas.
However, it should not be forgotten that the
borders of the country today are extremely porous
and vulnerable to such threats as terrorism, drug
trafficking, arms trafficking and all types of activities
associated with transnational organized crime.
Furthermore, we should point out as a positive element
that there have been no reports of serious violations of
human rights. Nevertheless, the Council is aware of
the difficult political history of Guinea-Bissau, as well
as the enormous challenges that lie ahead. Therefore,
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) must continue to provide
the support needed for the country to reach a solution
to the crisis.
6/8

14/02/2017

In any case, there is no doubt that those who are
primarily responsible for the current situation are the
political stakeholders of Guinea-Bissau, who have not
honoured the commitments undertaken in Conakry,
and it must be clear that the current Prime Minister has
not been appointed in compliance with the consensus
agreed in Conakry. As a result, we must stress that
they must comply with their commitments under the
road map and the Conakry Agreement and show that
they are truly committed to a peaceful and negotiated
political solution.
The results of the strategic review mission that took
place last December were very clear in pointing out
that UNIOGBIS must give priority to its good offices,
political facilitation and the coordination of efforts.
Another element that the mission underscored and to
which Uruguay attaches importance is the introduction
of reforms to promote the rule of law and human
rights, in particular to fight impunity and improve
State capabilities. The fact that the strategic review
mission presented possible reference parameters for the
departure of the UNIOGBIS continues to be a positive
element. At the same time, however, we agree with the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that the presence
of UNIOGBIS be extended for another year.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Sambú (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
The Government of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau
welcomes this opportunity to participate in today’s
Security Council meeting with a view to reacting to
the report submitted by the Secretary-General on the
prevailing political situation in my country (S/2017/111).
On behalf of the President of the Republic and of the
Government, we would like to thank the international
community for its unwavering support and solidarity
shown to our country and for keeping the political
situation in Guinea-Bissau on the international agenda,
which has led to the promotion of political dialogue
aimed at generating and consolidating interparty
consensus for the sake of political and governing
stability in the country. In this context, we praise the
outstanding efforts of the United Nations, particularly
those of the Security Council, the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative for our country, as well as
the Guinea-Bissau configuration. We thank the Council
for the attention paid to our country and the important
17-03960

14/02/2017

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

S/PV.7883

contribution made to stabilization and political and
social normalization processes in our society.

of the Parliament — the law of Guinea-Bissau says the
following:

On 16 November 2016, a new Prime Minister was
appointed by presidential decree and a new Government
was set up in accordance with the Bissau and Conakry
road maps, which are the two instruments that at
this time bind political stakeholders in the National
Assembly and civil society and define the ways and
means to end the crisis and foster political dialogue to
shore up stability.

“The meeting of the Assembly for the
assessment of the Government programme, in
accordance with article 85, paragraph 1, of the
Constitution, is set by common agreement between
the President and the Prime Minister”.

As a product of inclusive dialogue involving all
political stakeholders, the Government chose this
instrument as the key tool for its political action, making
it a priority for the political parties represented in the
National Assembly, in order to build and strengthen the
political framework leading to a form of governance that
would meet the expectations of people for normalizing
political life and improving Government action. In
this respect, the Government takes this opportunity
to reiterate its commitment to the scrupulous
implementation of the Conakry Agreement and to
working for the inclusion of all signatories in order to
broaden the political base supporting the Government.
In spite of varying interpretations of the Agreement by
some of the signatories, which has created difficulties
in its implementation, the Government nonetheless
respected all dialogue mechanisms for cooperation and
defining arrangements for action with respect to the
expected political and State reforms.
I would like to inform the members of the Security
Council that, in order to respect the constitutional
time frame, the Prime Minister visited the Parliament
personally, where he submitted the Government’s
programme to the Speaker of the National Assembly
for approval. I would also like to underline that this
act was preceded by a round table with the signatories
of the Conakry Agreement in order to assess the
political priorities and guidelines of the programme.
The Government enjoys a majority in the Parliament
for the approval of its programme. The majority was
a determining factor in the appointment of the current
Government, which now has a parliamentary base for
the Prime Minister to make this Government viable.
(spoke in Spanish)
With respect to the meeting of the Assembly — which
was at an impasse for more than 15 months, in violation
of all the constitutional provisions and internal rules

Furthermore, the Government undertakes to continue
an inclusive political dialogue with the parties that have
divergent interpretations of the Political Agreement in
order to achieve a broader understanding, taking into
account the supreme interests of the people of GuineaBissau for political stability and development of
the country. To that end, we hope we can always count
on the active support of the international community.
(spoke in French)
I should like to end my statement on behalf of the
Government by expressing our gratitude to the Economic
Community Of West African States (ECOWAS) for
the important role it played in the mediation process
to resolve the crisis, and to the ECOWAS Mission in
Guinea Bissau for its presence and action in GuineaBissau. We offer our heartfelt thanks to the President
of the ECOWAS Commission and the Heads of State of
the subregion for their role in seeking a resolution to the
crisis in Guinea-Bissau.
We also thank our regional organization, the
African Union, for its careful monitoring of internal
developments in Guinea-Bissau. Allow me to express
the support of the Government for the initiative to
change the size of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau with a
view to adapting it to the current political context and
to promote peacebuilding, the implementation of State
reforms, support for social stabilization and the pursuit
of the objectives of nation building.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liberia.
Mr. Brown (Liberia): Let me, at the outset, thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this debate
and for the international attention it affords to ongoing
efforts to resolve the current roadblock to the search
for sustainable peace in Guinea-Bissau. On behalf
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), permit me to thank the Secretary-General
and his representative for his report (S/2017/111).

17-039607/8

S/PV.7883

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The Authority of Heads of State and Government
of ECOWAS remains engaged and seized of finding
a lasting solution to the political impasse in GuineaBissau. The failure to implement the Conakry Agreement
of 14 October 2016, signed by all stakeholders, and
the contentious, non-consensual appointment of the
Prime Minister remain issues of grave concern for the
advancement of peace efforts. The ECOWAS Authority
of Heads of State and Government recognizes that
the current political stalemate undermines GuineaBissau’s socioeconomic development and is a threat to
peace and stability in the country and, by extension, the
subregion. We must urgently ensure adherence to the
Conakry Agreement and accelerate its implementation.
Permit me to give a retrospective account of
reconciliatory engagements since the signing of
the Conakry Agreement. In furtherance of the
implementation of the Agreement, the ECOWAS
Authority of Heads of State and Government tasked
President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, Chairperson of
ECOWAS, to follow up with all stakeholders on their
commitments. In light of that mandate, she led a
presidential mission to Guinea-Bissau on 5 November
2016, consisting of the President of the ECOWAS
Commission, Mr. Marcel de Souza; the Minister of State
of Guinea, Mr. Youssouf Kiridi Bangoura, representing
President Alpha Condé; the ECOWAS Mediator, along
with other officials of ECOWAS; the African Union;
the United Nations; and the European Union, among
others. That meeting was to provide the opportunity to
make progress towards resolving the crisis.
The outcome of the mission was the signing of
a final communiqué focusing on the following six
points in tandem with the Conakry Agreement: first
of all, the stakeholders reaffirmed their commitment
to the Conakry Agreement; secondly, the stakeholders
were encouraged to accelerate the reintegration of the
15 dissident Members of Parliament into the Partido
Africano da Independência da Guiné e Cabo Verde
(PAIGC), in compliance with the Conakry Agreement;
thirdly, the President of the Republic, without further
delay, was to appoint a consensual Prime Minister
who had the confidence of the President; fourthly, an
all-inclusive Government was to be formed, taking
into account the parliamentary representations of the
political parties; fifthly, parliamentary sessions were
to be convened as soon as possible; and sixthly, a

8/8

14/02/2017

national dialogue round table was to be organized in
order to discuss the stability pact, which was meant to
articulate key constitutional and institutional reforms
before the 2018 legislative elections, as stated in the
Conakry Agreement.
In mid-November 2016, Mr. Umaro Mokhtar
Sissoco Embaló was appointed Prime Minister by
President José Mário Vaz. The appointment, however,
was not unanimously accepted because Mr. Embaló
was not a consensus candidate. That has resulted in the
current setback.
In the continuing efforts to find an amicable and
peaceful resolution to the crisis, Guinea-Bissau has
been placed high on the ECOWAS agenda. At a recent
meeting on the margins of the African Union Summit
in Addis Ababa, the Commission discussed ways to
continue the mediation efforts, including through
continued support for the mediator, President Alpha
Condé of Guinea. The President of Sierra Leone,
Mr. Ernest Bai Koroma, was designated to assist
President Condé in the mediation, as the latter had
also assumed the Chairmanship of the African Union.
President Condé will schedule a meeting of the PAIGC
in Conakry, to be convened as soon as possible.
The challenge that the Government of Guinea-Bissau
now faces is obtaining the Parliament’s endorsement
of its development plan. If that effort fails, the newly
appointed Prime Minister would have to resign. The
situation is a source of growing tension between the
Speaker of the Parliament and the Executive Branch.
Meanwhile, the Authority calls on all parties and
stakeholders in Guinea-Bissau to remain engaged, to
support ongoing peace efforts and to collaborate on
promoting the passage of the development agenda,
which will trigger the release of the donor funding
required to meet the needs of the people of GuineaBissau. The ECOWAS Authority also renews calls for
broader international support of its ongoing efforts
to bring lasting peace to the sisterly Republic of
Guinea-Bissau.
The President: I now invite the Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

17-03960
