S/2018/1059*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 November 2018
Original: English

United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2410
(2018), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) until 15 April 2019 and requested me to
report to the Council every 90 days on the imple mentation of the resolution. It covers
major developments that have occurred since the issuance of my most recent report,
on 30 August (S/2018/795), progress on the benchmarked exit strategy and an update
on timelines for the transfer of tasks and responsibilities for handover to the
Government, in coordination with the United Nations country team.

II. Major developments
A.

Political developments
2.
This reporting period was marked by incidents of volati lity and tension,
including calls for President Jovenel Moïse to step down. The two Senate commission
reports of 2016 and 2017 on the mismanagement of the PetroCaribe Fund, which I
detailed in my report of 20 March (S/2018/241), gave rise to widespread yet
predominantly peaceful civil society demonstrations nationwide to demand greater
transparency and accountability from the Government. As these protests unfolded, a
civil society movement known as PetroCaribe Challenge emerged on social media in
August, intensifying calls for a credible investigation and for the authorities to exert
due diligence. While the movement was initially not politically affiliated, in
September, the more extreme opposition parties joined the demonstrations. Online
and on the streets, the rhetoric intensified and incidents of violence occurred in the
capital, Port-au-Prince. The pressure continued to mount ahead of the 17 October
commemoration of the assassination of Jean-Jacques Dessalines, a leader of the
Haitian Revolution and the first ruler of an independent Haiti in 1804.
3.
On 17 October, protesters took to the streets in considerable numbers in
31 locations across the country, with the biggest gathering occurring in the
metropolitan area of Port-au-Prince (West region). As the day progressed, the initially
peaceful demonstrations grew more tense and, in some instances, became violent ,
with widespread use of roadblocks and burning tyres. The violence was successfully
contained by the national police and damage to property was limited. An estimated
* Reissued for technical reasons on 7 December 2018.

18-19895* (E)

071218

*1819895*

S/2018/1059

10,000 to 15,000 Haitians marched that day, the largest public demonstration in recent
history. Most demands focused on the PetroCaribe Fund, and there were also calls for
improved delivery of social services and for President Moïse to step down.
4.
The national police reported that 2 civilians were killed and 24 injured, in
addition to 19 national police officers. In addition, 46 people were arrested
nationwide. Local media and politicians unanimously viewed the 17 October
demonstrations as a success due to their relatively peaceful nature. International
actors highlighted the professionalism of the police and the improved
communications between the Government and police leadership.
5.
The situation remained tense throughout the religious holiday weekend of 1 and
2 November. On 31 October, a combined funeral for six individuals, alleged to have
died under various circumstances on 17 October in the Delmas 2 and Bel-Air
neighbourhoods (Delmas, West region) was disrupted by shootings and road blocks,
with many disturbances reported across the city. Later that day, 11 people were
wounded by gunshots in the Village de Dieu area of Port-au-Prince, and a girl of
11 years of age was killed.
6.
The 18 November commemorations of the 215th anniversary of the battle of
Vertières (Cap-Haïtien, North region) were also marked by nationwide anti -corruption
protests. In the country’s main cities, demonstrations brought together relatively large
crowds of people, albeit in smaller numbers than on 17 October. The protestors were
notably different from the 17 October crowds, most of them being political militants
echoing the calls of the opposition, with far fewer women present. Barricades of rocks
and burning tyres erected by protesters were quickly cleared by the national police,
and a small number of incidents were recorded. Authorities reported 6 people killed,
5 injured and 35 arrested. The leaders of the radical opposition party Secteur
démocratique et populaire reported 11 people killed, 45 wounded and 75 arrested. The
demonstrations were followed by a well-observed two-day general strike on 19 and
20 November.
7.
President Moïse responded to the people’s demands by asking that the Prime
Minister provide all necessary support to the relevant institutions, specifically the
justice system as it investigates the allegations regarding the mismanagement of the
PetroCaribe funds. The President further emphasized that private companies found to
have defrauded the State would be prosecuted, and he requested that all State officials
involved in the management of the PetroCaribe funds make themselves available to
the ongoing investigation.
8.
On 22 October, amid growing allegations of mismanagement, President Moïse
dismissed 18 close associates and advisers, including his chief of staff, who
previously served as Economy and Finance Minister, citing the importance of
government accountability. On the same day, Prime Minister Jean -Henry Céant
announced the creation of an independent commission comprising national experts to
oversee the PetroCaribe investigation and guarantee its political neutrality. However,
since the announcement, national media associations, members of the PetroCaribe
Challenge movement, human rights organizations and other entities mentioned by the
Prime Minister as possible members of the commission publicly declined to participate.
9.
Activity in Parliament was characterized by limited legislative activity in both
chambers due to their failure to hold regular weekly plenary sessions. On
4 September, Parliament adopted the amended 2017–2018 budget, revised after fuel
subsidies were reintroduced following violent unrest against the measure from 6 to
8 July. The revised budget forecasts a 10 per cent increase in spending, or
approximately $150 million, together with a drop in fuel revenues of approximately
$100 million. The draft law on the creation, organization and functioning of the
National Council on Legal Aid, promulgated on 26 October, sets the legal framew ork
2/28

18-19895

S/2018/1059

for access to legal advice for Haitians regardless of their social status. This long
overdue piece of legislation represents an important milestone in the effort to reduce
pretrial detention rates. The second ordinary session of the legislative year cl osed on
10 September, with 8 draft laws voted and transmitted to the executive for
promulgation, bringing the year’s total to 19. Following his appointment as Prime
Minister on 5 August, Jean Henry Céant’s cabinet received a vote of confidence in an
extraordinary session of the National Assembly on 15 and 16 September.
10. The new Cabinet consists of 25 ministers, secretaries of state and delegate
ministers, including 6 women. Women thus account for only 24 per cent of the
Cabinet, which is lower than the 30 per cent minimum quota prescribed in the
Constitution. The female ministers have been appointed to ministries traditionally
occupied by women: Tourism, Haitians Living Abroad, Social Affairs and Labour,
Public Health and Population, Women’s Affairs and Women’s Rights, and Human
Rights and the Fight against Extreme Poverty, which seldom play a role in strategic
government decision-making. The new Government includes six ministers and three
state secretaries from the previous Government.
11. Despite the reappointment of the Minister of Justice and Public Security,
relationships between the judiciary and the executive branches remained tense,
resulting in delays in the appointment of judges. A total of 66 judges were appointed
by the President during the period under review. Nonetheless, according to the Superior
Council of the Judiciary, at least 70 more judges should be appointed to ensure that
all courts are functioning normally. In parallel, since 11 October, the lawyers of the
Port-au-Prince Bar Association launched a strike demanding the recall of the Port -auPrince Public Prosecutor and the arrest of the West region director of the national
police and other police officers accused of police brutality against lawyers.

B.

Economic situation
12. Macroeconomic indicators continued to deteriorate during the reporting period.
Failure to reform the fuel price subsidies weakened an already low domestic revenue
mobilization, inducing a serious budget deficit as expenditures rose. By the end of
August, fuel subsidies and transfers to the state electricity utility amounted to 2.2 per
cent and 1.5 per cent of the gross domestic product, respectively, while spending on
education and health combined represented 2.4 per cent. As a result, the budget deficit
is now expected to reach 4 per cent of the gross domestic product. Inflation reached
14.1 per cent at the end August. The Haitian gourde’s depreciation against the United
States dollar continued, closing at a commercial exchange rate of 1 dollar to
73 gourdes by 22 October, a 10.4 per cent devaluation since October 2017.

C.

Humanitarian situation
13. On 6 October 2018, an earthquake of 5.9 magnitude struck the northern part of
Haiti, with the epicentre located about 20 kilometres north of Port -de-Paix (NorthWest region). According to the Directorate of Civil Protection, the earthquake caused
18 deaths, 548 wounded, destroyed 1,417 houses, damaged 9,717 houses and affected
11,134 families in the North-West, North and Artibonite regions. The affected
population required shelter, kitchen, water, sanitation and hygiene kits. The
Government mobilized its resources to assist the population.
14. In the immediate aftermath, the United Nations humanitarian agencies, jointly,
and in support of the Directorate of Civil Protection, visited some of the affected areas
to assess the damage and identify areas of potential support to national authorities.
MINUJUSTH assisted national rescue efforts by supporting the national police in the

18-19895

3/28

S/2018/1059

affected areas and through the deployment of its drone unit. In the wake of the
earthquake, the Government announced the intention to create a permanent
multisectoral crisis management mechanism under the leadership of the Prime
Minister’s office to improve coordination, including of humanitarian aid, in line with
the Government’s interest in a new paradigm for international assistance. The
international community reiterated its long-standing support and continued
commitment to investing in the strengthening of the Directorate of Civil Protection.
15. The United Nations continued to support the Haitian authorities ’ response to
combat cholera under the umbrella of the national plan for the elimination of cholera.
In a promising development, the number of cases did not increase significantly during
the rainy season. Although suspected cholera cases continue to be reported throughout
the country, new suspected cases nationwide dropped to an average of 46 cases
weekly in September and the first week of October, compared to 301 weekly
suspected cases during the same period in 2017. The suspected weekly caseload at
the peak of the outbreak in 2010 was over 18,500.
16. Despite this progress, it is critical that the intensified cholera control efforts are
maintained to continue saving lives and reducing the transmission of cholera in line
with the targets set in the national plan. The rapid respo nse teams from the Ministry
of Public Health and Population, supported by the United Nations Children ’s Fund
(UNICEF), have been instrumental to the successes in fighting the disease. An early
reduction in the number of response teams poses a risk that cho lera might spread
again. Under track 2 of the new United Nations approach to cholera, the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) is concluding local consultations in
Mirebalais to provide material assistance to those most directly affected by the
disease. UNDP and the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS),
supported by the Office of the Special Envoy for Haiti, UNICEF and MINUJUSTH,
are preparing a follow-up to the pilot phase, to provide other severely affected
communities with similar support.
17. Special attention continued to be given to reinforcing local capacities for
emergency preparedness. On 6 October, with the support of the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA), 30 health and protection experts from the final 3 of the
10 regions in the country completed the certification on the Minimum Initial Service
Package for Reproductive Health in emergencies, bringing the total to 100 experts
trained across the 10 regions.
18. According to the partial results of the Integrated Food Security Phas e
Classification conducted in October 2018 in drought-affected areas, 5 per cent of the
population analysed (145,078 people) are in an emergency phase, and 25 per cent
(629,082 people) are in a crisis phase, representing approximately 30 per cent of the
population analysed. Projections of the situation indicate that from October 2018 to
February 2019, 774,159 people will be food insecure and in need of assistance.
19. The 2018 humanitarian response plan, which is aimed at reaching 2.2 million
Haitians with humanitarian and protection assistance and requires $252.2 million, was
only 11.2 per cent funded as at 23 November 2018.
20. On 20 September, the evaluation phase of the long overdue population and
housing census in Haiti was finalized, marking the transi tion to the main phase. After
more than 15 years, with the support of UNFPA, the census will provide a much
needed update of the national database on demographics, socioeconomics, gender and
housing conditions. These are essential for the country and the i nternational
community to establish new baselines for more effective and sustainable policies that
save lives and ensure a more informed approach to helping Haiti eradicate extreme
poverty and embrace the challenge of reaching the sustainable development g oals.

4/28

18-19895

S/2018/1059

III. Mandate implementation
21. As requested by the Council in its resolutions 2350 (2017) and 2410 (2018),
MINUJUSTH established a mechanism to monitor progress in the implementation of
its benchmarked two-year exit strategy and transition to a non-peacekeeping United
Nations presence. The data collection and analysis for the 46 indicators outlined in
my previous report continue to be conducted in collaboration with the United Nations
country team and national stakeholders, using the existing monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework. This joint
monitoring mechanism, which enhances the coordinatio n of actions planned by
MINUJUSTH and the United Nations country team in support of the Government,
will further facilitate the transfer of tasks and responsibilities. The progress made
during the reporting period is outlined in annex I to the present repo rt.
22. Against the backdrop of demonstrations throughout the reporting period, and in
view of the elections planned for the fourth quarter of 2019, MINUJUSTH continued
to use its community violence reduction programme to mitigate pockets of violence
in “hot spot” areas in Port-au-Prince and its outskirts. In fragile neighbourhoods
affected by a lack of socioeconomic opportunities and limited access to basic services,
including the police and justice systems, and prone to persistent gang viole nce, idle
and disfranchised young men and women represent easy recruits who can be used to
trigger violence in public protests to serve political and/or criminal interests. The
programme involved community members, in particular at-risk youth and women
living in the most marginalized neighbourhoods, in planning and implementing high
labour-intensive and income-generating activities to stabilize and improve security in
neighbourhoods under gang control.
23. MINUJUSTH initiated three separate community violence reduction projects,
in Martissant and Carrefour-Feuille, southern neighbourhoods of Port-au-Prince,
implemented by both national and international non-governmental organizations.
Thus far, a total of 2,242 women and 2,058 men are enrolled in activities such as
football tournaments, capacity-building for community leaders, neighbourhood-based
dialogues to promote peace and access to education.
24. These initiatives, which offered temporary livelihood opportunities to youth,
complemented the national police’s security stabilization efforts by raising
community awareness on security and rule of law issues as well as increasing
community trust in the national police and rule of law institutions. For instance, in
Port-au-Prince, internships and vocational training opportunities had been offered to
151 at-risk youth, in partnership with 70 local businesses, and in the Centre region,
288 young women and men from marginalized communities had participated in the
construction of an agricultural road. The national police are now able to easily provide
community policing services through activities undertaken within the framework of
community violence reduction projects.
25. MINUJUSTH is also supporting the implementation of community violence
reduction projects in the North, North-West and Centre regions, which focus on
income-generating and highly labour-intensive activities. These include vocational
and on-the-job training, capacity-building in small business management and support
to direct beneficiaries for the development of income-generating activities. As at
7 November, 691 women and 599 men had taken part in those activities.
26. Increasing the understanding of the rule of law remains a key priority. Since
1 September, MINUJUSTH mobile teams, with funding from the community violence
reduction programme, has supported seven conferences and town hall debates
throughout the country to raise community awareness of the rule of law. A total of
23 such activities have been held thus far, in which more than 4,500 people, including
18-19895

5/28

S/2018/1059

1,436 women, have participated. On the basis of assessments by mobile teams,
11 quick-impact projects were initiated to improve the facilities of rule of law
institutions, including courts, prisons and police posts, as well as water treatment i n
prisons, toilet construction in detention cells and the construction of prison fences
and watchtowers.
27. Under the joint rule of law programme, the Mission and the United Nations
country team continued to support the rule of law institutions in line wi th the
MINUJUSTH mandate. The programme helped to renovate and equip police stations,
strengthened the case management system of the Inspector-General of the Haitian
national police, and supported oversight and accountability bodies, such as the
Superior Council of the Judiciary, the Ministry of Justice and Public Security, the
Directorate of Prison Administration, the Office of the National Human Rights
Ombudsperson, the Interministerial Committee on Human Rights and civil society,
through the use of programmatic funding.
28. MINUJUSTH finalized its protection of civilians strategy and its second
forward-looking assessment of threats to civilians covering the period October to
December 2018, in consultation with humanitarian actors. These include human righ ts
violations by the national police, violence resulting from gang activity and violence
triggered by major civil unrest, massive deportation or the spontaneous return of
Haitian migrants, and natural disasters.

A.

Security and police developments (benchmarks 1, 4, 5 and 6)
29. There were 108 largely peaceful demonstrations related to the PetroCaribe
Challenge movement during the reporting period, 23 of which were in the
metropolitan area of Port-au-Prince. Data sourced from the national police shows that
the rate of homicide had decreased 4.2 per cent since my previous report and, as at
the time of publication of the present report, is now at 6.22 per 100,000 inhabitants,
one of the lowest in the Caribbean region. Over half of these homicides occurred in
the Port-au-Prince metropolitan area.
30. The efforts by the national police to ensure the safety of the population
continued to be operationally challenged by gangs operating in areas of the capital.
Despite the commitment of the national police hierar chy to tackle gangs,
neighbourhoods such as Martissant, which are densely crowded, pose significant
impediments to improving the safety of a population that is suffering from poor
socioeconomic opportunities and particularly vulnerable to criminality and i nsecurity.
On at least two occasions, national police officers accompanied by a MINUJUSTH
formed police unit were fired upon during patrols in gang -ridden neighbourhoods
without sustaining injuries or damage.
31. During the planned demonstration on 17 October in Port-au-Prince, a group of
violent demonstrators attempted to force entry into the World Bank and UNFPA
offices, throwing stones and injuring a private security guard. Two surveillance
cameras were also stolen. In Saint Marc (Artibonite), three Uni ted Nations formed
police unit officers were injured by stones thrown at them, and seven police officers
assigned to the public order unit suffered lacerations from stones in Cap -Haïtien. On
18 November, a small number of incidents were recorded.
32. The Mission provided operational support to the national police by participating
in 290 joint temporary checkpoints, 528 foot patrols, 576 vehicle patrols and 5 joint
police operations. The Mission also provided support in 12 crowd -control operations
related to protests in Port-au-Prince and other cities. The national police specialized
units continued to show progress in terms of operational planning, coordination and

6/28

18-19895

S/2018/1059

compliance with principles on the use of force and respect of huma n rights as outlined
in the national police strategic development plan for the period 2017–2021.
33. MINUJUSTH supported the national police in an operation conducted in Village
de Dieu (southern Port-au-Prince, West region) in an attempt to regain control of the
zone and capture a gang leader operating in that area. The operation, which took place
on 3 November, mobilized 140 officers from national police specialized units. In
addition to assisting in planning the operation, MINUJUSTH support ed the police in
securing and conducting surveillance of the perimeter with a drone unit, five formed
police unit sections and armoured vehicles. A formed police unit armoured vehicle
was shot at during an exchange of gunfire between the national police and gang
members. No injuries were reported. The operation continued from 4 to 5 November,
with an increased presence by the national police and MINUJUSTH formed police
units in the area, in particular through patrols on Route Nationale 2 and inside Village
de Dieu.
34. The national police strategic development plan for the period 2017–2021 has
experienced a slow rate of implementation during its first year. Among the primary
causes for the limited progress was the insufficient funding committed by the
Government of Haiti and international donors. At the onset, the Haitian Government
committed to cover 55 per cent of the funding of the five -year plan, but thus far has
provided only 8 per cent of its required financial resources for the 2017–2018 fiscal
period. Likewise, main donors have only contributed 15 per cent of their first-year
financial commitment. This has resulted in some complex priority actions of the plan
not being completed, with an overall implementation rate of 27.6 per cent for the first
year and progress on 90 of the remaining 108 activities.
35. Since the adoption of the strategic development plan, a total of 42 infrastructure
projects have been implemented, enabling the national police to increase their
presence in the municipal sections. During the reporting period, 15 infrastructure
projects in support of the national police were ongoing, 4 of which were financed by
the Government of Haiti, 4 through the Mission quick-impact projects, 3 through the
joint rule of law programme and 4 through bilateral cooperation. Increasing national
police facilities across the country is a key aspect in ensuring the effective presence
of the national police and reducing insecurity, but also for improving the working
conditions of police officers.
36. Following the graduation on 19 September of 692 cadets, the t otal number of
police officers nationwide increased to 15,735, including 1,568 women (10 per cent).
This brings the police-officer-to-population ratio to 1.37 police officers per
1,000 inhabitants, which is still below the United Nations standard of 2.2 pe r 1,000.
Nevertheless, this represents an important milestone in achieving the targeted ratio of
1.45, and at least 11 per cent of women, by October 2019. The percentage of police
personnel deployed outside the Port-au-Prince metropolitan area has reached 34.2 per
cent, a 4.5 per cent increase from my previous report. As part of the continued effort
to increase the number of police officers, the national police announced that it had
enrolled 658 applicants, including 132 women, for its 30th promotion, whose training
should start before the end of 2018.
37. As part of the joint project by MINUJUSTH and the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) to establish a
gender-sensitive recruitment mechanism for the national police, activities are under
way to identify marginalized communities in which young women will be encouraged
to apply. Through its community violence reduction programme, the Mission also
supported community mobilization against sexual and gender-based violence in the
Artibonite, Grand’Anse and South regions. As at 20 November, 30 moderators from
15 local organizations carried out 59 sensitization sessions for 3,012 direct
18-19895

7/28

S/2018/1059

beneficiaries, to raise awareness among the general population on sexual and gender based violence and on reporting such cases.
38. The fourth international seminar on the fight against sexual and gender -based
violence, organized jointly by the Mission and the nat ional police, took place from
8 to 10 October at the Haitian National Police Academy in Port-au-Prince. My Special
Representative, international speakers, prosecutors and various United Nations
organizations and civil society in Haiti participated in the seminar. The topics
included human trafficking, sexual and gender-based violence, including domestic
violence, justice and the functioning of the penal chain, and victim protection.
Likewise, with the goal of enhancing the capacity of the national police to prevent
and investigate cases of sexual and gender-based violence, in November, three
workshops were held in the metropolitan area of Port-au-Prince with key stakeholders
in the penal system.
39. As requested in resolution 2410 (2018), preparations for the withdrawal of two
formed police units in December are under way, with arrangements in place for the
national police to take over residual operations where the United Nations presence
will be reduced. The Mission will update the security transition plan in the coming
weeks to provide information on the repatriation of other formed police units. The
national police has committed to ensuring a smooth drawdown of the formed police
units in 2019, through a continued assessment of the security situation across the
country, in close coordination with the United Nations country team and international
donors.

B.

Justice (benchmarks 1, 2 and 5)
40. During the period under review, important progress was made on the legislative
front, such as the promulgation of the legal aid law. On the institutional front,
advances were made regarding the timely review of criminal cases and the
commitment of the Ministry of Justice and Public Security to replicate the
coordination mechanism of the Port-au-Prince jurisdiction nationwide. Prolonged
pretrial detention rates persisted, particularly in jurisdictions with poor access to
justice and where monitoring of the caseload of judges and prosecutors is weak.
41. As at 23 October, the proportion of detainees in pretrial detention in excess of
two years was 63.6 per cent, compared to 61.1 per cent in the previous reporting
period. To address this situation, several initiatives are being put in place. At the
August meeting of the penal chain committee of Port-au-Prince, which brings
together all rule of law actors on a monthly basis, the Ministry of Justice and Public
Security took steps towards facilitating the delivery of the sentencing orders
necessary for the release of convicted persons who had already completed their
sentence. A ministerial committee is also being established to list inmates and their
periods of detention, in order to identify those for whom detention is no longer
justified.
42. During the same period, MINUJUSTH continued to provide technical support
to four legal aid projects providing access to justice to vulnerable individuals financed
by its community violence reduction programme. The two legal aid offices of the
Port-au-Prince Bar Association opened 2,249 new cases, held 1,961 consultations,
filed 100 habeas corpus requests and contributed to the release of 250 pretrial
detainees during the reporting period. A third legal aid project started its activities at
the centre for the re-education of minors in conflict with the law and created a registry
of all 89 detained minors, with 54 cases opened and two workshops held for lawyers
and judges to improve the handling of cases involving minors. Similarly, a pilot
multidisciplinary legal aid project at the women’s prison of Cabaret (West region),

8/28

18-19895

S/2018/1059

launched by UN-Women in 2017, was expanded in September to provide legal
assistance and psychosocial support to all the 258 women and girls in detention. The
investigating judges issued 14 orders; nine releases were obtained through this project
(after 5, 6, 7 and 11 months of extended detention, re spectively).
43. In the Port-au-Prince jurisdiction, prosecutors, investigating judges and the
court of first instance are on track to achieve the benchmarked indicators related to
access to justice. Between October 2017 and September 2018, prosecutors rec eived
1,080 penal cases. In 41 per cent of them (444 cases), the prosecution decided whether
to present charges or to close the file the same day that the case was filed. In 43 per
cent of those cases, processed in real time, charges were dropped. During t he same
period, investigating judges closed 365 files. During the 2017–2018 judicial year, the
22 investigating judges closed over 16 cases each, a yearly average of 1.3 cases per
investigating judge per month. The court of first instance did not hold hear ings during
the reporting period, owing to judicial vacations between 30 June and 30 September.
44. The court of first instance and the court of appeal of Port -au-Prince have not
been operational since 10 October when the Bar Association of Port -au-Prince
decided to suspend the pleadings and blocked access to the courts. The lawyers are
protesting violent responses by national police officers on 2, 4 and 9 October. They
are also requesting that the chief public prosecutor be dismissed for not initiating
legal proceedings. This situation is of concern and if not resolved could have a
negative effect on the performance of these jurisdictions and that of the legal aid
offices. Despite these developments, the court of first instance has adjudicated a total
of 437 penal cases since October 2017.
45. A disagreement between the Superior Council of the Judiciary and the executive
branch resurfaced during the reporting period. In an open letter to President Moïse
dated 10 September, the Council warned of the negative impact that delays in the
appointment of judges could have on the justice system. The Government noted that
the delays were due to the conduct of thorough background checks and, on the eve of
the start of the 2018 judicial year on 1 October, appointed 36 judges and, on
22 October, 30 more. On 30 August, the Senate launched a second call to fill vacant
seats on the Cour de cassation on 30 August, as the partial list previously submitted
to the Government would allow for only four of the six vacant seats to be filled.
46. In addition to the delays in the appointment of judges, the National Association
of Magistrates threatened to go on strike if their request for a salary increase was not
taken into consideration by the presidency. The recent ad interim appoi ntment of
Ocnam Clamé Daméus as the Director of the Directorate of Judicial Inspections of
the Superior Council of the Judiciary, a position that has been vacant since April 2016,
when it was created, raised some concerns in certain sectors of civil societ y, as he is
the Superior Council councillor representing all prosecutors of the courts of first
instance.
47. The adoption of the law on legal assistance by the legislative branch on
10 September and its promulgation on 26 October constituted a major step that will
significantly improve access to justice. In order to create a framework for the
implementation of the law, the Ministry of Justice and Public Security established a
technical committee, to which MINUJUSTH is contributing. The Committee will
support the Ministry in the diffusion and implementation of the law by developing an
action plan and a budget and designing rules, regulations and application tools.
48. MINUJUSTH, in accordance with its mandate, has also continued its support to
the control bodies of the Ministry of Justice and Public Security and the Superior
Council of the Judiciary to strengthen their oversight a nd discipline functions.
MINUJUSTH provided assistance to the Ministry in its inspection services through a
series of activities, to perform inspection missions, in the public prosecutor ’s offices
18-19895

9/28

S/2018/1059

in the 18 courts of first instance and 5 courts of appeal during the judicial year 2018–
2019. MINUJUSTH supported one workshop on performance indicators and inspection
tools for prosecutors, held from 2 to 4 October, another one on the development plan
of the judicial inspectorate, held on 10 and 11 October, and one on capacity -building
and exchanges of experiences, held on 24 and 25 October. In addition, MINUJUSTH
provided technical assistance and supported the directorate of the judicial inspectorate
of the Superior Council of the Judiciary, for a five -day retreat, held from 8 to
12 October, on the careers and evaluation of magistrates.
49. In the framework of the joint rule of law programme, MINUJUSTH and
UN-Women provided training on the impact of prolonged pretrial detention of women
and girls to 80 penal system officials from nine jurisdictions. The training also
included information on international and regional human rights instrument s such as
the American Convention on Human Rights.

C.

Corrections (benchmarks 1, 3 and 5)
50. While important steps have been taken towards enhancing the administrative,
managerial and operational capacities of the Directorate of Prison Administration and
to improve detention conditions, the draft prison law aimed at the improvement of
prisons and the organic law elevating the Directorate of Prison Administration to a
central directorate within the national police, with its own financial and
administrative autonomy, have not made much progress. The final draft of the prison
law is pending validation by the Director-General of the national police, and the
organic law is under review by the Minister of Justice and Public Security. Increased
political engagement and enhanced use of good offices of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General support efforts to achieve this goal.
51. As at 15 October, the Directorate of Prison Administration was responsible for
a total of 11,755 detainees, including 417 women, 278 boys and 15 gi rls. The
occupancy rate stood at 364 per cent, based on the national standard of 2.5 square
metres per detainee. The international standard is 4.5 square metres. Extreme
overcrowding and poor hygiene conditions in most facilities have contributed to
health problems among detainees, such as skin diseases, tuberculosis, diarrhoea and
urinary tract infections. The death rate among detainees has increased from 8 per
1,000, as noted in my most recent report, to 11.8 per 1,000 on a projected yearly basis,
as at 15 October. The three leading causes of death among detainees are tuberculosis,
malnutrition and cardiovascular diseases. The increase in the death rate is mostly due
to irregular food deliveries and a shortage of medical staff and medication. Regular
payment of suppliers has remained a challenge over the past years. Increased financial
and administrative autonomy for the Prison Administration could help to prevent
those recurring challenges. The Prison Administration, with support from
MINUJUSTH, is implementing the medical road map and the emergency health
directives, developing stronger partnerships with the Ministry of Public Health and
Population, the World Health Organization and the non-governmental organization
Health through Walls.
52. The Prison Administration is also implementing a targeted and dedicated
recruitment and training strategy, in preparation for the autonomous management of
its financial, administrative and human resources. Accordingly, 61 new police
graduates, including 9 women, will join the penitentiary service, after undergoing a
specialized eight-week training course. This will increase the number of prison
officers from 1,182 to 1,242. Furthermore, the Prison Administration is developing a
staff performance appraisal tool and has started implementing it in five prisons.

10/28

18-19895

S/2018/1059

53. The Prison Administration, with the support of MINUJUSTH, elaborated the
terms of reference and criteria to certify that prisons operate following national and
international norms regarding, inter alia, detention conditions, security, administrative
management and reintegration, and are therefore able to operate without full -time
support from international actors. A workshop was held on 5 September for 23 senior
staff of the Prison Administration and Haitian nationa l police, to sensitize them on
the certification criteria and to promote national ownership of the process.

D.

Human rights (benchmarks 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9)
54. The new Prime Minister appointed a Minister-delegate for Human Rights and
the Fight against Extreme Poverty on 17 September, effectively reinstating the
position that had been discontinued in December 2014. The Minister-delegate has
taken over the responsibility of human rights focal point in the Government, including
by leading the Inter-Ministerial Committee for Human Rights and preparing a
national human rights action plan. This appointment is an important development
brought about by the combined advocacy of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Mission’s leadership. MINUJUSTH is in the process of hiring an
expert to assist the Inter-Ministerial Committee in the elaboration of the national
human rights action plan.
55. In September, Haiti announced its accession to the 1954 Convention relating to
the Status of Stateless Persons and the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of
Statelessness. The accession to the Conventions follows recommendations of the
country’s 2016 universal periodic review. Haiti’s accession is of particular
importance, as it comes at a juncture in which thousands of H aitians are being
deported from countries of the region. According to information released by
Dominican authorities, 21,707 Haitians were deported or forcibly returned to Haiti
from the Dominican Republic during the months of August and September. In 2018,
the migratory movements on the border between Haiti and the Dominican Republic
intensified, and a total of 80,832 Haitians were deported or turned back at the border
between January and July. On 27 August, Dominican authorities announced that the
national regularization plan for foreigners was terminated, following two extensions.
56. The General Inspectorate of the national police, with support from MINUJUSTH,
is in the process of standardizing its criteria as part of the process to improve
accountability for human rights violations committed by the national police. Between
1 July and 30 September, the General Inspectorate conducted administrative
investigations of 93 per cent of the allegations of human rights violations received.
During the reporting period, MINUJUSTH monitored 15 incidents of human rights
violations allegedly committed by the national police, which resulted in 51 casualties.
Most incidents pertained to allegations of excessive use of force and ill -treatment of
detainees following arrest. The Inspectorate has opened administrative investigations
into 14 of these incidents. While in most cases no judicial proceedings were initiated,
in four incidents the officers allegedly responsible were arrested and face prosecution.
This reflects an improvement in relation to the previous reporting period, in which
only one incident proceeded to the prosecution stage but will still require the sustained
commitment of relevant authorities to ensure that 100 per cent of confirmed crimes
or human rights violations committed by national police and Directorate of Prison
Administration officers are prosecuted. The Mission will continue to advocate for full
and transparent accountability for these incidents.
57. In August, as part of the Mission’s efforts to reduce community violence,
MINUJUSTH delivered a training in Hinche (Centre region) to reinforce the capacity
of local non-governmental organizations to monitor and report on allegations of
human rights violations. In a follow-up workshop in October, the participants

18-19895

11/28

S/2018/1059

demonstrated a deeper knowledge of the subject matter. Similar trainings were
delivered in Les Cayes (South region) and Gonaïves (Artibonite region) to staff of the
Office of the National Human Rights Ombudsperson. MINUJUSTH also provided
technical support to the Inter-Ministerial Committee for Human Rights in organizing
a workshop, held in October, on the elaboration of the second report by Haiti to the
Human Rights Committee regarding its implementation of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights. During the reporting period, local non-governmental
organizations have submitted two complaints to the special procedures of the Human
Rights Council.
58. In a follow-up to a colloquium organized in September 2017 by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in October MINUJUSTH
held a workshop on the fight against impunity for past human rights violations for
representatives of civil society organizations. The aim was to identify concrete actions
that non-governmental organizations can take to advance the fight against impunity,
including their role in preparing the national work plan on impunity.

E.

Anti-corruption and Permanent Electoral Council (benchmarks 10
and 11)
59. At the end of October, the Provisional Electoral Council submitted a draft
organic law to the Government regulating the Permanent Electoral Council. The draft
included comments made by the Government on a previous version of the bill. The
updated draft law was submitted to Parliament on 14 November. In the absence of a
permanent council, the Provisional Electoral Council could organize the legislative
elections, which are to renew one third of the Senate and the full Lower Chamber.
Both President Moïse in his statement to the General Assemb ly on 27 September and
Prime Minister Céant in his policy statement of 5 September committed to the holding
of the elections in October 2019, in accordance with constitutional requirements,
while no mention had been made of municipal elections as at the da te of publication
of the present report. In this regard, the new Government included a Minister-delegate
for Electoral Affairs, Patrick Sully Joseph. The specific budget for the 2019 elections
was also still under review by the executive.
60. In a letter to my Special Representative dated 25 October, the Government
requested the assistance of the United Nations system in Haiti for the organization of
the October 2019 elections, noting that the support of the international community in
terms of human, material and financial resources would be indispensable. In the same
letter, the Government indicated its readiness to welcome a needs assessment mission,
aimed at establishing the conditions for technical and operational support and
identifying potential partnerships with the international community. Preparations are
under way to deploy a team to undertake the needs assessment in early December.
61. Regarding the measures implemented to prevent corruption, the fin alized 2017–
2018 public expenditure financial report, the drafting of which was supported through
the joint rule of law programme, is pending publication. UNDP will continue to
provide support for the drafting of the 2018–2019 report under the joint rule of law
programme.

IV. Joint transition planning
62. The Prime Minister and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of MINUJUSTH established a joint commission composed of advisers of the
Prime Minister and Mission staff, with the active participation of United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes. The aim of the joint commission is to remove
12/28

18-19895

S/2018/1059

bottlenecks in the implementation of the MINUJUSTH mandate and exit strategy and
to make progress on common priorities. During the reporting period, the joint
commission met on three occasions to discuss the sustainability of progress beyond
the withdrawal of the Mission with regards to, inter alia, prison overcrowding,
prolonged pretrial detention, support to the justice sector and the reduction of
community violence. The joint commission has made progress in increasing
government understanding of the MINUJUSTH transition process, obtaining
agreement for the construction of two tribunals in vulnerable areas of the greater Port au-Prince metropolitan area, and at the request of the Governmen t, the launch of a
dialogue on the electoral process.
63. MINUJUSTH and the United Nations country team continued to prepare for the
transition to a non-peacekeeping presence in the country beyond 15 October 2019. A
joint resource mobilization strategy, based on the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework for 2017–2021, is being developed by the country team, in
collaboration with MINUJUSTH and Headquarters, to support the implementation of
its strategic priorities while also taking into account sp ecific requirements, in
particular those arising from the new United Nations approach to cholera. The
resource requirements will be refined through the finalization of the joint work plan
on governance and the rule of law (outcome 5 of the United Nations D evelopment
Assistance Framework) for 2019–2020 that will bridge the transition period. While
this joint work plan is on track to be finalized by 15 December, the resource and
financing gap will require it to be further aligned with the outcome of the strat egic
assessment requested in resolution 2410 (2018), to be presented in my next report.
64. A transition programming task force supports the development of the joint work
plan on governance and the rule of law. The integrated policy and planning group, the
coordination body that brings together the senior leadership of the Mission and the
United Nations country team and provides strategic direction on peace consolidation
efforts and transition, created the task force and placed it under the leadership of my
Deputy Special Representative, Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator.
It seeks to support the Mission and the country team in analysing institutional
capacities and additional capacities required by the United Nations following the
withdrawal of the Mission and drafting programme and project documents for the
country team.

V. Mission support
65. Former MINUSTAH sites that are no longer required for MINUJUSTH have
been closed. Mission Support continues to maintain 26 locations: Mission
headquarters, police headquarters, seven camps occupied by formed police units and
17 United Nations Police co-locations with the national police. Pre-planning activities
to assess the scope of drawdown requirements in preparation for the transition have
been initiated. Implementation of the December 2018 repatriation of two formed
police units is in progress, which will be followed with activities to close and hand
over the respective vacated camps in early 2019.
66. Mission Support continues to implement the supply chain management
optimization activities to facilitate the upcoming drawdown. This comprises the
reconciliation of large quantities of surplus inventory (expendable and non -expendable)
that were transferred from MINUSTAH and effective reduction of the asset holdings
to align and meet the mandated requirements of MINUJUSTH. As a priority, the
identified surplus will follow the asset disposal strategy of directly supporting
projects with the United Nations country team and programmatic activities in the
context of the transition and mandate implementation.

18-19895

13/28

S/2018/1059

67. Efforts to outsource ancillary services such as engineering, environmental and
waste management, camp management and maintenance, vehicle maintenance and
repairs have been hampered by limited local service provider capacity in Haiti.
Operational adjustments have been necessary to sustain the provision of basic mission
support services, which have resulted in unforeseen higher costs associated wi th
international outsourcing options. This includes the establishment of on -site services
performed by UNOPS contracted personnel. This solution ensures essential and
responsive service provision whilst supporting the established lean staffing structure
of the mission support concept, as well as facilitating the necessary agility and
efficiency required during the draw down and transition of the mission.

VI. Conduct and discipline
68. No new allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse have been repor ted.
MINUJUSTH continued the implementation of the three-pronged conduct and
discipline strategy for all categories of United Nations personnel. The Mission
pursued its prevention activities, including training, risk assessment and public
information, to sensitize the Haitian population to United Nations standards of
conduct, in particular the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse,
complemented by remedial action. As part of the remedial action, the Mission
maintained continuous communication and referral for assistance of the victims of
sexual exploitation and abuse.

VII. Observations
69. The unfolding of the 17 October and 18 November demonstrations is a sign of
the capacity of the national police to professionally control crowds demonstrating
throughout the country. The vigorous debate that is currently taking place regarding
accountability for the use of the PetroCaribe funds should encourage civil society and
the opposition to engage in a constructive dialogue, and the Government t o
demonstrate with concrete actions its willingness to address the demands of the
population. Such dialogue may in turn sustain the basic requirements for the long term stability of the country.
70. To maintain that momentum, it will be critical that conc rete action be taken to
address corruption, including the allegations of mismanagement of the PetroCaribe
funds. A key indicator of progress will be the ability of the judiciary to complete the
investigations and bring charges as needed against those indiv iduals and companies
that have allegedly defrauded the Haitian people. In this regard, I welcome the
declaration of the Superior Court of Audits and Administrative Disputes that their
report will be ready by January 2019, and I encourage the Superior Counc il of the
Judiciary to ensure that magistrates under its jurisdiction enjoy the necessary
independence to conduct the required judicial proceedings. Failure to do so in an
effective manner would contribute to the destabilization of the country. At this cri tical
juncture, it is essential that actors from across the political spectrum, from all
branches of Government and from civil society work together for the common good.
71. The holding of 2019 elections will be a crucial milestone for the stability of
Haiti. I welcome the Government’s commitment to hold the elections on schedule,
and I take note of its request for electoral assistance from the United Nations. I
encourage the Haitian authorities to swiftly adopt the electoral law, update the
electoral lists and pass the electoral budget to pave the way for credible, timely and
inclusive elections. I also encourage all political actors and civil society to engage in
a constructive dialogue towards peaceful elections.
14/28

18-19895

S/2018/1059

72. Delays in the adoption and implementation of State programmes and the slowmoving legislative process continued to contribute to a lack of public confidence in
the country’s institutions and to deter internal and external private investment critical
to fostering sustainable development, ultimately increasing the challenges to be
overcome by the people. If not addressed, those conditions will bring further
destabilization and divert Haiti from its path towards achieving the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Immediate assistance, in particular to reinforce social
safety nets, will be crucial in the coming months. Enhanced collaboration between
the executive branch and the parliament, possibly including through the establishment
of a coordinated legislative agenda for the legislative year 2019, would also bring
momentum to the legislative process.
73. The decades-old phenomenon in Haitian prisons of severe overcrowding and
poor conditions owing in part to recurrent arrests pending legal recourse and the
effects of the malfunctioning of the judicial system must be tackled with renewed
energy, effort, political will and adequate resources. At the same time, renewed efforts
will be required to adequately confront the persistent phenomenon of gang violence
in Haiti, including by engaging affected communities in violence reduction
programming.
74. Despite the integrated efforts of the Government and the United Nations system
in Haiti, much remains to be done to achieve the objectives of the MINUJUSTH exit
strategy. I am concerned that the achievement of a substantial number of indicators
remain elusive, especially regarding the adoption and implementation of legislation
deemed critical for the consolidation of the rule of law in Haiti. Sustained efforts by
the leaders and people of the country, with the support of MINUJUSTH, the United
Nations country team and the wider international community, will be required to
ensure a smooth and effective transition to a non-peacekeeping presence in the
coming year.
75. Progress must also continue in consolidating the rule of law. Maintaining a
stable political environment and keeping reform priorities on track are instrumental
to that end. A renewed commitment by both the Government and the international
community to the adoption of the strategic plan by the Sup erior Council of the
Judiciary and the allocation of budgetary resources for its implementation are some
of the necessary steps. Efforts must be redoubled to ensure that the benchmarks are
attained and form a solid foundation on which to strengthen the rul e of law,
consolidate stability and advance towards sustainable development.
76. MINUJUSTH will continue to work with government officials, the international
community and civil society organizations to support dialogue efforts through the
good offices of my Special Representative. Broad cooperation between relevant
stakeholders, including the private sector and civil society, and enhanced
communication between the Haitian institutions and the public are key to ensuring
success in addressing priority tasks, including the adoption of short-term measures
that can respond to the immediate needs of the people.
77. In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my Special
Representative for Haiti, Helen Meagher La Lime, and the women and men of
MINUJUSTH for their courage and dedication in consolidating the rule of law and
promoting human rights in Haiti, as well as to those Member States that have provided
police personnel for the Mission.

18-19895

15/28

S/2018/1059

Annex I
Benchmark indicators, targets and baselines
Symbol

Equivalent

Symbol

Equivalent

On track to achieve target by the timeline

Challenges expected to achieve target by the
timeline but with a descending trend

Challenges expected to achieve target by
the timeline but with a positive trend

No progress/Not on track to achieve target
by timeline

Challenges expected to achieve target by
the timeline but with a stagnating trend

No update on progress was expected during
the reporting period

Target
timeline

Indicator

1. The executive
and legislative
branches have
promulgated
legislation that
improves access to
justice, enhances
the development of
the national police
and addresses
prolonged pretrial
detention, which is
a cause of prison
overcrowding; all
branches have
initiated
implementation of
the new legislation,
including through
sustainable budget
allocations

1.1 Existence of the
new Criminal Code
(1 — draft law initiated;
2 — draft law voted by
each chamber; 3 — law
promulgated by
President)

April
2019

3 — New Criminal
Code is
promulgated

1 — Review of the draft
completed by the justice
and security
commission of the
Senate. Lower chamber
has engaged in
discussions with
different actors to build
support for the adoption
of the draft.

1.2 Existence of the
Code of Criminal
Procedure (1 — draft
law initiated; 2 — draft
law voted by each
chamber; 3 — law
promulgated by
President)

April
2019

3 — Code of
Criminal
Procedure is
promulgated

1 — Review of the draft
completed by the justice
and security
commission of the
Senate. Lower chamber
has engaged in
discussions with
different actors to build
support for the adoption
of the draft.

1.3 Existence of the
Legal Aid Law
(1 — draft law initiated;
2 — draft law voted by
each chamber; 3 — law
promulgated by
President)

April
2019

3 — Legal Aid
Law is
promulgated

3 — Law on the
creation, organization
and functioning of the
National Council on
Legal Aid adopted by
both chambers on
10 September 2018,
transferred to President
on 27 September and
published in the official
gazette on 26 October

16/28

Target

Update as at 15 October
(or otherwise specified)

Benchmark

Trend

18-19895

S/2018/1059

Benchmark

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 October
(or otherwise specified)

1.4 Existence of the
organic law on the
Haitian National Police
elevating Directorate of
Prison Administration to
a central directorate
(1 — draft law initiated;
2 — draft law voted by
each chamber; 3 — law
promulgated by
President)

April
2019

3 — Organic law
on national police
is promulgated

1 — Draft organic law
is pending validation by
the Director General of
the national police.

1.5 Existence of the
Prison Law (1 — draft
law initiated; 2 — draft
law voted by each
chamber; 3 — law
promulgated by
President)

April
2019

3 — Prison Law is
promulgated

1 — Draft prison law
pending final validation
by Directorate of Prison
Administration

1.6 Identification of
the implementation
requirements by the
relevant institutions,
including budgetary
allocations, for the new
legislation
(disaggregated by law)

October
2019

Implementation
requirements,
including
budgetary
allocations, are
determined for
new legislation

Identification of
implementation
requirements for:

Trend

(a) Draft Criminal
Code: not yet adopted
(b) Code of Criminal
Procedure: not yet
adopted
(c) Legal Aid Law: a
technical committee on
the implementation of
the law has been set up
by the Ministry of
Justice and Public
Security
(d) Organic law on
national police: not yet
adopted
(e) Prison Law: not yet
adopted

1.7 Number of new
case files processed in
real time by the
prosecutors in the
jurisdiction of Port-auPrince

18-19895

October
2019

800 new case files
processed in real
time by the
prosecutors in the
jurisdiction of
Port-au-Prince

October 2017–
September 2018:
444 new cases
processed in real time
by Port-au-Prince
jurisdiction prosecutors

17/28

S/2018/1059

Benchmark

2. The Haitian
authorities make
timely, genderbalanced and
merit-based
appointments in
the justice sector,
including in the
Superior Council
of the Judiciary,
the Court of
Cassation and the
Superior Court of
Audits and
Administrative
Disputes

18/28

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 October
(or otherwise specified)

1.8 Proportion of
detainees in pretrial
detention in excess of
two years at the civil
prison of Port-au-Prince

October
2019

50.4 per cent of
detainees in
pretrial detention
at the civil prison
of Port-au-Prince

15 October: 63.6 per
cent (2,346 out of
3,690)

1.9 Number of cases
closed by investigative
judges in the
jurisdiction of Port-auPrince

October
2019

750 orders issued

October 2017–
September 2018:
365 orders issued

1.10 Number of penal
cases adjudicated by the
court of first instance of
Port-au-Prince

October
2019

800 penal cases
adjudicated by the
court of first
instance of Portau-Prince

October 2017–
September 2018: court
of first instance of Portau-Prince adjudicated
411 penal cases

2.1 Existence of the
annual report of the
Superior Council of the
Judiciary, to include:
judiciary staffing by
gender; judiciary
inspection results;
number of certified
judges; and
implementation of judge
evaluation process

April
2019

Annual report of
the Superior
Council of the
Judiciary
available,
including:
judiciary staffing
by gender;
judiciary
inspection results;
number of certified
judges; and
implementation of
judge evaluation
process

The report on the state
of the judiciary is being
revised by the Superior
Council of the
Judiciary. This report
will then be used as a
basis to start the
Superior Council’s
annual report, which has
not yet been initiated.

2.2 Number of seats
filled at the Superior
Council of the Judiciary,
the Court of Cassation
and the Superior Court
of Audits and
Administrative
Disputes, disaggregated
by gender

April
2019

Superior Council
of the Judiciary:
9/9 (3 women)

(a) Superior Council of
the Judiciary: 9/9
(0 women).

Court of
Cassation: 12/12
(4 women)

(b) Court of Cassation:
6/12 (1 woman). On
30 August, the Senate
launched for a second
time this year a call to
fill two of the vacant
seats at the Court of
Cassation, in order to
complete the partial list
previously submitted to
the executive, which
would allow for only
four of the six vacant
seats to be filled. The
issue of the mandate of
the President of the

Superior Court of
Audits and
Administrative
Disputes: 9/9
(3 women)

Trend

18-19895

S/2018/1059

Benchmark

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 October
(or otherwise specified)

Trend

Court of Cassation is
not resolved.
(c) Superior Court of
Audits and
Administrative
Disputes: 9/9
(2 women)
3. The Directorate
of Prison
Administration
performs key
management
functions
providing basic
services to all
detainees and
ensures respect for
their rights

18-19895

3.1 Number of deaths
per 1,000 inmates

October
2019

Ratio equal to or
below 10/1,000
inmates

1 January to 15 October
2018: 11.8/1,000
inmates (100 deaths
registered)

3.2 Number of prisons
supported by
functioning health
services for inmates,
disaggregated by gender

October
2019

Nine out of
18 prisons and
four largest
national police
holding facilities
supported by
adequate healthcare facilities for
inmates

Seven out of 18 prisons
supported by
functioning health
services for inmates

3.3 Number of
Directorate of Prison
Administration officers
recruited through a
dedicated process,
disaggregated by
gender, out of the 941
new officers required by
2021 to meet the
Directorate’s needs

October
2019

300 Directorate
of Prison
Administration
officers recruited,
of whom 30 per
cent are women,
out of the total 941
new officers to
meet the
Directorate’s
needs by 2021

61 recruits, including
9 women, graduated
from the twenty-ninth
promotion of the
national police to be
deployed to the
Directorate of Prison
Administration.

3.4 Number of prisons
certified by the
Directorate of Prison
Administration as being
able to operate without
full-time support from
international actors
(MINUJUSTH or
others)

October
2019

Nine prisons
certified out of 18

Criteria for certification
elaborated and draft
evaluation survey
validated by the
Directorate of Prison
Administration. Joint
monitoring and
evaluation committee of
the Directorate and
MINUJUSTH to
oversee certification
process also instituted

19/28

S/2018/1059
Target
timeline

Indicator

4. The national
police responds to
public disorder and
manages security
threats throughout
Haiti,
demonstrating
elevated levels of
professionalism,
human rights
awareness and
gender sensitivity,
without requiring
international
support, as a result
of the
implementation of
the relevant
priorities of the
strategic
development plan
of the national
police for 2017–
2021

4.1 Implementation
rate of the strategic
development plan of the
national police for
2017–2021

October
2019

43 per cent
implemented (57
of 133 priorities in
strategic
development plan)

The first annual
evaluation of the
strategic development
plan for 2017–2021 has
been completed. The
overall rate of
implementation of the
plan is 27.6 per cent (no
priority actions
completed, 9 at an
advanced stage,
39 initiated and 14 not
started).

4.2 Number of police
officers per 1,000
citizens

October
2019

1.45

1.37 (increase is due to
the graduation of
692 cadets of the
twenty-ninth promotion
in September 2018)

4.3 Percentage of
women police officers

October
2019

11 per cent

10 per cent
(1,568 women out of
15,735 total)

4.4 Percentage of
national police capacity
statically deployed
outside the Port-auPrince metropolitan area

October
2019

40 per cent

34.2 per cent

4.5 Number of
specialized public order
units out of the 13
existing units of
the national police
(12 Unités
départementales pour le
maintien de l’ordre and
1 Compagnie
d’intervention et de
maintien de l’ordre)
capable of responding to
security threats with no
MINUJUSTH support

October
2019

All 13 units are
capable of
responding to
security threats
with no
MINUJUSTH
support

A total of 6 of the
13 units operate without
MINUJUSTH support

4.6 Percentage of
public order/security
operations planned and
executed by national
police without
MINUJUSTH support

October
2019

100 per cent of
operations without
MINUJUSTH
support

97 per cent of
operations without
MINUJUSTH support

20/28

Target

Update as at 15 October
(or otherwise specified)

Benchmark

Trend

18-19895

S/2018/1059

Benchmark

5. Strengthened
internal oversight
and accountability
mechanisms in the
justice, corrections
and police sectors
address
misconduct and
ensure increased
effectiveness and
compliance with
human rights

18-19895

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 October
(or otherwise specified)

4.7 Percentage of
national budget
allocated to national
police

October
2019

8.0 per cent of
national budget
allocated to
national police

6.6 per cent of national
budget allocated to the
national police. The
amended budget for
fiscal year 2017–2018
adopted on 30 August
lists a slight decrease in
the funds allocated to
the national police

5.1 Number of courts
of first instance
inspected (out of 18)

April
2019

All 18 courts of
first instance and
5 appeal courts
inspected by the
Ministry of Justice

No inspection
conducted. The Ministry
of Justice and Public
Security carried out
preparatory activities
with the support of
MINUJUSTH, in order
to perform inspection
missions during the
judicial year 2018–2019

5.2 Percentage of
allegations of human
rights violations against
public officials (national
police officers,
Directorate of Prison
Administration
officials) investigated
by the General
Inspectorate of the
national police

April
2019

80 per cent of all
allegations
investigated by the
General
Inspectorate of the
national police

1 January–
30 September: 84.3 per
cent of allegations
investigated against
national police officers,
including Directorate of
Prison Administration
agents (204
investigations out of
242 allegations
received).

5.3 Percentage of
confirmed misconduct
by national police and
Directorate of Prison
Administration officers
disciplined by the
national police

April
2019

60 per cent of
cases investigated
have sanctions
implemented

1 January–
30 September: 6.8 per
cent (13 cases have
been sanctioned out of
190 allegations of
misconducts against
national police officers,
including Directorate of
Prison Administration
officials, investigated
by the General
Inspectorate of the
national police)

Number of appeal
courts inspected (out
of 5)

Trend

21/28

S/2018/1059

Benchmark

6. Haitian women
and men, in
particular those
from the most
vulnerable and
marginalized
communities,
demonstrate
increased trust in
the capability and
willingness of the
justice system to
address crime and
of the national
police to provide
security

22/28

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 October
(or otherwise specified)

5.4 Percentage of
confirmed crimes or
human rights violations
committed by national
police and Directorate
of Prison
Administration officers
prosecuted by judicial
authorities

April
2019

100 per cent of
confirmed crimes
or human rights
violations
committed by
national police
officers prosecuted
by judicial
authorities

15 July–17 October:
police officers were
prosecuted in 7 per cent
(4 out of 57) of the
cases of alleged human
rights violations.

5.5 Percentage of staff
of the General
Inspectorate of the
national police deployed
outside the Port-auPrince metropolitan
area, disaggregated by
gender

April
2019

30 per cent of
projected 340 staff
of the General
Inspectorate of the
national police
deployed outside
the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area

October 2018: none of
the 198 personnel
assigned to the General
Inspectorate of the
national police are
deployed outside the
Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area.

6.1 Proportion of the
population expressing
satisfaction on how the
national police performs
at reducing crime

April
2019

88 per cent

The survey has yet to be
undertaken.

6.2 Number of youth at
risk and women
benefiting from
community violence
reduction/reinsertion
programmes
demonstrating
willingness to work
with national police
community policing
initiatives and law
enforcement authorities

April
2019

500 youth at risk
and women
cooperating with
national police
community
policing and law
enforcement
authorities

458 at-risk youth and
women cooperating
with national police
community policing and
law enforcement
authorities.

6.3 Number of victims
of intentional homicide
per 100,000 citizens,
disaggregated by gender
and age

April
2019

Rate of 9.3 or less
of intentional
homicide,
disaggregated by
gender and age

2018 (From January to
18 October): 6.22
equivalent to 591
intentional homicides
out of which 535
victims were men,
37 women, 12 male
minors and 7 female
minors.

6.4 Number of
kidnappings reported in
the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area

April
2019

50 or fewer
kidnappings
reported in the
Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area

1 January–18 October
2018: 37 cases of
kidnapping concerning
40 people (18 men and
22 women)

Trend

18-19895

S/2018/1059

Benchmark

7. The national
Office of the
Ombudsperson
functions
independently and
protects citizens
whose rights have
been violated

18-19895

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 October
(or otherwise specified)

6.5 Number of gangrelated incidents in the
hotspot zones of Cité
Soleil, Bel-Air and
Martissant

April
2019

18 or fewer gangrelated incidents in
the hotspot zones
of Cité Soleil, BelAir and Martissant

1 January–18 October
2018: 21 incidents

6.6 Number of sexual
and gender-based
violence cases
investigated by national
police, reflecting
enhanced national
police capacity

April
2019

At least 275 cases
of sexual and
gender-based
violence are
investigated

1 January–18 October
2018: 182 cases were
investigated

7.1 Level of
compliance of the
Office of the
Ombudsperson with
international standards
on the work of national
human rights
institutions, and
structural capacity to
operate as an
independent and
effective institution in
accordance with the
Paris Principles

October
2019

A status according
to Paris Principles

A status according to
Paris Principles until
next decision of the
Global Alliance of
National Human Rights
Institutions due for May
2019

7.2 Number of
recommendations of the
Office of the
Ombudsperson
implemented by
national rule of law
institutions

April
2019

Three
None
recommendations
of the of the
Ombudsperson
implemented by
national rule of law
institutions

Trend

23/28

S/2018/1059
Target
timeline

Indicator

8. Civil society
organizations,
including those
representing
women, engage
with the Haitian
authorities to
advocate the
promotion and
protection of
human rights, and
are empowered to
bring allegations of
human rights
violations to the
competent judicial
or administrative
authorities

8.1 Number of
alternative reports
prepared and submitted
by civil society
organizations to
international human
rights mechanisms

April
2019

Two reports
prepared and
submitted by civil
society
organizations to
international human
rights mechanisms

No meetings or reviews
by international human
rights mechanisms in
the reporting period

8.2 Number of cases
reported by local civil
society organizations
monitoring human
rights violations

April
2019

10 reports
published by local
civil society
organizations
monitoring human
rights violations

Eight reports published
by local civil society
organizations
monitoring human
rights

9. National
authorities comply
with international
human rights
obligations,
including holding
individuals
responsible for
current and past
human rights
violations and
fulfilling their
reporting
obligations to
human rights treaty
bodies

9.1 Availability of
national plan of action
for human rights

October
2019

National plan of
action for the
implementation
of the
recommendations
made by human
rights mechanisms,
in particular
through the
universal periodic
review of the
Human Rights
Council

In September, Stéphanie
Auguste was appointed
Minister-delegate for
Human Rights and the
Fight against Extreme
Poverty. The Ministerdelegate leads the
Inter-Ministerial
Committee for Human
Rights, the entity
responsible for
preparing the national
action plan for human
rights.

9.2 Number of
recommendations made
by the human rights
mechanisms accepted
by the Government of
Haiti

April
2019

Three
recommendations
made by human
rights mechanisms
accepted by the
Government of
Haiti

No meetings or reviews
by international human
rights mechanisms in
the reporting period.
However, in September,
the Government
implemented two
recommendations that
had been made by the
universal periodic
review: accession to the
Convention relating to
the Status of Stateless
Persons and the
Convention on the
Reduction of
Statelessness.

24/28

Target

Update as at 15 October
(or otherwise specified)

Benchmark

Trend

18-19895

S/2018/1059

Benchmark

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 October
(or otherwise specified)

9.3 Number of reports
prepared and submitted
to international human
rights mechanisms by
the Government of Haiti

April
2019

Two reports
prepared and
submitted to
international
human rights
mechanisms by the
Government of
Haiti

No meetings or reviews
by international human
rights mechanisms in
the reporting period

9.4 Appointment by
the Government of Haiti
of a high-level human
rights focal point within
the executive branch

April
2019

One high-level
focal point within
the executive
branch appointed
by the Government
of Haiti

In September, the Prime
Minister appointed
Stéphanie Auguste as
the Minister-delegate
for Human Rights and
the Fight against
Extreme Poverty. The
Minister-delegate
replaces the Minister of
Justice as human rights
focal point.

10. Rule of law and
anti-corruption
institutions
demonstrate
increased capacity
to fight corruption

10.1 Availability of
annual report on public
spending by Superior
Court of Audits and
Administrative Disputes

April
2019

The annual report
on public spending
of Superior Court
of Audits and
Administrative
Disputes is
available

The report is pending
publication.

11. The Permanent
Electoral Council
is established
through a credible
and transparent
process and
exercises its
electoral
responsibilities in
an independent and
transparent
manner, without
requiring
international
support

11.1 Nomination by the
three branches of their
three members for the
Permanent Electoral
Council, with a view to
establishing the Council
as an operational and
independent body

October
2019

The nine members
are nominated and
the Permanent
Electoral Council
is established, is
operational and
functions
independently

Nomination process of
the three representatives
has been initiated by
each branch.

11.2 Update of the
electoral lists in
preparation of the next
electoral cycle

October
2019

The electoral lists
are updated

Not yet undertaken

11.3 Existence of the
Electoral Law in
preparation of the next
electoral cycle
(1 — draft law initiated;
2 — draft law voted by
each chamber; 3 — law
promulgated by the
President)

October
2019

3 — Electoral Law
is promulgated

1 — Draft law was
transmitted by the
executive to Parliament
on 14 November

18-19895

Trend

25/28

S/2018/1059

Annex II
Composition and strength of the police component of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti as at
12 November 2018
United Nations police officers
Country

26/28

Formed police unit members

Women

Men

Women

Men

Argentina

1

9

–

–

Benin

–

22

–

–

Bangladesh

–

3

19

120

Burkina Faso

–

13

–

–

Brazil

–

–

–

–

Canada

6

11

–

–

Chad

1

5

–

–

Chile

1

1

–

–

Cameroon

5

1

–

–

Colombia

–

–

–

–

Côte d’Ivoire

1

19

–

–

Djibouti

–

1

–

–

El Salvador

–

2

–

–

Ethiopia

–

–

–

–

France

–

–

–

–

Germany

1

–

–

–

Guinea

–

2

–

–

India

–

–

–

280

Indonesia

–

–

–

–

Jordan

–

8

–

140

Madagascar

1

14

–

–

Mali

–

9

–

–

Mexico

–

1

–

–

Nepal

1

3

7

133

Niger

–

22

–

–

Nigeria

1

3

–

–

Norway

3

–

–

–

Pakistan

–

1

–

–

Philippines

–

–

–

–

Portugal

–

–

–

–

Republic of Korea

3

1

–

–

Romania

2

8

–

–

Russian Federation

–

5

–

–

Rwanda

–

6

14

126

Senegal

8

6

16

138

Slovakia

–

2

–

–

Spain

–

2

–

–

18-19895

S/2018/1059
United Nations police officers
Country

Formed police unit members

Women

Men

Women

Men

Sri Lanka

–

1

–

–

Sweden

1

2

–

–

Togo

2

5

–

–

Tunisia

4

22

–

–

Turkey

–

12

–

–

Uruguay

–

1

–

–

United States of America

–

5

–

–

42

228

56

937

Subtotal
Total

270

993
1 263

18-19895

27/28

S/2018/1059

Annex III
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti:
deployment map

28/28

18-19895
