65

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

services and other suitable arrangements to facilitate the
holding of meetings by the developing countries in
pursuance of the objectives of economic co-operation
among developing countries;
5. Welcomes the establishment by the Trade and
Development Board, in decision 142 (XVI) of 23 October 1976,47 of the Committee on Economic Co-operation among Developing Countries as an open-ended
main committee of the Board to consider and recommend measures to provide, in the field of competence
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, as and when requested, support and assistance
to developing countries in strengthening and enlarging
their mutual co-operation at the subregional, regional
and interregional levels, in accordance with G~neral
Assembly resolution 3362 (S-VII) and other relevant
resolutions of the United Nations;
6. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, while
taking all the necessary measures requested by the
Trade and Development Board in its decision 142
(XVI), to assist developing countries, at their request
and after consideration and appropriate action by the
Committee on Economic Co-operation among Developing Countries, in carrying out studies on specific issues
relating to trade and development, especially those relating to the promotion of trade and financial co-operation among developing countries, and to make those
studies available to all delegations;
7. Urges developed countries to provide appropriate support, as and when requested from them by developing countries, for the implementation of measures of
economic co-operation among developing countries;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a progress report to the General Assembly, at its thirty-second session, on all measures taken by the specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system in support of measures of economic co-operation
among developing countries.
101 st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/120.

Secretariat of the World Food Council

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3348 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, by which it established the World Food
Council in conformity with resolution XXII adopted by
the World Food Conference on 16 November 197448
and requested the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, to establish the
secretariat of the Council,
Noting that the World Food Council has adopted
rules of procedure49 containing provisions concerning
the appointment of the head and the staff of the secretariat of the Council,
I. Decides that the secretariat of the World Food
Council shall be headed by an Executive Director who
shall be appointed b¥ the Secretary-General, in' con41 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtyfirst Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/31/15), vol. II, annex I.
4 8 See Report of the World Food Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.75.II.A.3), chap. II.
49 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/31/19), annex IV.

sultation with the members of the Council and with
the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, for a period of four
years with due regard to the principle of geographical
rotation;
2. Further decides that the Secretary-General shall,
in consultation with the Executive Director of the World
Food Council, appoint an adequate number of staff to
the secretariat of the Council, taking into account the
need for equitable geographical distribution, in addition
to professional competence, and avoiding the appointment of persons who simultaneously perform functions
in other agencies or institutions.
101 st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/121.

Report of thC' World Food Council

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202
(S-Vl) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 3348 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974 on the World Food Conference and the
Universal Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger
and Malnutrition, and corresponding resolutions of the
World Food Conference,
Having considered the report of the World Food
Council on the work of its second session, 50
I. Calls upon all Governments and the relevant
bodies and agencies of the United Nations system to
implement fully the recommendations of the World
Food Council contained in the document entitled "Recommendations agreed upon by the World Food Council
at its second session";" 1
2. Requests the World Food Council, at its third
session, to take immediate and concrete steps to promote
the early implementation of the resolutions adopted by
the World Food Conference and by the General Assembly at its seventh special session and, for this purpose, to give sympathetic consideration to the draft
resolutions of the Group of Seventy-seven which are
contained in annex II to the report of the Council. 50
101 st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/122.

International Fund
Development 52

for

Agricultural

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution XIII of 16 November 1974 of
the World Food Conference 53 and General Assembly
resolutions 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 and
3503 (XXX) of 15 December 1975,
ri<> Ibid., Supplement No. 19 (A/31/19).
.il A/C.2/31 /L.65.

For the printed text, see Official Records

of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement

No. 19 (A/31/19), annex I, paras. 50-69, 79 and 91.
52 See also sect. X.B.3 below, decision 31 /413.
5 :i See Report of the World Food Conference (United Nations puhlication, Sales No. E.75.IT.A.3), chap. II.

66

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Welcoming the progress achieved so far on the establishment of the International Fund for Agricultural
Development,
Noting that, relative to their combined gross national
products, the contributions pledged by the developing
countries are substantially large,
1. Expresses its appreciation to all Governments
that have made pledges of contributions to the International Fund for Agricultural Development, especially
to the Governments of the developing countries;
2. Expresses also its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral and to the Executive Director of the World
Food Council for their efforts towards the establishment
of the Fund.
101 st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/156.

Action programme in favour of developing island countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3338 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974 in which it invited the executive heads of
the organizations concerned within the United Nations
system to intensify their efforts with respect to developing island countries, within their fields of competence,
Recalling further its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation in which it, inter alia, called for
special measures to be undertaken by developed countries and developing countries in a position to do so
to assist in the structural transformation of the economy
of the least developed, land-locked and island developing countries,
Recalling also resolution 98 (IV) of 31 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development54 in which a series of special measures and
specific action, respectively, in favour of the least developed countries and in favour of the land-locked and
island developing countries were recommended as supplementary action to the general measures applicable
to all developing countries in the spirit of the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment
of a New International Economic Order, 55
Recognizing the particular impediments hampering
the economic development of many developing island
countries, especially their difficulties in respect of transport and communications, the smallness of their economies and markets, their low resource endowment and
their heavy dependence on a few commodities for foreign exchange earnings,
1. Invites the executive heads of the organizations
concerned within the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Development Programme, in
the continuation of their efforts with respect to developing island countries to incorporate in their regional and
interregional programmes the relevant recommendations
contained in resolution 98 (IV) of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development;
54 See

Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D.10),
part one, sect. A.
55Resolutions3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-Vr).

2. Urges all Governments, in particular those of the
developed countries, to lend their support, in the cont~xt
of their assistance programmes, for the implementat!on
of the specific action envisaged in favour of ?eveloptng
island countries within the framework of their development plans and priorities;
3. Calls upon the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session, through
the Economic and Social Council, a progress report
on the implementation of specific action in favour of
developing island countries.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/157.

Specific action in favour of land-locked
developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2971 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972 and resolution 63 (Ill) of 19 May 1972
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,~6
Recalling also its resolutions 3169 (XXVIII) of
17 December 1973 and 3311 (XXIX) of 14 December 197 4 on special measures related to the particular needs of the land-locked developing countries,
Bearing in mind various other resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly and its related organs and
by specialized agencies emphasizing special and urgent
measures in favour of land-locked developing countries,
A ware of the need to implement immediately the resolutions adopted by the United Nations, the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, particularly its resolution 98 (IV) of 31 May 1976,57 and
other related organs of the United Nations calling for
specific action in favour of land-locked developing
countries,
Noting with concern that the problems of the landlocked developing countries have not found adequate
solutions and that concrete and effective operational
measures have not yet been taken in their favour,
Noting further that the difficulties faced by the landlocked developing countries, especially their remoteness
from the sea, impede their active and full participation
in the world economic life and hamper their development,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the land-locked
countries and the specialized agencies, to find ways and
means of improving the economic situation of the landlocked developing countries through the urgent implementation of resolutions 63 (Ill) and 98 (IV) of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
2. Calls upon Member States and the entire international community to give special attention to the trade
requirements of the land-locked developing countries,
including the possible provision of preferential treatment of their goods;
r,6 See Proceedings vf the United Nations Confere11ce mi
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report a11d
Annexes (United Nations publication. Sales No. E.73.II.D.4),
annex I.A.
57 Ibid., Fourth Session, vol. J, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D.10), part one, sect. A.
