UNITED NATIONS

TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

MEETING: 27 SEPTEMBER 1971
NEW

1

RETURN

WITHOUT

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 584) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , , . . . . , . . , . . . . , , . . , . . . I . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 September 197 1 addressed to the President of the Security
Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of),
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia,
the Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar,Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia (S/10326);
@I Report of the AdHoc Sub-Committee on Namibia (S/10330) . . . . . . . , . .

1

S/PV. 1584

DELAY .

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTY-FOURTH

Held in New York on Monday,
President: Mr. Toru NAKAGAWA

27 September

(Japan).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agendr/lS84)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter &ted 17 September 1971 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, the
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya,
L,iberia, the Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger,
Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, the
Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and
Zambia (S/10326);
(b) Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia
(S/10330).

MEETING
1971, ut 4.30 p.m.

requests for invitations to participate in the Council’s
discussion from the representatives of Ethiopia, South
Africa, Sudan, Liberia and Guyana.
2. I would propose that the Security Council extend
invitations in accordance with the usual practice to all the
aforementioned representatives. May I take it that the
Security Council is in agreement?
3. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): With regard to the request by
the representative of South Africa to be invited to
participate in our proceedings today, I should like to know
in what capacity visd-vis the question of Naml%ia he
intends to speak, Would he be participating in the capacity
of the representative of a Member State which is fulfilling
its obligations under the Charter towards Namibia? I
should like to have some clarification on that question.
4. The PRESIDENT: I understand that the representative
of South Africa would be participating in the debate in the
Council as the representative of a member State of the
United Nations.
5. Mr, FARAH (Somalia): I do not have a copy of the
document which the representative of South Africa submitted to the Security Council asking to participate in our
discussion. However, it would interest my delegation to
know the nomenclature which he used in referring to the
Territory of Namibia.
6. The PRESIDENT: For the information of the members
of the Council, I shall read out the letter from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa:

Adoption of the agenda

371eagenda wasadopted.

The situation in Namibia:
“I have the honour to inform you that I have been
(a) Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the
instructed by the Government of the Republic of South
President of the Stkrity
Council from the repreAfrica to request that an opportunity be given to Mr. H.
sentatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
Muller, Minister for Foreign Affairs, to participate withthe Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo (Demo- .
out vote in the discussion in the Security Council on the
cratic Republic of), Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
item relating to South West Africa on the Council’s
Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia, the
agenda,” fSjJO334.J
Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, MOPOCCO,the Niger, Nigeria, the Peoplef
7, Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I think that the item inscribed
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
on the agenda relates to the question of Namibia. I should
Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia,‘Uganda,
like to have some clarification on this point.
the United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and
Zambia (S/10326);
8. Mr. TERENCE (Burundi) (interbrefation from French):
In fact, the letter contairitng the request of the repre(bl Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia
(S/10330)
sentative of South Africa raises a new element. The Council

is seized of a matter directly relating to Namibia, and, in
conformity with operative paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution 2372 (XXII), the country with which we are

1. The PRESIDENT: In connexion with the question on
the Council’s agenda this afternoon, I have received
I

concerned is called Namibia. Therefore, further clarification
is required becausethe question as formulated in the letter
of the members of the Organization of African Unity, refers
to Namibia.
9. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): Mr.President, I
should like to associate myself with the point made by the
representative of Burundi. There ought to be uniformity in
the terminology that we use. May I draw attention to the
report submitted to the Security Council entitled “Report
of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia” dated 23
September 1971 /S/20330/. The reference there is to
Namibia. As correctly pointed out by Ambassador Terence
of Burundi, the second item on the provisional agenda
reads: ‘“The situation in Namibia”. The letter submitted by
the Permanent Representative of South Africa refers to
“, , . the discussion in the Security Council on the item
relating to South West Africa on the Council’s agenda.” On
the Council’s agenda it is established beyond any doubt
that we are speaking of Namibia, not of South West Africa.
That is true also of the report submitted to the Security
council.
10 I therefore believe that the wording of the letter from
1’)~ Lepresentative of South Africa should be changed to
conform with the wording of the agenda we have adopted
and with the report submitted to the Security Council.
11. The PRESIDENT: I take note of the fact that some
members of the Council have expressed reservations on the
Lcrminology “South West Africa” included in the letter of
the Permanent Representative of South Africa. As President
of the Security Council I do not think I can control the
temlinology which a Member State of this Organization
uses. Therefore, I would recommend that the Security

Council invite, together with the other representatives, the
representative of South Africa to participate in this debate.
12. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(tmnslated Porn Russian): &believe that considerable and

serious attention should be paid to such terminological
questions in the practice of the United Nations and its
organs.
13. The history of the United Nations showshow unjustly
some Members of the Organization have acted and continue
tc act even now by trying in their official documents to
impose any names they wish on States-not to mention this
particular case. That is why, as the representative of the

Soviet Union, I cannot but associate myself with the views
expressedby the speakerswho preceded me, representatives
of Africa and the Arab East. In this connexion, it would be
desirable if the United Nations, the United Nations Secretariat, the organs of the United Nations and the officers of
those organs would not Leed the whims of any given
Member of the Organization as to how it happens to want
to designate a certain State or Territory, but would adhere
to the terminology and designation which the State itself
considers to be suitable and acceptable or to the ten+
nology established in official documents and positions and
in decisions of the United Nations.
14. We do not have to search far for examples. Only last
Year one of the great Powers began ‘to use the officially
3

established name for one of the States which has not yet
been admitted to the Organization; until recently-until last
year, I think-the United Nations Secretariat referred to the
German Democratic Republic as East Germany or some
other name, although this was absolutely contrary to reality
and common sense, simply because somebody wished it to
be so and somebody in the United Nations Secretariat
heeded the opinion of a small but influential group of
States which thus imposed their will and their terminology.
15. We cannot agree to such a state of affairs. Order must
be restored in this regard, and the oflicial designations of
States and Territories in accepted international practice
must correspond to the designations determined by the
Government of the country itself, In the caseof a sovereign
State, or, in the case of a Territory, to the OffiCial
designation which is accepted in the United Nations; these
names must be respected by the Members of the United
Nations and must be used in documents.
16. Mr, PRATT (Sierra Leone): I support the point of
order which has been raised by the representative of
Somalia. I should Iike to add that we must follow a strict
interpretation of rule 37 of our rules of procedure. Apart
from adhering very closely to matters which are relevantand what is relevant to this debate is Namibia, not South
West Africa-we can exercise our discretion in allowing
participation by Member States only if at least one of two
conditions is ti.dfJled . Those conditions are clearly spelt out
in rule 37, They are that the interests of that Member State
could be affected or that the Member State itself has
brought the matter to our attention by a resolution or by
other means.
17. Now, in the Ietter which has been read to us,nowhere
are we told that the interests of the Member State wishing
to participate in the Council’s discussion are affected and,
without going into the substance, we know that the
resolutions of the General Assembly and those of the
Security Council have long ago terminated the interests of
that particular Member State over the Territory known as
Namibia. Accordingly, if it is not a question of interests, we
fail to see on what basis that particular Member State can
claim a right to speak when its interests have been
terminated so @at it no longer has any interests in the
subject-matter of the debate.

18. Therefore, on that added point-first there is the point
of irrelevancy and, secondly, the point that there are no
interests that have been shown-1 would support the point
of order that has been raised.
: “,.‘”
,:
”
.i;, ;, *_
19. The PRESIDENT: I think the’opinion of the members
of the Council is divided on whether tie’should agree to
invite ,the representative of South Africa to participate in
,,:. ;’ ,/ s ..I /,
th.& debate.
’
.‘,
: i
‘. . .),(. .
I20. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argetitina) (interpretation
.Fom Spanish): Personally, I think it is regrettable that the
:note submitted by the delegation of South Africa use$ the
term “South West Africa” instead of “Namibia” which is
Ithe name by which the United Nations refers to that
’I’erritoxy in all its documentation. However, I beheve that
1the fact that the South African delegation is asking to

participate in the debate, under the agenda which the
Council has just adopted, in itself implies that the dele@ion, if it is invited by the Council to participate is going
to discussthe situation in Namibia and not the situation in
the territory of South West Africa.
21, I think that if the members of the Council engage in a
debate on the use of the term as it appearsin the letter,
they may forget that we have just adopted an agenda in
which reference is clearly made to the situation in Namibia.
All those who participate in the debate around the Council
table will do so making reference to the situation in
Namibia and not to the situation in South West Africa.
22. I therefore support the suggestion made by the
President that we invite the delegation of South Africa to
participate in the debate and-1 again state clearly on “The
situation in Namibia”.
23. Mr. TERENCE (Burundi) (interpretation from
Bench): This is the second time I take the floor to help the
Council to allay any misunderstanding. It is a matter not of
opposing the participation of South Africa in the debate,
but of inviting South Africa to take part in the debate at
such time as its request is explicitly in conformity with the
item on our agenda, Therefore all misunderstanding must
be avoided. If the letter can be prepared during the
meeting, the delegation of Burundi will be in favour of
having South Africa at this table to take part in the debate.
If South Africa is ready only tomorrow to agree to this
terminology, let it take part in the debate tomorrow. But if
it asks to take part in the debate about a country unknown
to the Security Council-or something which has nothing to
do with the present debate-there is absolutely no reason to
heed its request.
24. Mr. KUJLAGA (Poland) [interpretation from French):
Mr. President, you spoke of divided counsels here, and I
should therefore like to make our position very explicit.
25. We have on the ,agenda of the Council the specific
question of Nardbia,“a Territory whose legal and political
status was defined a few years ago-in 1966-by the
competent authorities of the United Nations. As our
colleagues had the occasion to state we have on the agenda
the “Report of the Ad Hoc SubCommittee on Namibia”.
Therefore, I think that the point of order raised by our
colleague from Somalia and supported by many other
delegations is perfectly valid,

27. How can the Security Council-which has called on all
Member States to refrain from rccognizing the authority of
the Government of South Africa over the Territory of
Namibia-accept a letter in which the representative of
South Africa wants to speak on a subject upon which
already the Security Council has asked all Member States,
including the members of the Security Council, not to
recognize, namely, “South West Africa”.
28. So what is involved is also the legal aspect of the
problem from the point of view of the integrity of the
Security council itself.
‘29. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): I do not think
we should let questions of terminology prevent us from
following our normal practice of allowing a Member State
to participate in discussions here in accordance with
Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of our provisional
rules of procedure. No one surely could deny that the
interests of South Africa are ‘specially affected” in this
case, and I can hardly imagine that South Africa will not be
mentioned in these discussions.
30. I therefore suggest that, having noted the observations
made by various members of the Council on the Point of
terminology, we should at least let the representative of
South Africa take a seat.
31, Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretation
fro/n Frewh/: I understand full well the feelings of some of
our colleagues in making their observations, but I must aver
that the debate here seems to go beyond words or even
beyond legal considerations. President Moktar Odd Daddah
this morning [1583rd meeting/ asked us to forge ahead and
to study the matter seriously and responsibly. Nobody can
deny that South Africa is a Member State and that it is
concerned in this matter, whatever name it gives to the
Territory it occupies. Therefore, the interests at stake are
much too considerable for us to fail to seize this opportunity of hearing what the representative of South Africa
has to teil us. It is for that reason that I fully share the
viewpoint expressed by our colleagues from Argentina and
the United Kingdom, and I think that the Council as a
whole, starting with the representatives of the African
States, must understand that it is in the interest of the
Council to hear the representative of South Africa.
32. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): I can hardly
b&eve that after years of wondering why a Government
was unwilling to come to the Security Council, now-for
what seem to be very legalistic reasons-there is at least the
appearance that we are trying to block it from coming here.

26. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): We are not, I
believe, denying the right of the representative of South
Africa to speak. What we are trying to do is to define
exactly the terms of reference of the Council itself. What is
involved is more than what is in a name. There is much
more in a word than what the word conveys.If we look at
the report to which I referred, “Report of the Ad Hoc
Sub-Committee on Namibia”, there is reference to a
resolution
of
Security
Council-resolution
the
283 (1970)-paragraph 1 of which states:

33. I have here the Advisory Opinion of the International
Court of Justice.1 On the cover we find these words:
“Namibi& (South West Africa)“. I find it extremely difficult
to understand the technicalities that have been raised,
when the Opinion of the Court itself usesthose words,

‘Requests all States to refrain from any relationsdiplomatic, consular or otherwise-with South Africa
implying recognition of the authority of the South
African Government over the territory of Namibia.”

1 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of
Youth Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
Security Council resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion, T.C.J.
rleporrs

3

1971,

p. 16.

3. I should certainly like to associate myself with the
remarks of the representatives of France, Argentina and the
United Kingdom; we should at least have free speech prevail
hece.
35. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I can share the view expressed by
pevious speakers that we might regret and even deplore
that a Member State of the United Nations does not use the
terminology used in these chambers. But for the reasons
that have already been expressed by the representatives of
France and the United States-namely, that it would be in
the interest of this body to hear the representative of a
country that has in the past been rather reluctant to come
before it-1 think it would indeed be in the interest of this
body to give the representative of that country the
opportunity to appear in this Chamber.
36. Furthermore, I should like to draw the attention of
our African friends to two points. First, resolution
2145 (XXI) usesthe term “‘South West Africa”. Secondly,
the resolution appearing at the beginning of document
S/10330, resolution 283 (1970), has seven paragraphs in
which the Security Council requests Member States to take
some action concerning the Tecritory of Namibia. Now, in
many of these paragraphs there is mention of bilateral and
multilateral treaties. If we were to hold that the term
“South West Africa” should not be used, would that not
give some countries the chance to say that certain multilateral or bilateral treaties do not concern Namibia and
therefore they need take no action in regard to them?
37. If this question-which, in my opinion, is rather
formalistic-is pushed further it will be self-defeating. I
should really like to draw the. attention of my African
friends to that important point.
38. Mr.

ROMAN (Nicaragua) /inferpretation from
My delegation shares the view of the delegations
of Argentina, the United Kingdom, France, the United
States and Italy that thdelegation of South Africa should
be invited to participate so that the Council may hear its
viewssince it has for so many years refused to participate in
debateson the matter.

42. Mr, FARAH (Somalia): I do not believe there Is any
need to put the matter to the vote. We wanted to place on
record our strong cesecva
tions concecning the procedure
South Africa has adopted in trying to appear before the
Council-that is, attempting to avoid any acknowkdgement
of the fact that the Territory of Namibia is very much
witbin the competence of the United Nations and is P
cesponsiiility of the United Nations. Evidently It does not
wish to reoognize that fact.
43. My delegation will not object to Mc.Mutlec’s np
pacing before the Counoil and giving us his views on the
situation in Namibia, but I wish it to be recorded that that
does not in any way imply recognition by my delegation
that Mr. MuIler legitimately represents the people of South
Africa. Last year, in another focum,\my delegation challenged the credentials of South Afcioa; at that time we s&id
that the question of credentials went beyond mere focmalities and was one of substance. We pointed out that the
representatives sent here represent only the white section of
the population of South Africa, which numben no more
than 4 million, and that the 17 miliion non-white people of
South Africa have no representation whatsoever in this
Ocganization although their country and their cesoucces
enabIe the white minority to profit and gain.
44. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Acab Republic): I simply wish to
affirm that when I spoke earlier I by no means meant that
the representative of South Africa should not be heard. But
with regard to the controversy that has arisen I should like
to agree with the representative of the United States,
Mr. Bush. The Council should use the wording used in the
Advisory Opinion, of the International Court of Justice:
“Namibia (South West Africa)“. But Namibia surely comes
first.
45. The PRESIDENT: The observations that have been
made will appear in the verbatim record,

Spmish):

39. With regard ta terminology, it is true that it would
have been preferable to use the word “Namibia”. But if
even in the Advisory Opinion of the Court both names ace
used that means there is not sufficient reason for us to be
deprived of the chance to hear South Africa’s views.
40. MC. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium) (interpretation
fiOm
For the reasons adduced by the Ambassador of
Argentina and the additional reasons given by the cepresentatives of the United States and France, I think we
should decide to invite South Africa to participate in the
debate.
French):

41, The PRESIDENT: Although the terminology used in
the letter requesting the participation of the permanent
representative of South Africa is neither proper nor
desirable, I believe that since the International Court of
Justice uses,in parenthesis, the words “South West Africa”
the representative of South Africa should be invited to
participate in the debate. If there aceany objections to that
ruling, I shall put the matter to the vote.

46. May I take it that the Security CouncB is in
agreement? Accordingly, it is so decided, and I shall invite
the Minister of Communications, Telecommunioations and
Posts of the Imperial Ethiopian Government, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Government of South Africa, the
Minister for. Foreign Affairs of the Government of Sudan,
who is the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the
Ocganization of African Unity, the Secretary of State of the
Government of Liberia, and the Minister of State for
External Affairs of the Government of Guyana to pacticipate in the Security Council’s discussion witbout the cigbt
to vote.
,I’
47. Owing to the limited number of pIaces provided at the
Security Council table, I am unfoctunately unable to invite
all these very distinguished participants to sit at the Courtoil
table during the course of our discussion, but must follow
the usual practice of Inviting socite of them to take the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber, on
the understanding that they will be invited to take a seat at
the Council table when it is their turn to speak.
48. I shall accordingly invite the Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of the Ocganization of African Unity, Mr. Mansour I&lid,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan,

4

and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa, Mr. H.
Huller, to take seats at the Council table. I shall then invite
the Ministers from Ethiopia, Liberia and Guyana to take
the seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr, M. Khalid (Sudan)
and Mr. H. Mulier (South Africa} took p&es at the
Security Council table, and Mr. T. Mah-onnen (Ethiopia},
Mr. J. R. Grimes (Liberia J and Mr. S. S. Ramphal (Guyana}
took the places reserved for them in the Council Chamber.

49. The PRESIDENT: I have received in addition a letter
from the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia /S/10332/ requesting, in accordance with a
decision of that Council, to be invited to participate
without the right to vote in the Security Council’s
discussion. I would propose that the Security Council
extend an invitation to the President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia under the provisions of rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure. As I hear no objection, I
take it that the Security Council agreeswith my suggestion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. 0. Ogbu,
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia, took
a place al the Security Council table,
50. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
resume its consideration of the question of the situation in
Namibia in accordance with the request of 36 African
States, as contained in document S/10326. Also included in
the agenda for this meeting is the report of the Security
Council’s Ad /foe Sub-Committee on Namibia, contained in
document S/10330. A number of other important documents have been submitted to the Council in connexlon
with the question, which I should like to mention very
briefly. The Advisory Opinion requested by the Council
from the International Court of Justice has been circulated
in document S/10267. The decision of the Organization of
African Unity to call for this discussion by the Security
Council was communicated in documents S/10272 and
S/10277. Document S/10288 contains the report of the
Secretary-General submitted under paragraph 9 of resolution 283 (1970) on a review of multilateral treaties to
which South Africa became a party, and which either by
direct reference or on the basis of relevant provisions of
international law might be considered to apply to Namibia.
In addition the Council has received in documents S/10303
and S/10312 communications on the subject of Namibia
from the Acting Chairman of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, and in document S/10331 a
communication from the Chairmanof the ninth meeting of
the Joint Meeting of the Special Committee on Apurtheid,
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the
United Nations Council for Namibia, which transmitted a
consensusof the Joint Meeting.

give the floor to Ambassador Terence of Burundi, the
Chairman of the Ad Hoc SubCommittee on Namibia.
52. Mr. TERBNCE (Burundi) (interpretation
from
&z&r/:
Mr. President, before introducing the report that
you have just mentioned, I wish, as the representative of
Burundi, to confirm what I said previously about the
invitation addressed to South Africa to take part ln the
debate. Some delegations which spoke after me did not
seem to have understood that my delegation had said, and I
repeat, that we were in favour of the presence of South
Africa at this table to take part in the debate. This feeBng is
based on the hope that South Africa is here to confum to
the Security Council that it accepts the conclusions of the
International Court of Justice. Having said this, I shall now
introduce the report.
53. It is with great pleasure that I present this report, after
the brilliant statement made by His Excellency Moktar
Ould Daddah, President of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania and present President of the Organization of African
Unity f1583rd meeting], in the presence of Mr.Mansour
l&&d, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan and the
present Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Mx.Makonnen, Minister for Post and Communications of the
Imperial Government of Ethiopia, Mr. Grimes, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Liberia, Mr. Arikpo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Nigeria and Mr. Hassane, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Chad.
54. Three months almost to the day have elapsed since the
historic day on which the International Court of Justice
declared illegal the presence of South Africa in Namibia and
requested that it immediately withdraw from that territory.
55. It was in the light of the report presented to it by its
that the
Security Council decided to refer the case of Namibia to
the International Court of Justice /resolution 284 (1970)].
As Chairman of that Ad Hoc SubCommittee on Namibia, I
am justly pleased to pay a highly deserved tribute to the
distinguished judges who discharged their obligations with
dignity and equity.
Ad Hoc Sub-Committee in July 1970 /S/9863/

56. President Zafrulla Khan is entitled to special congratulations for his courage since he thus restored to the Hague
Court the integrity and the morality belonging to this world
judicial organ. All the judges who laboured with extreme
energy and assiduity in order to ensure the triumph of the
Namibian cause deserveour highest praise.
57. The Judgment of the Court is in itself a resounding
victory, not only for Namibia and Africa but, above all, for
the United Nations. The verdict of 21 June 1971 has
contributed to rehabilitating a Court whose.integrity had
been breached and had become suspect in the eyes of the
world. The Judgment is now a source of comfort for the
United Nations, whose trust in the International Court of
Justice is now renewed.
58. That preliminary statement enables me to speak now
about the report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia
[S/10330/,
the Committee being composed of the 15
members of the Security Council.

51. The Chairman of the Security Council’s Ad Hoc
Sub-Committee on Namibia, the representative of Burundi,
will introduce the report of the Ad Hoc SubCommittee. I
5

59. Since the International Court of Justice decided that
South Africa wasin duty bound immediately to withdraw
from Namibia, two parallel and complementary processes
started: on the one hand, the unanimous decision at the last
meeting of the Heads of State and Government of the 0AI.l
to call an emergency meeting of the Security Coqncil,and,
on the other hand, the efforts on the part of the Ad Hoc
SubCommittee, ln the framework of the terms of reference
contained in operative paragraphs 14 and 15 of resolution
283 (1970) of 29 July 1970, to work out recommendations
for the Security Council in conformity with the Judgment
of the International Court.

Justice after having successively challenged the General
Assembly and the Security Council? Representatives will
see that it Is Imperative to order South Africa to obey the
verdict of the judges In The Hague, because any cornplacency towards Pretoria would cause serious damage to
our Organiza tion.
66. It is therefore Imperative to abandon any attempt to
interpret the Opinion of the Court in the way most
favourable for the respective interestr of Member States.
Would it not be legithnate to wonder about the raison
d’6tre of the International Court of Justice If not only the
validity of its Judgments were in dispute but even its
authority were contested or ignored?

60. Now that the Ad Hoc SubCommittee has completed
its work, I am happy to present the results of its laborious
67. On the other hand, we must stress that the confirmaefforts to the Security Council, and this with a view to the
tion of the Opinion of the Court by the Security Council,
measures that the Security Cbuncll will have to take ln
far from being in the interest only of the Namiblans or the
future. After negotiations in a climate of mutual underAfricans, will contribute, to a very large extent, to restoring
standing and friendship, the members of the Ad Hoc
the honour of that body In particular, and of the world
Sub-Committee came to conclusions, which are found in
Organlzation as a whole. But to fail to discharge such an
one single document composed of three specific parts: the
obligation to protect the integrity of the Court woufd be
first category of recommendations is found in Part A of our
tantamount to a serious infringement of the very prestige of
report [ibti., para. 18/; it contains the proposals upon
which the delegations agreed, generally speaking, However, the organs of the United Nations and that of the permanent
member, to which the international community quite
the Afro-Asian States thought it their imperative duty to
correctly entrusts the task of preserving the United Nations
submit proposals that would complete the ones I just
mentioned and would help the Security Council to assess from the deadly blows which the South African Government is constantly dealing it.
more correctly its role in the problem of Namibia in view of
the Conclusions of the Court. Those proposals will be
68. Never has the Security Council been in such a crucial
found in Part B of the report [ibid., pam.191.
situation, where it has to regain possession of a Territory
falling within the purview of the United Nations, and
61. Since some delegations did not at the time have therefore of the Council itself. At this crossroads in the
instructions from their Governments, and since others
history of the Council, will the permanent members choose
wished to have more time to consider the Afro-Asian
the humiliation of defeat which South Africa is endeavrecommendations, no final agreement could be reached.
ouring to inflict upon it, or fulfil the sacred mission
entrusted to them: that of defending international peace
62. In Part C of the report /ibid., pum.201, the United
and security against any threat7
States and Italy present a proposal, upon which divergencies remain.
69. Reserving my right to speak as representative of
Burundi,
that is all I want to say in Introducing the report
63. I also wish to mention that the delegations of the
presented to the Security Council except that we appeal to
United Kingdom and France expressed reservations about
representatives to be kind enough to consider that report
the proposals contained in the report. However, the report
and
come to final conclusions.
in itself is but one step in fulfiuing the role which is
incumbent upon the Security Council. Therefore, it goes 70. The PRESDENT:
I call on Ambassador Ogbu, Presiwithout saying that it is in the Council that unanimity is
dent of thsUn.ited Nations Council for Namibia.
Indispensable. Despite the divergent viewpoints expressed
on various parts of the report, all members of this Council
71. Mr. OCBU (President of the United Nations Council
are fully aware of the need to approve and to implement
for Namibia): On behalf of the United Nations Council for
the Opinion handed down by the International Court of
Namibia, I wish to express my appreciation of the
Justice.
invitation to participate in this debate which the Security
Council has extended to me in my capacity as President of
64. In view of my responsibilities on behalf of the Ad Hoc
that CouncL
Sub-Committee, and especially because of an overrldlng
desire to safeguard the authority of the Council and
72. In the long history of the consideration of the
strengthen its effectiveness, I must addressan urgent appeal
question of Namibia, the Security Council’s meeting today
to all members to abandon their reservations and agree ofi
will stand apart, both in respect of the circumstances under
measures capable of compelling South Africa to respect the
which it has come to be convened and in the expectation
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations and its
which it has already evoked for Namiilans and all lovers of
bodies.
freedom throughout the world. The immediate objective is
to enable the Security Council to consider measures which
65. What would remain of the value and the powersof the
it must take In the light of the Advisory Opinion of the
United Nations if the Pretoria regime arrogated unto itself
Intemationrd Court of Justice which was handed down on
21 June 1971.
the right to defy the Opinion of the International Court of
6

73. That Opinion was historic, since it rejected-for all
time-the South African contention that it has any status
whatsoever in the Territory; it reaffirmed the international
status of Namibia and the responsibility of the United
Nations towards the Territory and its people-responsibilities which were to be carried out by the authority
created by the United Nations, namely, the United Nations
Council for Namibla; and it called upon all Members of the
United Nations and non-Member States to see that their
bilateral and multilateral relations with South Africa
conform to the Court’s findings.
74. By acceding to the request of the Council for Namibia
to be allowed to participate in this debate, the Security
Council has taken a step which further advances the
position of the organ over which I have the privilege of
presiding at present. I am here then to seek, on behalf of
the United Nations Council for Namibia, the Security
COUIIC~~‘S assistance for Namibia and its people, who, in
their oppression, look to the United Nations to take the
necessary steps which wiIl be the logical cmsequenms of
the Organization’s position vi&vis the Territory-a position which has been reaffirmed once again by this Organiz&ion’s highest judicial body,
7.5. What does the Council for Namibia request of the
Security Council?
76. fermit me to begin by saying that we see no need to
go into the history of the futile efforts by the Security
Council and the General Assembly to compel the racist
regime in South Africa to abide by the scoresof resolutions
which have been adopted with a view to putting an end to
its illegal occupation of Namibia.
77. We know, with regret, that no appeals, condemnations
or calls for action have so far succeeded in making South
Africa budge from its position of detiance of the will of the
large majority of the Members of this Organization concerning Namibia. And we know that the inability of the
Organization to act in the face of that flagrant defiance is
due not to the lack of sincerity or will by that majority but
to the inherent weakness ln its enforcement machinery,
exacerbated by the persistent refusal of a handful of States,
great and small, to abide by their Charter obligations. Yet
we also know that the Organization cannot allow South
Africa to defy indefinitely the will of the majority.
Notwithstanding the limitations which the sovereignty and
selfishness of a few States have put on the effectiveness of
the United Nations, the Organization must act, and act as
decisively as possible.

carrying out its responsibilities within the limitations
imposed upon it by South Africa’s intransigence.
79. To date, the Council’s identity and travel documents
which can be issued to Namiblans have been recognized by
over 70 Governments as valid travel documents, enabling
Namibians to fake advantage of the educational and other
types of assistance offered to them by sympathetic Govemments. The Council has been able to sign agreements with
five Member States granting the right of return to Namibians who leave the countries of their residence for
purposes such as education and training.
80. The Acting United Nations Commissioner for Namibia
has set up a regional office at Lusaka, Zambia, to issue
travel documents, and that Office will soon be given
additional functions to act as a channel of information
between the Council, the Organization of African Unity
and the African continent regarding Namibia.
81. But that is not enough. The scope of the activities of
the Council for Namibia must be broadened in conformity
with its proper status. This can be accomplished by several
means which would further enhance the status of that
Council as the entity charged with responsibility for the
administration of Namibia and, at the same time, further
erode the position of and increase international pressure on
South Africa. Within its present terms of reference, the
Council certainly has the legal powers of a sovereign entity
visa-vis Namibia, but it lacks the resources and it is unable
to exercise those powers, particularly inside the Territory.
82. The sine qua non for the successof any measures to be
adopted by the Security Council is therefore to put an end
to the illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa. This
would require the application of the strongest possible
pressures against that country, including the application of
the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter if that became
necessary. Once that is accomplished the Council for
Namibia will have the opportunity to carry out the
responsibilities which have been entrusted to it inside the
Territory, provided the Council is given the necessary
means, including adequate funds and resources. Such funds
and resources must be provided out of the United Nations
regular budget, since voluntary contributions cannot guarantee the successful functioning of the United Nations
Council for Namibia as an administering body,
83. Another measure which can help in strengthening the
Council for Namibia and make it more effective is the
appointment of a full-time Commissioner. Although the
previous and current Acting Commissioners have carried
out their duties with dedication and distinction, the
increased tempo of activities which must follow your
deliberations here make it imperative for the Council to be
assisted by an official who can give fully of his time and
energy to the all-important task of executing the policies
which will be enunciated by the Council.

78. As I stated earlier, the Court’s Advisory Opinion has
confirmed once again that South Africa’s continued occupation of Namibia is illegal. The obvious implication of that
Opinion is &at the only entity that could administer the
Territory was the United. Nations, which had created the
United Nations Council for Namibia to act on its behalf.
The Court has, in other words, recognized the Council as
the de iure Government of Namibia. The Council for
Namibia itself has had no doubt whatsoever about the
United Nations legal standing vis-a-vis the Territory and its
people. Consequently, ever since its creation it has been

84. There is no question that the recent Advisory Opinion
of the Court has enhanced the United Nations position
relating to Namrbia, while at the same time it has dealt a
severeblow to the South African stand regarding Namibia.
7

85. ~hb Organization must, therefore, not allow this
victory, achieved by the forces of law and justice against
me forces of tyranny and injustice, to be dissipated. The
United Nations is duty bound to do what it can in order
that the Council is enabled, inter a&: (a) to challenge every
action which South Africa or its partners may take
concerning or on behalf of Namibia, since South Africa has
no locus standi in the Territory; lb) to give maximum
publicity to the positions of the United Nations and South
Africa regarding the Territory, so as to let the world know
that this Organization’s position conforms to law, justice,
respect for fundamental human wrights and the basic
principles of legality, while South Africa’s position is in
conflict with and a denial of these fundamental principles;
fc) to increase, by all available means, pressure on South
Africa, seeking full cooperation of the specialized agencies
and Members and non-Member States with the Council and
its recognition as the sole legal authority with power to act,
in the name of the United Nations, on behalf of Namibia.
86. Speaking of co.operation, the United Nations Council
was pleased about the co-operation and coordination of
activities of the three subsidiary organs of the United
Nations dealing with the problems of southern Aftica, a
processwhich wasinitiated this year by the holding of joint
meetings of the Special Committee of Twenty-Four,> the
Special Commiftee on ApartJzcid and the United Nations
Council for Namibia. The aims and the hopes of the joint
meeting were spelled out in a consensus which was
transmhtcd to the Security Council for the attention ofits
members, to which you referred recently, Mr. President.
87. The oppressed people of Namibia have seen a ray of
hope in the Advisory Opinion of the International Court of
Justice which they expect to help loosen South Africa’s
stranglehold over the Territory and to achieve the cherished
desire of its people for freedom and independence. This
Organization, which has set itself up as the guardian of the
destiny of Namibia as w.independent and free country,
must not allow the aspirations of its people to die. Nor can
this Organization shirk its responsibilities towards other
peoples and nations, particularly those in Africa. That
continent is directly concerned with the perpetuation of
colonialism and subjugation of millions of its sons and
daughters. Its interest in the fate of Namibia has been
clearly manifested in many ways, as for example, by its
recent active participation in this Council’s proceedings, in
the Court’s proceedings, as well as the presencehere today
of Moktar Ould Daddah, President of the Islamic Republic
of Mauritania and the current Chairman of the Organizstion
of Afrim Unity.
88. Through reliable first-hand information, we in the
Council for Namibia have learned how joyfully the newsof
the Advisory Opinion of the Court was received by both
educated and uneducated Namibians. We also know that
South Africa has been unhappy, to say the least, about that
Opinion.
89. The Narnibians are now looking forward to the day
when they can enjoy the benefits of freedom to which they
are entitled and the fruit of their labours.
2 Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
COlOnial Countries and Peoples.

8

90. I appeal to the Security Council, and through it to the
entire United Nations, not to dash to the ground the hopes
of millions of oppressed people. I appeal for decisive action
by this Counoil to remove from the Territory South Africa,
which is now the only obstacle to the reahzation of the goal
of the United Nations for the peofie of Namibia. Pinatly, I
appeal to all nations that have any dealing with South
Africa, which touches upon and is at the expense of the
well-being of Namiiis and its people, to be guided by their
conscience and their Charter obligations, rather than by
their self-serving material interest.
91. The PRESIDENT: Before caIling on the next representative on the list, I should like to inform the Council
that I have just received a letter from the Chairman of the
Afrioan Group of States in which . he states that the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan, Ethiopia,
Nigeria, Liberia and Chad are serving as members of the
delegation of the Organization of African Unity, beaded by
Moktar Ould Daddah, and he requests that they be invited
to participate in the Security Council’s discussion on the
question of Namibia without the right to vote.
92. Inasmuch as three of the Ministers mentioned in that
letter have already been invited to participate in the
discussion, having submitted separate requests to that
effect, I would propose that the Council now proceed to
invite the other two members of the OAU delegationnamely, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria and
Chad-to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote.
93 . As there is no objection, it is so decided,
94. I shall now invite the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Nigeria and Chad to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber in order to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, on the understanding
that they wih be invited to take places at the Council table
when it is their turn to speak.
At the invitation of the President,Mr. 0. Arikpo (N&etiJ
and Mr. B. Hassane(Chad) took the places reserved for
them in the Council Chamber,

95. The PRESIDENT: The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of South
Africa, on whom I now call.
96. Mr. MULLER (South Africa): May I first of all express
my thanks and appreciation of the opportunity to participate in the discussion of this item in the Security Council. I
shall not today embark upon a detailed legal analysis of the
International Court’s Advisory Opinion of 21 June 1971.
But I do wish to state the main reasonswhy that Opinion is
completely unacceptable to my Government and to point
out some of the alarming implications’of accepting itimplications -w&h stretch well beyond the particular
question of South West Africa and which must surely be a
matter of considerable concern to all the Members of this
Organization. 1 shall confine myself to the primary issues
which were before the Court, namely, the powers of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council and the
question of the factual justification for the purported

revocation of South Africa’s title to administer the Territory.

97. Now, the fundamental issue in dispute was whether
there was any provision of the Charter under which the
General Assembly could have terminated South Africa’s
right of administration. After all, the Court itself has said
that the powers of the Assembly are derived from and
based upon the Charter of the United Nations. It cannot,
therefore, act outside the Charter.
98. It has, of course, always been trite law that, apart
from someimmaterial exceptions which were never in issue,
the Charter confers upon the Assembly only the power to
discuss and the power to recommend. It cannot make
binding decisions and it cannot itself take direct action.
9. Let us look in this connexion at Article 10 of the
Charter, which is the cornerstone of the Assembly’s powers,
It says,so far as it is relevant: “The General Assembly may
discussany questions or any matters within the scope of
the present Charter . . . and . . . may make recommendations . . . on any such questions or matters.”
100. The other relevant provisions of the Charter dealing
with the Assembly’s powers are to the same effect. What
provision then could possibly have empowered the Assembly to adopt its resolution 2145 &X1)-a resolution by
which it purported to terminate the Mandate for South
West Africa with binding effect?
101. As I have said, that was the fundamental question in
dispute and one which was argued at length in the
proceedings. Now did the Court deal with it? It did not
even attempt to answer it; it simply evaded the issue. Al1 it
said wasthis, in paragraph 105:
I‘ . . , it would not be correct to assume that, because
the General Assembly is in principle vested with recommendatory powers, it is debarred from adopting, in
specific caseswithin’ the framework of its competence,
resolutions which make determinations or have operative
design.”
102. This is of course pure question-begging; for the
question which the Court was called upon to answer was
precisely whether the Assembly’s purported revocation was
within the framework of its competence. That framework
of competence is to be found only in the provisions of the
Charter-not in a bare assertion by the Court. And if a
provision of the Charter does confer the power claimed,
why did the Court not indicate what that provision was?
103. Nor would it help to rely upon a theory of succession
to the powersof the League of Nations-a theory in itself
highly controversial, to say the least. For the Court itself
has in the past repeatedly stressedthat even when operating
as a successorto the Council of the League, the General
Assembly cannot act otherwise than in accordance with the
Charter. That is still the law-the Court did not overrule
what it had previously said in this connexion. Yet still it
failed to indicate what Charter basis could have authorized
the Assembly’s action.
9

104. Why? There can be only one answer and it was
provided by one of the dissenting judges. He said the
following on page 289 of the report of the Court:
“ . . . the whole of this most important aspect of the
matter, resulting from the Court’s own jurisprudence asit
wasenunciated in the 1955 Vofi?rgfiocedure case, is now
completely ignored, and not even mentioned, in the
present Opinion of the Court;-for the sufficient reason
no doubt that there is no satisfactory answer that can be
given to it.”
105. I turn next to the powers of the Security Council.
And if the Court’s fmdmgs are unreasoned and unconvincing in regard to the action taken by the General
Assembly, they are even more so in regard to that taken by
the Security Council-for here the Court made even less of
an effort to meet the issuesinvolved.
106. The language of Article 24 of the Charter makes it
abundantly clear that although that Article confers upon
the Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, it does not
itself confer any powers upon the Council. What it does
provide is that in order to discharge that responsibility the
Council shall have the specific powers laid down in
Chapters VI, VII, VIII and XII.
107. In spite of this, when the Court came to deal with
the power of the Council to adopt resolution 276 (1970) it
stated that Article 24 confers upon the Council general
powers which may be exercised whenever a situation might
lead to a breach of the peace. The Court stated that these
powers are additional to those specifically granted to the
Council under the Chapters indicated and are limited only
by the extremely wide purposes and principIes of the
United Nations. Moreover, according to the Court, should
the Council so intend, any decision which it might take
would be binding in terms of Article 25.
108. Now these are vitally important and far-reaching
findings. One would therefore have expected the Court to
motivate them very carefully. But what do we find in fact?
We find that the Court simply ignores cogent arguments
presented to the contrary. And we find that in support of
its interpretation of Article 24 the Court merely refers to a
statement by the Secretary-General of the United Nations
in 1947. The correctness of that statement was itself an
issue which was strongly and extensively controverted
during the proceedings. Yet what does the Court do? It
accepts its correctness without advancing one single word
of reasoning in support thereof.
109. Can there be confidence in this kind of adjudication.
110. Another disquieting feature of the Opinion was the
Court’s treatment of the question whether, when the
Council adopted its relevant resolutions, it was acting for
the maintenance of international peace and security. That it
was only for this purpose that the Council could validly
have acted wasaccepted by the Court.
111. The evidence, however, was crystal clear that the
Council had not acted for that purpose but for a corn.

uletely different one: namely, to secure as an end ln itself
ihe &noval of South Africa from South West Africa go that
the United Nations could take over the Territory and bring
about its almost immediate independence as a single
political entity-regardless of the consequences,

“There is not a single example of a matter laid before
the Security Council in which some Member State could
not have claimed that the continuance of a given &u&ion
represented an immediate or remote threat to the
maintenance of peace.”

112. To this evidence the Court simply closed its eyes. It
asserted that the Council wasacting for the maintenance! of
peace and securityAan assertion which, despite the urgings
of some of its members, the Council itself deliberately
avoided making in any one of its resolutions.

121, The attempts by one or two of the major& Judgea
to limit the effects of the Court’s Opinion to the particular
case of South West Afdca are quite unconvincing turd
indeed meaningless. The principles which hold good for the
present ease must also hold good for other casesand will
inevitably be applied to them.

113. The implications which flow from the Court‘s attempt to attribute to the General Assembly and the
Security Council implied powers which they were never
intended to have under the Charter, are enormous in their
scope.

122. Another disturbing feature of the Court’s Opinion ia
the way in which the Court treated its previous Opinions
and Judgments. The Court purported to “adhere to its
own
jurisprudence”, But what it actually did wassimply to
overrule much of that jurisprudence without explanation
and without saying that it was doing so. It relied heavily on
those of its previous pronouncements which were adverse
to South Africa’s contentions while it shnply ignored or
brushed aside those which subatantlated them, Ita I966
Judgment, for example, which tended to support South
Africa’s position, wasinvoked only twice-and then merely
to try to refute South Africa’s argument.

114. According to the Court’s lnterpretatlon of the
Charter, the Assembly now has the power to make findings
of fact and of law-fmdings which would bind even
nonconsenting States and, it would appear, States not
Members of the United Nations. But the Court has left a
host of vital questions completely unanswered. How can
the Assembly take binding decisions when the Charter
confines its powers to discussion and recommendations?
What are the specific casesin which it can do this? What
are the limits, if any, on these powers?
115 V It would, however, follow from the Opinion itself
that merely by invoking Article 10 of the Charter, the
Assembly can now oblige States to submit reports to it and
to accept its supervision in regard to any matter which the
Assembly might choose to discuss.

123. On the other hand, where its previous pronounce.
merits did not suit its Opinion, the Court just disregarded
them. To give but two examples of such pronouncements:
“it was never the intention that the Council (of the
League) should be able to impose its viewson the various
mandatories-the system adopted was one which deliberately rendered this impossible”;
and again,

I 16. Similarly a State which for reasons of policy voluntarily brings a matter before the Assembly might thenceforth fmd itself under an obligation to do so.

“resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly . . . subject to certain exceptions not here material . . .
are not binding, but only recommendatory in character.”

117. And ‘within the framew& of its competence”,
whatever that may mea?, ihe Assembly would now even be
able to abrogate or tiiter territorial rights.

124. Then there is the Court’s treatment of another
fundamental issue-the question of the factual justification
for General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI). The Aasembly based that resolution on South Africa’s alleged
non-fulfilment of obligations in respect of the administration of the Territory-obligations
alleged to have been
violated by acts of oppression and repression of the
inhabitants of the Territory and by the alleged denial of
rights of selfdetermination, freedom and independence. In
particular, the Assembly made no mention of South
Africa’s refusal to render reports on its administration ,1to
the United Nations.

118. The powers of me Security Council would, according
to the Court’s inteypretation, if anything, be still more
drastic. Its powers under Articles 24 and 25 would be
“commensurate with its responsibility for the maintenance
of peace and security” and limited only by the “fundamental principles and purposes” of the Charter.
119. It could thus make and enforce decisions on a wide
range of matters. The carefully devised safeguardsin other
chapters of the Charter would count for nothing; simply by
invoking Article 24 the Council could, for example, do
what it miaht otherwise be unable to do under Chapters VI

125. Yet this was the very ground upon which the Court
relied. Not only then did the Court endorse an act of the
Assembly in which the Assembly acted as the judge of
complaints brought by itself and which ‘it faded ‘to
investigate, but it endorsed it upon a complaint not relied
upon by the Assembly itself, The inference Is inescapable
that the Court did this to avoid having to inquire into the
factual justification for the Assembly’s action,

c

0rvII.

,

.

120. No long& would ft be restricted to acting in
situations which constituted “a threat to the peace” or
which were ‘likely to endanger” the peace-it would be
sunricient that in the Council’s view a situation might lead
to 8 breach of the peace. And as one of the dissenting
Judges remarked, on page 340:

126. However, the most extraordinary aspect of the
matter was that the Court, having decided not to go into
10

the factual issues, nevertheless made findings thereon.
Moreover, it did so in a decidedly uninformed’ and
prejudiced manner, going out of its way to censure South
Africa’s policies in the Territory. And to crown it all, it did
this after refusing to hear detailed evidence, or to co.
operate with South Africa in the holding of a plebiscite,
which South Africa had offered in connexion with this very
question. The purpose of the Court’s censure was clearly
political rather than legal and its ernphasizesthe basically
political nature of the Opinion.

Territory, but also by quoting informed press reports-most
of which emanated from foreign correspondents who saw
the conditions in the Territory for themselves only three
months ago. It should not be thought that these correspondents were not critical of some aspects of South
Africa’s polcies. They were. But the important feature of
their reports was that virtually every one of them rejected
the allegations upon which the General Assembly and the
Security Council have always 80 unctitically relied in any
action they have taken against my Government.

127. These are some, though by no means ali, of the
reasonswhy the South African Government cannot accept
the Court’s Opinion, either in its specific application to
South West Africa or in its wider implications.

133. Let me start with the charges that the peoples of the
Territory are denied aII politjcal rights, including the right
of selfdetermination,
and that South Africa has no
intention of leading them towards self-government. Now,
what are the facts?

128, Let us, however, for present purposes concentrate on
tho cardinal issues I have mentioned. For, as long as the
questions raised by these issues remain unanswered, there
cannot be even the remotest justification for accepting the
Opinion. The matter is not merely technical. It is a matter
of vital and fundamental importance. It is a matter of
acquiescing in an Opinion which, with virtually no supporting reasoning at all, seeks to confer upon the Generai
Assembly and the Security Council powers far surpassing
anything agreed upon by the framers of the Charter.
129. Acceptance of the Opinion will mean no more nor
less tflan this: that in almost any situation in which
two-thirds of the Members of the Organization wish to
impose their will upon a particular State or States, they can
now do so-without regard to the provisions of the Charter
as these have hitherto been understood. The safeguards
incorporated in the Charter might just aswell not be there.
I do not have to spell out what the end result would be for
the future of international co-operation and the rights of
individual States. And with particular reference to the
question now before this Council, the exercise of such wide
powers in an attempt to escalate measures against South
Africa could result in the disruption of the peaceful
development of ail the peoples of southern Africa.
130. There is peace, prosperity and progressin South West
Africa today. And I state categorically that there is no
threat to international peace and security as a result of
conditions there. Nor wih there be, unless Members of this
Organization artificially create one as a pretext for the
realisation of ulterior motives.
131. What possible role then is there for the Council to
play in the affairs of the Territory? It has been alleged in
this Organization that South Africa is oppressing the
peoples of the Territory, is failing to promote their welfare,
is denying to them their right of self-determination. Indeed,
it was on these very grounds that the General Assembly
purported to terminate South Africa’s title to administer
the Territory; and it wason these grounds that the Security
Council acted as it did.

134. In the political field, contrary to what is alleged, my
Government is making determined efforts to bring the
peoples of South West Africa towards self-government.
Concrete evidence of this is to be seen in the accelerated
development in recent years of governmental institutions in
Owambo and Kavango, which now both have their own
legislative and executive counciis functioning on a federal
basis, asweII as their own Departments of Government. The
Rehobothets have always enjoyed a certain degree of
autonomy and selfgovernment and they have been offered
more. Positive preparatory steps have aiready been taken
towards the further constitutional development of the
Damas and the Caprivians. Consultations aimed at still
further political development are continually taking pIace
between the South African authorities and the various
peoples of the Territory. This process, I say here today, wiii
continue until the stage of full self-determination, based on
the will of the peoples, is reached.
135. This is what The ZIrnes of London reported in its
issue of 21 June 1971:
“The basic object of democracy is to give aiI the people
a say in the management of their own affairs. This basic
policy hoIda in South West Africa-the aim being to
extend the franchise to all groups. But with such a
diversification of tribes within the country it is important
that each tribe govern its own affairs and not those of
others.”
136. Several correspondents during their recent tour of
the Territory remarked on the heterogeneous Population
which is the raison d’etre for South Africa’s policies. Thus
the London DaiQ Express of 22 June 1971 pointed out
that “there is no ‘people’ of South West Africa. The
population . . . is made up of a number of disparate
peoples, each with its own jdentity.”
137. ‘l%e South African Governement is committed to the
principle of selfdetermination
no less than any other
Member of this Orgatition;
and it is our conviction that
the peoples of South West Africa wish us to continue to
administer the Territory. until they have achieved fuii
self-determination under our guidance.

132. But nothing could be further from the truth than
these allegations. And I propose to show briefly just how
&founded they really are. I shah do so not only by
presenting facts and fisures which are incontestable and
which illustrate the steady progress and development in the

138. It was in order to provide further evidence of their
wishes in this regard, and also to refute once and for all the
11

the factual issues, nevertheless made findings thereon.
Moreover, it did so in a decidedly uninformed and
prejudiced manner, going out of its way to censure South
Africa’s policies In the Territory. And to crown it all, it did
this after refusing to hear detailed evidence, or to cooperate with South Africa in the holding of a plebiscite,
which South Africa had offered in connexion with this very
question. The purpose of the Court’s censure was clearly
political rather than legal and its emphasizes the basicaIly
political nature of the Opinion,

Territory, but also by quoting informed pressreports-most
of which emanated from foreign correspondents who saw
the conditions in the Territory for themselves only three
months ago. It should not be thought that these correspondents were not critical of some aspects of South
Africa’s policies. They were. But the important feature of
their reports was that virtuaIIy every one of them rejected
the allegations upon which the General Assembly and the
Security Council have always so uncritically relied in any
action they have taken against my Government.

127. These are some, though by no means all, of the
reasonswhy the South African Government cannot accept
the Court’s Opinion, either in its specific application to
South West Africa or in its wider implications.

133. Let me start with the charges that the peoples of the
Territory are denied ah political rights, includhrg the right
of selfdetermination,
and that South Africa has no
intention of leading them towards selfgovernment. Now,
what are the facts?

128, Let us, however, for present purposes concentrate on
the cardinal issues I have mentioned. For, as long as the
questions raised by these issues remain unanswered, there
cannot be even the remotest justification for accepting the
Opinion. The matter is not merely technical. It is a matter
of vital and fundamental importance. It is a matter of
acquiescing in an Opinion which, with virtually no supporting reasoning at all, seeks to confer upon the General
Assembly and the Security Council powers far surpassing
anything agreed upon by the framers of the Charter.
129. Acceptance of the Opinion will mean no more nor
less than this: that in almost any situation in which
two-thirds of the Members of the Organization wish to
impose their will upon a particular State or States, they can
now do so-without regard to the provisions of the Charter
as these have hitherto been understood. The safeguards
incorporated in the Charter might just as well not be there.
I do not have to spell out what the end result would be for
the future of international co-operation and the rights of
individual States. And with particular reference to the
question now before this Council, the exercise of such wide
powers in an attempt to escalate measures against South
Africa could result in the disruption of the peaceful
development of all the peoples of southern Africa.
130. There is peace, prosperity and progress in South West
Africa today. And I state categorically that there is no
threat to international peace and security as a result of
conditions there. Nor will there be, unless Members of this
Organization artificially create one as a pretext for the
realization of ulterior motives,
131. What possible role then is there for the Council to
play in the affairs of the Territory? It has been alleged in
this Organization that South Africa is oppressing the
peoples of the Territory, is failing to promote their welfare,
is denying to them their right ofselfdetermination. Indeed,
it was on these very grounds that the General Assembly
purported to terminate South Africa’s title to administer
the Territory; and it wason these grounds that the Security
Council acted as it did.

134. In the political field, contrary to what is alleged, my
Government is making determined efforts to bring the
peoples of South West Africa towards self-government.
Concrete evidence of this is to be seen in the accelerated
development in recent years of governmental institutions in
Owambo and Kavango, which now both have their own
legislative and executive councils functioning on a federal
basis, as well as their own Departments of Government. The
Rehobothers have always enjoyed a certain degree of
autonomy and self-government and they have been offered
more. Positive preparatory steps have already been taken
towards the further constitutional development of the
Damas and the Caprivians. Consultations aimed at still
further political development are continually taking place
between the South African authorities and the various
peoples of the Territory. This process, I say here today, will
continue until the stage of full self-determination, based on
the will of the peoples, is reached,
135. This is what ;I;he Times of London reported in its
issue of 21 June 1971:
“The basic object of democracy is to give ah the people
a say in the management of their own affairs, This basic
policy holds in South West Africa-the aim being to
extend the franchise to all groups. But with such a
diversification of tribes within the country it is important
that each tribe govern its own affairs and not those of
others.”
136. Several correspondents during their recent tour of
the Territory remarked on the heterogeneous population
which is the raison d’&re for South Africa’s policies. Thus
the London Dai& Express of 22 June 1971 pointed out
that “there is no ‘people’ of South West Africa. The
population . , . is made up of a number. of disparate
peoples, each with its own identity.”
137. The South African Governement is committed to the
principle of self-determination no less than any other
Member of this Orgamzation; and it is our conviction that
the peoples of South West Africa wish us to continue to
administer the Territory until they have achieved full
self-determination under our guidance.

132. But nothing could be further from the truth than
these allegations. And I propose to show briefly just how
ill-founded they really are. I shall do so not only by
presenting facts and figures which are incontestable and
which illustrate the steady progress and development in the

138. It was in order to provide further evidence of their
wishes in this regard, and also to refute once and for all the
11

irresponsible charges of oppression and repressionwhich are
continually being made, that we proposed to the International Court that a plebiscite of all the inhabitants of the
Territory be held. The inhabitants were to have been asked
whether it was their wish that the Territory should
continue to be administered by South Africa or whether it
should henceforth be administered by the Ui’tited Nations.
139. What was the reaction to this proposal? It was
resisted on the flimsiest and most spurious of grounds. The
representative of the Secretary-General even stated that a
vote in favour of South Africa would really count against it
since it would show that the political development of the
inhabitants had been neglected. What is one to make of this
type of argument? Is it really being suggested that the
peoples of South West Africa would not have known it had
they really been ill-treated, enslaved and oppressed?
140. In the event the Court rejected the plebiscite
proposal. We still think it was a great pity. We still think
that those who professed concern for the peoples of the
Territory should have availed themselves of that opportunity.
141. Let us look next at the economic development of the
Territory. Here we have to do with allegations that the
inhabitants are in a state of constant economic servitude,
even that they are reduced to starvation. Factsand figures,
many of which appear in publications of this Organization,
refute. these allegations.
142. It must be borne in mind that in South West Africa
there are several formidable natural obstacles to economic
development. There is the great scarcity of water in many
large areas, the great distances between towns and villages,
and the very small local market. Yet, in spite of all these
inhibiting factors, the economic life of the Territory
continues to prosper-and at a gratifying rate. For this the
credit is in large measure due to the efforts of the South
African Government.
143. Referring specifically to Owambo, the London Daily
of 22 June lbil observed: “South Africa has
clearIy taken the least developed region of the territory
where most of the alleged atrocities are claimed to have
been committed-Gvamboland-and
poured millions of
pounds into it.” The figures speak for themselves. Take, for
example, the gross domestic product of the Territory. In
1960 it was $205.6 million. In 1969, only nine years later,
it was no less than $520.9 million-two and a half times as
much. Per capita income is amongst the highest in Africa.
Express

144. Manufacturing suffers most from the restricting
factors I have already mentioned. Yet the net value of
output has risen by an annual average of $3,570,000,
reaching $43.5 million in 1967-1968.
145. This progress was made possible by reason of the
sound infrastructure established, and to a large extent
maintained, by the South African Government. One has
only to consider rail and road transport services. to
appreciate the indispensable role which South Africa pkIYS
in the Territory. Vast distances, a small population and a
scarcity of water and local fuel result in a disproportionately high capital investment and financial losses.

146. Yet in 1964 South West Africa had 37.1 kilometres
of railways per 10,000 of population. Up to 1970 it had
cost South Africa no less than $292 million in capital
expenditure to run the railways in the Territory. The
system is run at a loss, which in 1970 amounted to $89
million.
147. Look at road construction. In September 1970 the
cost of major road construction projects actually under way
was estimated at $453 million. And further projects
scheduled for the next four years will cost some $748
million.
148. Consider also postal and telecommunication services
in the Territory. Post Oftice revenueamounted to over $5.6
million in 1970. The value of telephone, telegraph and
radio installations amounted to more than $33.9 million in
1970. Owambo today has its own FM radio service,its own
studios and its own announcers.
149. Of vital importance to South West Africa is the
supply of water. Water is scarce and rainfall sparse and
irregular. But it is essential to the development of the
Territory, and the authorities have therefore devoted much
effort and ingenuity as well as money to meeting the
problem. How well they have succeededis shown by the
fact that already two-thirds of the total surface and
underground supply of the Territory is being utilized.
150. To achieve this development, the Government has
spent some $114 million over the last twenty years. If
expenditure by local authorities and private enterprise were
added the figure might well be doubled.
151. In 1970 there were 177 domestic water supply
schemes constructed and operated by the State in the
Territory, besides a vast number of boreholes drilled to
supply water for man and beast in outlying areas. It is
estimated that by the year 2000 the capital cost of
providing the additional water required in the Territory will
amount to no less than $3,766 million.
152. According to a recent publication of the Economic
and Social Council, an amount of $130 million was
approved by the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme in respect of projects in some 80
countries, m&tly developing countries, with a total population of 1,600 million.
153. T’%at means that roughly 8 cents per capita will be
expended on a large number of UNDP development
projects of various kinds in 80 countries of the world. In
Owambo in South West Africa, with a population of
342,000, a total amount of $22 million has already been
expended by the South African Government on water
development alone. The costs of Owambo’s over-all water
supply scheme have been estimated at $85 million, which
givesa per capita figure of $2485.
154. Expenditure on water in South West Africa over the
next ten years is expected to rise from the current $28.2
million per annum to about $59.3 million per annum in
1980. By way of comparison, the budget of the Food and
Agriculture Organlzation of the United Nations for the year

12

1970-1971 was about $705 million; loans and credits
granted by the World Bank and the International ~e~el~~mm association for water and sewerageschemes through.
Out the world for the year 1970.1971 totalled $188
million, while in the same year the two organimtions
together granted $56 million for the whole of Africa in
respect of agricultural projects.
155 I The relatively high cost of electrical power is another
factor which inhibits the development of South West
Africa. The Territory has no usable coal deposits of its own.
It must CQnWuentlY import coal from the Republic of
South Africa--by far the cheapest sourceof supply, but still
eXFXnSiVe.What is being done to meet this problem?
156. As the Council is probably aware, South Africa, in
collaboration with the Government of Portugal, has already
instituted the first phase of a project to utilize the water of
the Kunene River as a source of power for the Territory. In
this connexion, the London Lki’y Telegraph of 19 June
1971 reported:
“Something like El00 million is being poured into the
area (Owambo) under the first five-year plan, much of it
for developing the hydra-potential of the Kunene River as
a cheap source of power. The completion of the project
in 1975 will contribute enormously to sustained economic growth in the south-west.”
The programme for the generation of power over the next
fifteen years involves a capital expenditure of the order of
$190 million.
157. In the light of what I have said, members of this
Council must surely agree that South Africa is making very
great efforts to promote the general welfare of the
inhabitants.
158. Of particular signiticance is the progress of the
non-white population groups in recent years. Ever greater
numbers of them are availing themselves of increasing
opportunities for gainful employment. In response to
economic incentives they are improving their qualifications
and performance more and more. Their wages compare
favourably with, and in many casesare considerably higher
than, wages in other African countries. Particularly is this
true of unskilled workers, who form the bulk of wageearners in Africa. The Canadian VancouverSun reported in
its issue of 23 June 1971 that “the journalists sawblacks
everywhere working as nurses, teachers, bookkeepers,
mechanics and truck drivers and operating their own
stores”.
159. Let me now deal with the field of education. The
system in South West Africa is directly in line with the
modern approach to schooling in Africa, the emphasis being
on the importance of African cultures in the education of
African youth. The standard is the same as that Of Whites in
South and South West Africa. The total number of Pupils
of all groups in primary and secondary schools has more
than doubled over the past ten years-from 59,000 in 1960
to 130,000 in 1970. The Augustineum High School,
Teachers and Technical Training Centre at Wmdhoek is
today an eminent centre of education and technical
training.
’

160. Since 1969, the Owambo Department of Education
and Culture has carried the responsibility for the control
and development of education in that territory. In 1961
there were 26,000 pupils at 128 schools in Owiunbo. In
1971, out of a population of 342,000, there were 61,000
Pupils at 222 schools. In the same period the number of
teachers increased from 600 to 1,260. Owambo also has the
Ongwediva educational and training institute, constructed
at a cost of about $6.4 million. It is an impressive complex
comprising three institutions in one-a high school, a
teachers’ training centre and a trades centre.
161. Education is also progressingrapidly in other homelands. In Kavango, for example, which has a total population of some 50,000, there were 84 schools, 245 teachers
and 10,300 pupils in 1970. A new secondary teachers’
training and vocational centre is under construction,
162. It has been alleged in this Organization that the
educational system ln the Territory is designed to prepare
the indigenous inhabitants for an inferior position in life. Is
it possible that the Council can believe that in the light of
the verifiable facts and figures I have given?
163. I turn now to health services,which,it is alleged, are
far too inadequate to savethe black peoples from gradual
extinction.
164. In 1970 current expenditure on health services for
these peoples amounted to approximately $6.1 million. The
1969-1970 level of Government expenditure on health
services for all population groups represents a per capita
outlay of about $13.1. There are 156 hospitals and clinics
in South West Africa. Of these, 139 servethe indigenous
peoples only, There are 6,651 hospital beds in the
Territory, giving a ratio of almost 89 beds per 10,000 of
population, To provide a basis for comparison, I may state
that in the United States of America there are 50 beds per
10,000 of population in Government hospitals, and roughly
80 if private hospitals are included.
165. In South West Africa hospital fees for the white
population group are charged according to a fixed tariff
based on income. But non-white out-patients are charged
only 15 cents for admission and in-patients 70 cents,
irrespective of the duration of hospitalization, but only if
they are able to pay. If not, even that nominal fee’ is
waived. Once admitted to hospital, all nonwhite patients
are treated entirely free of charge. That includes specialist
treatment.
166. Scientists and technical personnel play a vltal role in
improving health conditions in the Territory and in
maintaining the standards already achieved. As an example,
in the malaria controlled areas of Owarnbo the average
incidence of malaria, which wasformerly 162 per cent, was
down to .06 per cent in 1969.
167. Finally, in replying to the more fantastic allegations
concerning genocide and racial extermination, concentration camps and slavery, a huge military build-up and the
establishment of a rocket researchstation, I can perhaps do
no better than to quote from the American magazines Time
and Nelvsweek of 5 July 1971. According to Time, the

13

reporters who visited the Territory recently “found no
etidence of genocide or concentration camps (the alleged
‘death house’ proved to be an institute for aeronomy)“.
And

Newsweek reported to the same effect. It stated:

“There was no indication whatsoever that the 3S0,OOO
strong Owambos are ill-treated-as UN critics have
charged. In fact, some of the wilder accusations proved to
be ricliculously wrong. A so-called desert ‘death factory’
near Tsumeb-where nuclear weapons and lethal gases
were supposedly being manufactured to use against
blackgoverned
nations-turned out to be a meteor.
ological station.
“We also sawno evidence of genocide or concentration
lamps alleged by some critics of the Pretoria Govemment.
‘There is no injustice against black men in my
land,’ insisted Chief Counselor Ushona Shiimi of the
Owambo Executive Council. ‘I do not think the United
Nations knqw what is going on here’ “,
168.
The tangible benefits of South Africa’s administration
of the Territory, in both human and material terms,
are there to be seen. As United Press International reported
In the China Post of 23 June 1971, there wasnothing found
In the Territory to substantiate the various chargesmade by
tie
United Nations against South Africa’s administration.
169.
And, as proof of my Government’s good faith, I
again
invite the SecretaryGeneral of this Organization, or
his representative, to visit the Territory and to see for
himself
the conditions that prevail there. Should he come,
he will see, and here I quote from the Lkily Express of 22
Jutle
1971, that: “South West Africa is no threat to world
peace
unless world pressures and United Nations force
make
it so.” And he will agree with The limes of London
21 June of this year that “the future development of the
tribes in South West Africa depends entirely on there being
peace in the country. If this can be maintained, then rapid
progress will be made towar&. the total civilization of the
:ntire
population .”
170.
It has been said that while South Africa has improved
he physical and material well-being of the peoples of the
rerritory,
it has ignored their moral well-being and violated
heir human dignity. A plebiscite could have put this matter
o the test. But the representative of the SecretaryGeneral
nd the Council for South West Africa opposed this and the
!ourt itself rejected our proposal.
713
From what I have said, it wilI be clear that our links
dth South West Africa cannot be severed at this stage
ithout
grave detriment to the inhabitants of the Territory.
s stated by Mr. George F. Kennan, former United States
ntbassador
to Moscow, who recently visited South West

This, I may add, is an excerpt from an article in which the
author wa by no means uncritical of conditions in
southern AMca,
172, In conclusion, I would sum up briefly the attitude of
my Government to the question of South West Africa.
173. Firstly, for the reasons I have already given, we reject
the Advisory Opinion of the International Court, As tho
South Afrhan Prime Minister said shortly &er the delivery
of the Opinion, we regard it as entirely untonabb. We say
that it was clearly and demonstrably not the result of
objective jurisprudence.
174. Secondly, and more important, is our relationship
with the inhabitants of the Territory. In this respect, I can
do no better than quote the actual words of my Prime
Minister. He stated:
“It Is our duty to administer South West Africa so as to
promote the weIl-being and progress ofits inhabitants. We
will carry out this duty with a view to selfdetermination
for all population groups. We have guided and admink
tered the peoples of South West Afnica for more than half
a century in a manner which has earned their whoiehearted confidence. We have set them on the way of
peace, prosperity and selfdetermination and we do not
intend to fail that trust. We shall, therefore, proceed with
out task and shall not neglect our responsibility towards
South West Africa and its peoples.”
175. Mr. GHALIB (Somalia): My delegation, headed by
my President, waspresent at the Summit Conference of the
Organization of African Unity when it wasdecided that the
President of that Organization, together with the Foreign
Ministers of the Sudan, Ethiopia, Sierra Leone, Chad and
Nigeria should address the Security Council on the question
of Namibia and when it was decided to impress upon the
Council members the united voice of Africa that justice
must be done and that the United Nations must embark
upon an effective course of action which would guarantee
for the people of Namibia their right to self-determination
and independence in accordance with the provisions of
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV).
176, This morn<g we were privileged to hear the African
viewpoint expressed through the eminent person of Presl.
dent Ould Daddah of the Islamic Repubfic of Mauritania, In
an eloquent and impassioned way he described the basic
facts of the situation; he emphasized the responsibilities of
the United Nations; and above aII the expectations of the.
people of Namibia in this vital matter,

till

177. The President of Mauritania has set the framework.
within which this debate shoul& take place; and the
contribution of my delegation will be to provide details and
suggestions as to how this Council could live up to its
responsibilities and obligations on this question in accord*
mce with the Charter and its own decisions.

rchfeved.”

178. The Somali delegation was one of those which took
)art in the historic debate in October 1966, which led to
he termination of South AfSca’s Mandate over South West
if&a. Referring to the possibility that the Government of

frica:

‘%

the event of a forced South African withdrawal , . ,
existing administrative and social services would
Sfrnply
cease to exist. In that event it would almost
ertainly
be years before it [the United Nations] could
%pect
to restore to this vast territory even a semblance
3f such good order and prosperity as it has now
14

South Africa would meet the provisions of resolution
2145 (XXI) with its customary intransigence the Somali
representative said then:
“The possible outcome of this resolution is a nettle
which must be firmly grasped.
“The United Nations must be prepared to take all the
steps necessary to enforce its decisions in this matter,
including the possible application by the Security Council
of the measures provided for in Chapter VII of the
Charter. If this aspect of the question is not accepted,
then we may have to add South West Africa to the list of
those issues-which turn up each year, haunt us briefly,
and are then relegated once more to the limbo of
unsolved problems,“s
179. This same concern-that the United Nations would
not follow up its declarations with positive action-led the
Somali delegation to participate actively in the discussions
which are summarized in the report of the Ad Hoc
Subcommittee on Namibia /S/10330/. The fear we
expressedin 1966 has become a present reality.
180. There have been two Security Council resolutions on
Namibia each year since 1968. All have reaffirmed the
illegality of South Aftica’s continued presence in Namibia
and either called upon South Africa to comply with United
Nations resolutions on Namibia or condemned South
Africa’s failure to comply with those resolutions. There has,
of course, been no response from South Africa. Resolution
283 (1970) brought some progress to the issue since it
called upon all States to take specific actions which would
help to emphasize the illegality of South Africa’s position
and assert the authority of the United Nations. This
resolution reflected the opinion of a majority of the
membership of the United Nations but since there were
some States which still entertained doubts about the precise
nature of their legal obligations towards Namibia, the
Council asked f?r md received a legal opinion from the
International Court Gf Justice. That opinion is, of course,
the point of departure for this debate on the question of
the legal consequences for States of the continued presence
of South Africa in Namiiia, notwithstanding Security
Council resolution 276 (1970).

181. I think it is pertinent to recall that the resolution
calling for a legal opinion from the International Court was
a unanimous one indicating a consensus on the view that
such an opinion was necessary to enable the Council to
move forward in the discharge of its responsibilities.

-and our feeling was shared by other Afro-Asian Statesthat the solution of the Namibian problem was not the
responsibility of the African States alone but one that had
to be shared by all States. Unfortunately, as in most
southern African situations, there was limited positive
.responseby other States, and it was the Afro-Asian working
draft which formed the basis for the consensus reached in
Part A of the proposals /ibid., para. 18/. It is a sad
commentary on United Nations affairs that those States
which have direct economic interests in South Africa
invariably limit their mle, in discussions on that area, to
criticism of proposals that have been put forward, without
submitting better alternatives themselves.
184. The Somali delegation’s position on the directions
which United Nations action on Namibia should now take
is based on a number of premises. I should like to consider
fast a group of related- premises whicl,are political in
nature. It is a political fact that Namibia is the direct
responslbillty of the United Nations.
185. It is important that we should be clear about what
this responsibility means. Every United Nations resolution
on Namibia so far has aMrmed the inalienable right of the
people of Namibia to freedom and independence, as
recognized in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV). The
sole responsibility of the United Nations towards Namibia
is to help its people achieve the goal of independence. That
is why my delegation proposed an amendment to the
proposal of the United States and Italy, which appears in
Part C of the proposals /ibid., para. 20/. Our amendment
reinforces sub-paragraph (i) of paragraph 18, and emphasizes that the United Nations has a central role to play
in creating conditions under which the people of the.
Territory shall be able to exercise freely their right to
self-determination and independence. As paragraph 20 now
stands, the positive nature of that United Nations responsibility is not spelled out. In the view of my delegation, it
would be most unfortunate if paragraph 20 were to stand in
its present form, which could constitute an excuse for
inaction.
186. I would also mention in the context of the question
of the right of the people of Namibia to self-determination
and independence that that right is threatened by the
application of the policy of upvtheid to that Territory and
by the division of the Territory or population into separate
tribal units. Sub-paragraphs (ii) and (iii) of paragraph 18
reaffirm the national unity and territorial integrity of
Namibia and condemn all moves by the Government of
South Africa designed to destroy that unity and territorial
integrity through the establishment of Bantustans.
187. It is another political fact that South Africa’s right of
presence in Namibia is no longer valid. One result of this
fact .was the provision in Security Council resolution
283 (1970) which called on the Secretary-General to make
a detailed study of multilateral treaties to which South
Africa is a party and which might be considered to apply to
the Territory of Namibia. That resolution also called on
Member States to study bilateral treaties which might
similarly apply to Namibia. The Secretary-General’s study
(S/10288 of 12 August 197i] has been completed, and a
few States have indicated their compliance with the
provisions I have outlined,

182. The stage has now been reached when, in the words
of our representative in 1966, the nettle must be firmly
grasped. The Security Council must take positive action to
assert its authority over Namibia.
183. It will be seen from paragraph 12 of the report of the
Sub-Committee that the Somali delegation initiated the
discussions which eventually led to the formulation of a
number of constructive proposals. We emphasized then
3 See OfficLd Records of the General Assembly, !Ilventy-first
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1427th meeting, paras.15 and 16.

15

188. Sub-paragraph (ix) $f paragraph 18 goes a step
further and calls for more positive action on the basis of the
studies of multilateral and bilateral treaties involving
Namibia that have already been undertaken. The whole of
Sub-paragraph (ix) goes to the heart of the matter of the
legal consequences for States of South Africa’s continued
illegal occupation of Namibia. The sub-sections, It will be
noted, follow closely the actual recommendations of the
International Court of Justice on those dealings with the
Government of South Africa which, to quote the Court, In
paragraph 121 of its opinion:
6‘I.. under the Charter of the United Nations and
general international law, should be considered as inconsistent with the declaration of illegality and invalidity
made in paragraph 2 of resolution 276 (1970), because
they may imply a recognition that South Africa’s
presence in Namibia is legal.”
189. Our third political premise, and one wI&h centres
around the conclusions of the International Court noted In
sub-paragraph(v) of paragraph 18, is that South Africa’s
continued presence in Namibia constitutes an illegal occuPation of the Territory. This uncontested political fact
demands political action.

in Namibia is that if tht presence ls indeed Illegal and if the
United Nations can take action on the political and
diplomatic levels against this illegality, then the fact must
also be accepted that action taken by the people of
Namibia to resist that illegal occupation is legitimate.
Consequently, we proposed in subparagraph (i) of paragraph 19 that the Security Council recognize the legitimacy
of the struggle of the people of Namibia against the jllegal
occupation of the South African authorities in their
Territory,
193. The final point ‘which I wIU mention in the general
context of the political premises for our delegation’s
recommendations and in the particular context of South
Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia is that if there is any
determination by the United Nations to give credibility to
its decisions on Namibia and if South Africa refuses to end
its defiance of the United Nations, the result must be a
serious confrontation. And yet South Africa is enabled to
persist In its defiance because some of the more powerful
Member States continue to supply arms to that country.

194. Security Council resolution 283 (1970) recognized
the significance to the Territory and people of Namibia of
the arms embargo against South Africa. My delegation
believes that the Security Council must, at the present time,
either reaffirm its resolution 282 (1970) on the arms
embargo in the context of Namibia, or call directly on all
States to refrain from supplying arms or military equipment
to the South African racist regime, as proposed in sub-paragraph (viii) of paragraph 19,

190. ‘ho years ago the Security Council called on South
Africa to withdraw from Namibia and fixed a deadline for
withdrawal. South Africa neither withdrew nor responded
in any way. We have been able to assessSouth Africa’s
position over the past few years and we have seen the
reaction of the South African racist dgime to the Opinion
of the International Court of Justice. It is evident that the
United Nations cannot continue to confine its attitude to
this important issue within the framework of condemnations, or appeals or calls on South Africa. The Security
Council must, of course, call formally on South Africa to
withdraw from Namibia, as it has done before in accordance with its legal obligations towards that Territory. As
proposed in sub-paragraph (vii) of paragraph 19, it must
also call on South Africa to enter into immediate discussions with the Secretaryhneral or any other appropriate
United
Nations medium on the arrangements for its
withdrawal from Namiiia so as to facilitate the speedy and
effective transfer of administration to the people of
Namibia.
But it is of paramount importance that the
Council show clearly its intention to take positive action if
this call is again ignored by South Africa.

195, So far I have spoken only of the political premises on
which the recommendations supported by the Somali
delegation are based. I should like to deal now with some
legal premises and their consequences, as they are spelled
out in the recommendations of the SubCommittee in its
report. The legal fact of overriding importance to my
delegation is that the United Nations is the sole legal
authority for the welfare and administration of the people
and Territory of Namibia until those people assume their
under General Assembly resolution
responsibilities
1514 (‘XV). Sub-paragraph (ii) of paragraph 19 is based on
that leeal fact, and it draws from this fact a consequence:
that all relations with or Involving Namibia, in order to have
legal effect, c& be entered into or maintained only through
the United Nations.

191. It is for this reason that my delegation strongly
supports the proposal that the Security Council declare that
any further refusal of the South African racist rdgime to
withdraw from Namibia would constitute, among other
&ings, an act of aggressionagainst the Territory of Namibia
and a threat to international peace and security within the
context of Chapter VII of the Charter. That proposal Is not
acceptable to the United States and to West European
delegations. But it is difficult to see in what other manner
the Namiiian situation can be described, since South Africa
maintains a military presencein Namibia, since it maintains
an illegal presence there, and since it defies the demands of
the Security Council that it withdraw’fiom the Territory.

196. My delegation is concerned that already an investment scramble is taking place over Namibia because of the
discovery of large uranium deposits and the favourable
prospects for oil and other mining industries. Elsewhere in
southern Africa and in other regions of the world, the
operations of intemationd combines often have the backing of their Governments. The economic involvement of
those Governments makes political solutions difficult inproblem areas. That kind of situation is being repeated in
Namibia, and the responsibility for preventing its further
development and for safeguarding the natural resotices of
the Territory in the interest of the people now rests with
the United Nations.

192. Another point which, in the view of my delegation,
springs from the premise of South Africa’s illegal presence

197. As my delegation emphasized during the discussions
of the SubCommittee, the significance of sub-paragraph (ii)
16

of paragraph 19 is to ensure that any wealth extracted from
Namibian soil should be used to enhance the welfare of the
Namibian people rather than to swell the coffers of South
Africa and foreign investors. My delegation considered it
very important that foreign investors should be informed
by their Governments that they would enter into new
investments in Namibia entirely at their own risk and that
once control of the Territory was wrested from South
Africa and vested in Namibia there would be no question of
compensation. We also considered that, until such time as
Namibia is able to assume control of its territory, foreign
firms should pay a proportion of their profits and royalties
into a fund to be used for the benefit of Namibians.
198. Another important legal responsibiljty of the United
Nations is to ensure that Namibia is adequately represented
and protected when international treaties which would
involve the interests of Namibia are being drawn up.
199. The question of adequate representation and protection of the rights of Namibia at the international level leads
naturally to the question of the necessity for the United
Nations to set up effective machinery for implementing its
decisions on Namiiia. The General Assembly has established the Council for Namibia to administer the Territory
until independence. Unfortunately, although that Council
was established at the request of an overwhelming majority
of States in the General Assembly, the Council has not been
able to discharge its functions because the permanent
members of the Security Council have refused to give it
support and recognition, and because the South African
racist r&me has refused to cooperate with it, The Security
Council, on its part, has established the Sub-Committee on
Namibia. But its terms of reference are only to study
further effective recommendations on ways and means by
which the relevant resolutions of the Council can be
implemented.
200. The position of the Somali delegation on the
question of machinery for implementing United Nations
resolutions on Namibia has always been that it is not
sufficient for the United Nations to stand by its resolution
2145 (XXI) without taking any step to give that declaration
tangible and realistic form. It is certainly wrong that after
five years the United Nations cannot agree upon an
appropriate organ for the administration of Namibia. Since
everyone is agreed that South Africa has no rights in
Namibia we must advance a step further. As the Secretary
General has observed, the Namibian situation is unique in
that there is no intervening sovereign jurisdiction between
the General Assembly and the people and Territory. of
Namibia: no governmental authority exists-other than the
General Assembly and the Security Council-with
the
competence to interpret and apply to Namibia the international obligations which are owing to the latter under the
Charter of the United Nations.
201. The United Nations must either reconstitute the
Council for Namibia or redefine its powers so as to make it
an organ which would have the full backing of the United
Nations. Another alternative could be to do away with the
Council and devise a completely new organ. What is
harmful to the Namibian people is for the United Nations
to be divided on this vital question-a division which
17

obstructs progress towards the implementation
decisions.

of its

202. Finally, I should like to consider a constitutional
premise for an hnportant recommendation supported by
my delegation. It is a constitutional fact that there devolves
on all States Members of the United Nations, in accordance
with the Charter, the duty to abide by the decisions of the
Security Council. My delegation believes that if that were
not so, the United Nations would be without an essential
pillar of its authority. We therefore support sub-paragraph
(ix) of paragraph 19, which reaffirms the obligation of all
States Members of the United Nations, under Article 25 of
the Charter, to accept and carry out the decisions of the
Security Council and which also reaffirms the obligation of
the United Nations to ensure that States which are not
Members of the United Nations act in accordance with the
principles of the Charter.
203. There are other recommendations appearing in the
SubCommittee’s report which my delegation supports but
which I have not singled out for emphasis or explanation
because they are selfexplanatory. The aim of all the
recommendations my delegation has proposed or supported
has been to protect the rights of the people and Territory
of Namibia and to maintain the authority and the credibility of the United Nations.
204. Before 1 conclude, I should like to say-with all due
respect to you, Mr. President, and the members of the
Council-that my delegation has been extremely disappointed by the statement made by Mr. Muller, because it
has shown only that South Africa is persisting in its course
of action.
205. I should like to remind the representative of the
racist rdgime of South Africa that the whole world, the
people of the world-except these racist regimes in southern
Africa-are extending their arms with alacrity and in good
will, while these racist rdgimes are defying world opinion. I
am not in a position to make any threats here, but I am
confident, and Africa is confident, that history will bear
witness to the fact that if, today, when the *hole world is
requesting you to come to reason, you ignore these
expressions of good will, there will be a day when you will
beg for peace in your own homes.
206. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Guyana. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement,
207. Mr. RAMPHAL (Guyana): Mr. President, my first
duty is to thank you for affording me an opportunity of
contributing to this debate, which I hope to do at no great
length. The problem of Namibia is, of course, of urgent and
direct concern to the peoples and Governments of the
African continent, but it is for that very reason, no less
than for reasons arising from its character, a problem of
concern to a great many countries beyond Africa, including
my own, a small State from another continent. I hope that
this contribution will in some modest way be-symbolic of
the solidarity which other States and peoples beyond Africa
are ready to demonstrate with the peoples of Namibia and

7

on the side of the ~SSWS of freedom, and of international
legality here involved.

208. In requesting this opportunity to participate in
today’s debate of the Security Council, it is not my
Government’s intention to add further to the chronicle of
outrage and censurewhich South Africa’s administration of
the Mandate, both de fire and de ficro, has inevitably and
rightly gensrated for the better part of five decades. We
have plaood on record in the General Assembly and
elsewhere our criticisms and our condemnations. Nor is it
our intention to use this occasion to catalogue the failures
which have attended the best efforts of this Organization to
CINTU~ the administration of Namibia in the true spirit of
the Mandate.
209. Such approaches to this debate may, I suggest,
contribute marginally to the rhetoric of persuasion, but
might conceivably, at this moment, be counter-productive
in the search for new solutions. Our point of departure
today is, and we feel must be, the Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice delivered on 21 June 1971.
210. It is, regrettably, the case that South Africa’s refusal
to comply with the resolutions of both the General
Assembly and the Security Council, calling upon it to
withdraw from Namibia, its continued consolidation of
control over the Territory and its extension to Namibia of
its ow vicious ssystem of apartheid, has created a situation
which, amid the present realities, no longer admits of
simple solutions. We should have been considering, in
uncomplicated ways, how we could, as an international
community “promote to the utmost the material and moral
well-being and social progress of the inhabitants of the
territory”. Instead, this land, and its unfortunate people,
find themselves caught in the crossVwindsof international
politics-cross-winds which confront each other from the
north and the south no less than from the east and the
west. Not for the first time in the history of international
behaviour there exists a real and present danger that these
confrontations could take on a relevance of their own,
subordinating, indeed obscurittg altogether, the basic problem which has occasioned them, and worse still, the needs
of the people who areits victims.
211. Our primary obligation is to the people of Namibia,
and this Security Council must at all times maintain those
obligations in the forefront of every consideration of the
problem. The fate of people, not the fate of issues,must be
the criteria by which the value of all solutions and
approaches to solutions must be measured.

with decisions of this Organization, and mom particularly
with decisions of this Council. Where it is possible, whether
or not credible, to fmd some technical justification for
avoidance, this more respectable course is followed, But all
too frequently States which regard themselves powerful
enough to do so with impunity, or who feel they can rely
upon the support of powerful friends in the international
community, indulge in blatant and unapologetic defiance.
There is a current trend of international lawlessnesswhich
unless arrested will undermine the fabric of our international life and destroy all hope for the ordered interna.
tional society for which we work and which is indeed the
rationale of this Council’s existence. This trend is all too
evident in the Namibia situation and it is one that this
Council must keep in the forefront of its present considera.
tions.
213. My Government welcomed the initiative taken by
this Council in seeking the Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice; indeed, in the general debate
of the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly
11876th plenav meetingj, I placed on record my delegation’s view that there was much in the jurisprudence of the
Court to justify optimism about the result. But these
processeswhich proceed on an assumption of international
legality will themselves have contributed further to invalidating that assumption unless this quite unique opportunity is taken by this Organization, and of course by the
Security Council, to restore the credibility of international
law and of the Charter in the minds of all States, but
perhaps more especially of the small States of the world
who look to international law and to the Charter as their
most effective guarantee of survival.
214. In this context, permit me to advert to the special
position of the four permanent members represented here,
whose privileged position in the process of international
decision-making imposes, I suggest with respect, correlative
responsibilities. The approbation of privilege involves the
loss of the right of reprobate responsibilities and I venture
to suggestthat the seriousnessof the issueswith which we
are faced imposes special demands upon these members.
215. I suggestalso that to justify inaction by reference to
the complexity of these issues is to abdicate the basic
responsibility for decision-making. If these considerations
are both relevant and valid, as my Government considers
them, the first question that arisesis what action should be
t&en by the Security Council in the light of the confirming
opinion of the lntemationai Court.
216. Despite past misconduct, and indeed despite indications of a continuing trend in this direction given since the
option of the International Court has been delivered-and
1 regret to say reiterated here this afternoon-this Council,
in our submission, should in the first instance proceed on
the assumption that South Africa, as a member of this
Crganization and as a party to the proceedings before the
International Court, will at least ultimately acknowledge its
obligations to be in accordance with the Court’s Opinion.
ms council, should, therefore, I suggest, call forthwith
upon the Government of South Africa to enter into
discussionswith the SecretaryGeneral for the purpose of
arranging for its orderly withdrawal from Namibia in

212. But there is one issue which must command the
attention of the Council because ln the final analysis it has
relevance for the fate of all peoples. We are all willing when
it suits US,or when we pay no price for it, to place ourselves
on the side of internationalism, to identify ourselves as
being among those who stand for an ordered international
society and to proclaim our adherence to international law.
Yet,
it is becoming all too familiar a feature of national
behavioural patterns to j.r&dge in semantic gymnastics to
avoid the implications of these commitments when they
bear upon our short-term national interests. Sometimes
these antics are concerned with avoidance of compliance
18

accordance with resolutions of both the General Assembly with their obligations in relation to Namibia must be
and the Security Council. This withdrawal must, of course, regarded as relevant factors in determining their qualificabe unconditjonaJ. No question can arise as to the con.
tions for future membership of this Organization.
ducting of’ any plebiscite as a condition precedent to
withdrawal. In short, whatever may have been the excuses
219. My Government, therefore, invites the Security
for ambivalence in the past, we can proceed hereafter on no
COUncil to reiterate in relation to ail States the specific
other basis than that of the acknowledged illegality of
obligations under resolution 283 (1970), and in doing so to
South Africa’s presence in the territory. Once the South
relate
them to the confirming authority of the Judgment
African presence is withdrawn the Security Council would,
of course, inevitably have to consider the establishment of a of the International Court of Justice Let us hope thereafter
that those Member States of the Organisation that have
United Nations presence in &mibia designed to ensure its
sought
refuge from compliance in doubts about the legality
territorial integrity and the safety of all its inhabitants.
of United Nations .action and those non-Member States
which question the existence of obligations at all will now,
217. But however right it is to proceed on the assumption
consistent with their obligations under international law,
that South Africa will at least respond to its international
comply forthwith with these decisions.
obligations as now explicitly
confirmed by the International Court, we must, at least, contemplate the pcssi220. But it is necessary to examine whether the Security
bility of continued refusal to do so, proceeding, it now
Council should not go further in specifying the implications
seems, on the basis of South Africa’s preference for the
which necessarily flow from resolutions 276 (1970) and
opinions of dissenting Judges to the Opinions ofthe Court
283 (1970) in which the South African Government was
itself. My Government believes therefore that the Security
recognized as incompetent to act on behalf of Namibia and
Council should once more address itself to the means which
was
required to withdraw its illegal administration from the
it can legitimately employ under the Charter to ensure
territory, which imposed such obligations as that on States
South Africa’s compliance. My -Government noted with
to inform the competent branches of their administration
satisfaction the establishment of the Ad Hoc SubCommittee of the Council charged with studying, in consulta- that their Governments no longer recognize South Africa as
the Administering Authority in Namibia and that such
tion with the Secretary-General, “ways and means by which
recognition be accorded to the United Nations Council for
the relevant resolutions of the Council can be effectively
Namibia from 27 October 1966-the date on which the
implemented in accordance with the appropriate provisions
General Assembly adopted resolution 2145 (XXI). The
of the Charter of the United Nations in the light of the
effect of such action would be to impose legal obligations
flagrant refusal of South Africa to withdraw from Naon these competent authorities to respect the rules and
mibia . , .” free resolution 276(1970)/. Pursuant to the
legislation of the Council of Namibia in all matters
work of that Committee my Government has likewise
pertaining to the administration of the territory, including
welcomed the adoption by this Council of resolution
regulations relating to the conduct of all commercial,
283 (1970) which imposes specifjc obligations on Member
industrial or investment activities, regulations concerning
States of this Organization regarding relations with South
travel to and from Namibia, regulations concerning the
Africa which might imply recognition of the authority of
granting of concessions and priviIeges in Namibia, regulathe South Africau Government over Namibia and activities
tions concerning the extent of and activities within the
of their nationals, including corporate nationals, in relation
maritime jurisdiction of Nambia and its continental shelf,
to Namibia.
among others.
218. It is the view of my Government that the Opinion of
221. My Government also considers that the Security
the International Court explicitly confirms as part of the
Council
should remind Member States of their obligations
obligations of Member States the obligations expressly
to desist from any measures or activities which might in any
spelled out in resolution 283 (1970). It is a matter for
way prejudice the territorial integrity of Namibia, including
satisfaction that the International Court has specifically
joint planning, training and exercises of a military nature
adverted in its Opinion to the obligations of non-Member
with the Government of South Africa so long as its
States and has specifically confirmed it to be incumbent
administration
is not withdrawn from the territory. Simiupon States which are not Members of the Organization to
larly, my Government wodd wish to see this Council
act in accordance with the relevant decisions of the General
remind all States of their obligation to prohibit the sale to
Assembly and the Security Council and, in the language of
South Africa of arms which might be used by South Africa
the Secretary-General’s report, “to give assistancein the
to further consolidate its illegal presence in the territory, to
action taken by the United Nations with regard to
prohibit the achievement of the same result by the transfer
Namibia”.4 This is a most important aspect of the Court’s
of patents and to prohibit the transfer of technology and
Opinion and my Government trusts that non-Member
expertise, including expertise in connexion with insurgency
States of the Organization that have hitherto considered
techniques
which may be employed to perpetuate South
themselves free to pursue courses of conduct in or in
Africa’s illegal administration over the territory, ,
relation to Namibia inconsistent with the decisions of this
”
Organization will henceforth desist and acknowledge themselves as being under obligations of a similar nature to those
222. All this means that the United Nations Council for
Namibia must continue its work with even greater vigour
of all Member States. It is not perhaps without relevance
md even more manifest authority. My Government conthat compliance or non-compliance by non-Member States
riders, therefore, that the time has indeed come for the
4 Ibid., Twenty-sixthSession,-Sq#mmtNo. 14 pm. 2%.
?roposdfor the appointment of a full-time Commissioner
19

for Namibia to be proceeded with, and, mindful of the
question of competence, it will pursue this proposal at this
sessionof the General Assembly.
223. Finally, my Government is conscious that none of
these meames wjll succeed in the face of intransigence
from the Covcmment of South Africa unless this Organiadon, through the conduct of all its Members, but more
especially of the major Powers, is prepared to demonstrate
a will to securecompliance with the.just decisions taken by
this Organization in relation to the Territory and the people
of Namibia. ‘Ihe legality of these decisions has now been
specif3ally upheld by the principal judicial organ of this
orgadation. There can no longer be any excuse for a less
than resolute approach to this matter, particularly at the
level of national policy and action. The Government of
South Africa may well be on the point of throwing down a
challenge to this Organization, to the International Court of
Justice, to the international community, indeed to the
whole concept of law asa force in international relations. If
we fail to take up that challenge now we will betray the
people of Namibia and we will betray ‘the people of the
world who have such a fundamental and pervasive interest
in the maintenance of the rule of law at the international,
no less than at the national, level.

224. The PRESIDENT: There are no more names inscribed on the list of speakers for this afternoon. Therefore,
I shall now adjourn this meeting. The next meeting will be
held at 3 o’clock tomorrow afternoon.

225. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Mr. President, we have with
us a delegation of leaders from Africa. I know that some of
them intend to speak, if not tomorrow, at least the day
after. I should like to know how you intend to schedule the
future meetings so that they can be accommodated.
The PRESIDENT: It depends on how many representatives will wish to speak. The meeting tomorrow
afternoon will probably be rather short. The meeting
schedule for thy week is very congested because we must
take up the reports of the Missions which we sent to
Senegal and to Guinea. I shall try to reconvene the Council
on this item at the earliest possible date after the meeting
tomorrow afternoon.
226.

227. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Mr. President, I see that you
have scheduled a meeting of the Council for Wednesday to
receive the report of the Special Mission which went to
Senegal. I understand that this has been arranged to
accommodate the President for next month, who was the .
Chairman of that Mission, That being the case would it be
possible for the Council immediately after the representative of Nicaragua has introduced his report, to
continue the debate on Namibia so that we can utilize that
meeting fully?
228. The PRESIDENT: I think that may be possible. In
any case, by tomorrow afternoon we will know what
arrangements can be made.
TRe meeting rose at 7.45 pm.
