TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 13 JUNE 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l475)

..,...,..................I....

Page

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , . . , . . . . . . . . , . , , . . . . , . . . , , , . . , . . . . . .

1

concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 6 June 1969 addressedto the Presidentof the Security Council by
the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen, Sudan, Swaziland,Syria,
Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Republic, United
Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yemen, Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/9237
and Add. 1)
Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of resolution 253 (1968)
(S/8954 and S/9252) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Question

SlPV.1475

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Se.wity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FIFTH MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 13 June 1969, at 10.30 a.m.
P&dent:

Mr. M. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay).

rity Council resolution 253 (1968) has already submitted a
preliminary report, distributed earlier as document S/8954.
I take it that the document being circulated now is the
second report by that Committee. If I hear no objections
from the members of the Council, I shall consider the
proposal by the representative of Algeria adopted,

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Aungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia,

The agenda, as amended, .was adopted.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l475)

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia

1. Adoption of the agenda.

Letter dated 6 June 1969 addressed to the President of the
Security Council bythe representatives of Afghanistan,
Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
Southern Yemen, Sudan, Swaziland, Syria, Thailand,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Republic,
United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yemen,
Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/9237 and Add.1)

2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 6 June 1969 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic of’), Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen,
Sudan, Swaziland, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yemen, Yugoslavia and
Zambia (S/9237 and Add.1)
Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of
resolution 253 (1968) (S/8954 and S/9252).

Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of
resolution 253 (1968) (S/B954 and S/9252)
5. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The Security Council will now take up the item it has to consider, in
accordance with the request for an urgent meeting contained in the letter addressed to the President of this
Council on 6 June by the representatives of fifty-nine
States Members of the United Nations, which is reproduced
in documents S/9237 and Add.1.

Adoption of the agenda
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The provisional agenda for this meeting of the Security Council
appears in document S/Agenda/l47.5, which members of
the Council have before them. If there are no objections, I
shall consider it adopted.

6. Before calling on the first speaker, I should like to draw
attention to document S/9244 which has been circulated.
That document contains the letter sent to me by the
Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, transmitting to the Security Council the text of a
resolution on the situation in Southern Rhodesia adopted
by that Committee on 10 June this year.

2. I call on the representative of Algeria on a point of
order.
3. Mr. RAI-IAL (Algeria) (translated from French): I
merely wish to point out that the Committee established in
pursuance of Security Council resolution 2.53 (1968) has
prepared a report on the progress of its work. I should like
to suggest that that report be taken up as the second item
of our agenda.

7. I also wish to draw the Security Council’s attention to
the first report by the Committee established in pursuance
of Council resolution 253 (1968), which appears in document S/8954. The Committee’s second report is contained
in document S/9252.

4. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The Council has heard the proposal made by the representative of
Algeria. The Committee established in pursuance of Secu1

8. Mr. RAHAL (Algeria) (translated from French): The
problem of Rhodesia has already been the subject of many
Security Council meetings. The situation that has prevailed
in that region of Africa since the unilateral declaration of
independence by Ian Smith has been recognized as suffciently serious to constitute a threat to peace.

at least half the land. Surely nothing less could be expected
from a regime which has never concealed its seg;regationist
convictions and which has so far successfully defied the
bans imposed by the administering Power, thle condemnation of world opinion and the resolutions of the Security
Council.

9. A little over a year ago a resohttion (253 (I968jl was
adopted by the Security Council specifying a series Of
measures, designed to combat the racist regime in Salisbury
and bring about its downfall, But what is the position
now? That regime, which should be in the throes of
overwhelming economic difficulties and the downfall of
which we should be expecting daily, is ready for a new
stage in its process of consolidation and an even more
blatant reaffirmation of its racist character. That is a fact
which we consider the more grave because it provides
irrefutable proof of the ineffectiveness of the economic
sanctions decided upon by the Security Council and
challenges the authority of the international institutions in
a manner which cannot be tolerated, Thus a renewed
consideration of the problem of Rhodesia by the Security
Council is clearly indispensable, not only to see what
conclusions can be drawn from a policy whose failure has
become obvious, but also to prescribe the measures called
for by a dangerously developing situation which may
gradually become completely out of hand.

13. That, in our opinion, is the crux of the problem, We
do not think that the remedy lies in yet another condemnation of the Salisbury r&lime, on top of all the previous
condemnations that have had no effect, thus discrediting
the most eminent international institutions and sharpening
the audacity of the racist minority in Rhodesia.
14. Once again we come before you on behalf of all of
Africa, on behalf of the Organization of African Unity, to
ask the Security Council to confront this problem with all
the attention it deserves, to weigh its gravity aml to handle
it with all the energy necessary to end this criminal venture
whose continued existence is a blot on the honour of
mankind.
15. Ever since the unilateral declaration of independence
by Ian Smith, the white minority in Rhodesia hias been in a
state of rebellion against the United Kingdom. The administering Power bears full responsibility for this rebellion; that
is a fact which we have always maintained and which the
United Kingdom Government itself asserts. While refusing
to apply the determined measures called for by the African
countries, that Government has repeatedly said it would
quell the rebellion of Ian Smith and claimed that it should
be trusted to bring the law back to Rhodesia. The Security
Council has given it its full support in adopting its policy of
economic sanctions and associating all the Statles Members
of the United Nations with them,

10. The decision by the self-proclaimed government in
Salisbury to submit its draft constitution to a referendum
should not cause any surprise, for it was obvious that the
failure of the actions taken by the administering Power as
well as by the international organizations would give that
basicahy illegal regime more and more confidence and
prompt it to take bolder and bolder attitudes, encouraged
by its continuing escape from punishment.

16. The United Kingdom Government entered into genu.
ine negotiations with Ian Smith to persuade him to
abandon his project. How does it now intend to react to the
latest decision by the self-styled government in Salisbury,
which is getting ready to cut its last ties with the parent
country? We are told that the referendum may result in a
defeat for Ian Smith and that it will then be possible to
discover among the white minority in Rhodesia some more
understanding spokesmen. If that were indeed the attitude
of the Government in London, we should find it hard not
to regard it as a new abdication fraught with grave
consequences.

11. In any case, there is no need for us to discuss that
decision or to comment on its worth, because, even if the
draft constitution were not marked by its outrageous
racism, the decision wouId deserve condemnation as the
product of a regime that has already been condemned, But
the text which Ian Smith proposes to have adopted is of
interest because it reveals, if that is still needed, the
intentions of the racist minority and the future that they
have in store for the Africans in Rhodesia.
12. The text has at least the merit of being clear,
announcing in forthright terms the most despicable racism
in its most brutal form. The self-proclaimed Rhodesian
government feels that the present constitution contains a
number of clauses that it considers unacceptable. It
identifies these clauses as “those which provide for future
government of the country by the African majority and
hence inevitably the domination of one race by another”.
What are we to think of this concern to avoid the
domination of one race by another when it is voiced by a
white minority which has at its mercy an entire country,
with its riches and its indigenous population? No doubt its
object is to prevent the Africans from remaining indefinitely dominated by the white minority that the draft
constitution provides for an assembly made up of fifty
white members and sixteen members elected by the African
majority, and guarantees the white minority possession of

17. Yet it has become clear that the way chosen by
London has only produced very disappointing results. The
time has come to recognize that and to draw tlhe necessary
conclusions. We do not doubt the sincerity of the United
Kingdom Government when it proclaims its will to restore
the situation in Rhodesia. But we are not convinced that, in
order to do so, it has made the effort necessary to arrive at
a positive result, And we have been even less convinced
since we had the opportunity to observe that London was
capable of taking immediate action with the utmost vigour
elsewhere-when
the rebellion was not the act of a
European minority.
18. We also think that the Security Council must appraise
the measures it has adopted in past resolutions, particularly
2

in its latest resolution (253 (1968/j of 29 May 1968. It is
clear that the proposed sanctions, after being in effect for a
year, have not yielded the expected results. According to a
United Kingdom estimate, the value of exports from
Rhodesia to countries outside Africa has amounted to ;E44
million. Add to that the exports arranged with the
complicity of South Africa and Portugal, and it can easily
be seen that the effect of the sanctions has been insignificant and that resolution 253 (1968) has been only partially
applied by several Member States. Furthermore, it must be
noted that the flow of European immigrants into Rhodesia
is swelling while at the same time increasing numbers of
Africans are emigrating to neighbouring countries. The
provision in resolution 253 (1968) which recommends all
Member States to discourage their citizens from emigrating
to Rhodesia has thus been disregarded.

23. How are we to answer Ian Smith when he decIares
“We must not flinch now that we are so close to our goal”?
It is beyond comprehension that the international community does not show equal determination in the defence
of a just cause, the cause of all the people of Zimbabwe,
already ga’ggedby the Salisbury racists and now threatened
with perpetual slavery. Unless today we make the necessary
effort to lance this abscess, we may be preparing for a
future day, perhaps not far off, an explosive situation
which will be much harder to contain.
24. The Security Council, in our opinion, has at its
disposal more comprehensive and more forceful means of
action than those it has called into play so far. It ought to
apply them with the firm resolve that the situation
demands, using the full weight of its authority to see that
its decisions are more strictly put into effect. The administering Power, for its part, must acknowledge its duty and at
last respond to this ever more aggressive rebellion by taking
an unequivocal and unwavering stand. The Charter has
entrusted it with the task of creating the conditions for the
Zimbabwe people to gain their independence; it will remain
answerable for any encroachment upon the inalienable
rights of the African people of Rhodesia.

19. The report of the Security Council Committee established in pursuance of resolution 253 (1968) is most
enlightening on this point. Admittedly the United Kingdom
Government has from time to time supplied the Committee
with very useful information on the disregard of this
resolution by a number of Member States. On the other
hand, it has done nothing to end the minority regime in
Rhodesia as stipulated in paragraph 2 of resolution
253 (1968). Worse still, by announcing prematurely that it
would not use force against the rebel colony and by
restating that position despite the growing strength of the
Smith regime and the failure of economic sanctions, it has
indirectly reassured the regime in Salisbury, which, undisturbed, is extending its policy of apartheid in Rhodesia.

25. Mr. MUDENDA (Zambia): Mr. President, allow me
first of all to say how greatly honoured I am to be accorded
this opportunity to address your august Council. As’ the
distinguished members of this Council know, Zambia is
comparatively new on the Security Council, having taken
its seat only this year. And yet, our trust and hope in the
General Assembly, and in this Council, whatever its
shortcomings, form one of the pillars of our foreign policy.
Indeed, in this imperfect world, we see the Council,
especially in the field of maintaining international peace
and security, as the only guarantee to human survival so far.

20. The policy of economic sanctions has proved ineffective largely because Rhodesia has had the benefit of
outward and inward trade routes provided by its allies-by
South Africa and by Portugal through Mozambique. Obviously the frontiers of Rhodesia cannot be sealed unless
these trade routes are closed or the economic sanctions are
extended to include Rhodesia’s allies. As it does not seem
likely at present that the agreement of States that have
extensive economic relations with South Africa and Portugal will be obtained, it becomes clear that the policy of
economic sanctions is doomed to remain ineffectual,
however sincere its intentions may be.

26. It is with this expectation that I bring you, Mr. President, and all your distinguished colleagues, the greetings
and wishes of my President, His Excellency, Dr. Kenneth
David Kaunda. It is also because of that trust and hope that
my Government has placed in you that I have come here so
that, together, we may re-examine the situation in Zimbabwe.
27. Nearly three and a half years ago, a small group of
power-hungry men in Rhodesia staged an open rebellion
against the United Kingdom, the administering Power.
Unlike other rebellions that of 11 November 1965 was not
for the purpose of overthrowing a colonial master, even
though the action of the rebels may have humiliated the
administering Power, The rebels embarked on the enterprise
for two reasons only. First, to entrench their priviIeged
position and, second, to deprive the indigenous inhabitants
of Zimbabwe for all time of the right to self-determination
and majority rule.

21. An unbiased look at the experience of the past year
therefore leads to a statement of the problem in completely
unambiguous terms. In taking up the Rhodesian question
the Security Council recognized and admitted that it
involved a situation which endangered peace in that region
of the world and hence world peace as a whole. That
assessment is still valid; more than that, it has been sadly
confirmed by the way in which the situation has developed
and by the most recent events.
22. To ward off this danger the Security Council has taken
a series of measures which in practice has yielded almost
insignificant results. The countries of Africa, which are
naturally and justifiably more keenly aware of the menace
facing them, therefore call on this august body for action to
guarantee their security, The administering Power,
Still
primarily responsible for the situation in Rhodesia, refuses
to take more vigorous steps to bring the Ian Smith rebellion
to an end.

28. Once they declared themselves independent the rebels
proceeded, with characteristic brutality, to suppress the
manifest popular resistance of the people of Zimbabwe. To
do this, they instituted a two-pronged attack. First-force:
in this regard, military force has been brought into play to
put down African resistance, and prisons, detention and
restriction camps have been filled with leaders of the
3

on this very subject in the GeneralAssemblyon
15 November19G6,my Presidentstated:

resistance. Second-the so-called constitution: emboldened
by the reassurance that the administering Power would
never use force against them in whatever circumstances, the
rebels seized the first opportune moment to “legitimize”, as
it were, their illegitimacy and in the ensuing so-called
constitution try to enshrine their privileges for ever, to the
total detriment of the majority of the inhabitants.

Speaking

29.

34. The obviouscourseof action for the SecurityCouncil
in the face of this defiance by South Africa andPortugal
would havebeento extend the mandatory sanctions
against
the two culprits: namely, South Africa andPortugal.In our
view, that wasthe logical thing to do if ChapterVII of the
Charter is to be meaningful. But, alas,one of the actorsin
the Rhodesiantragedy had already come out with an
interestingformula: no force, no sell-out,I10 corlfrontation
with South Africa. That monstrous contradiction has
brought to nil all the efforts of the Security Councilandof
all the countriesof the world, I am satisfiedthat, aslongas
that contradiction remains, the sanctionspolicy will n?t
succeed; and if we continue with that policy without
pluggingthe obvious loop-holes,posterity will look at usas
peoplewho tried to carry water in baskets.

“We remaineven more convinced that nothingshortof
force or mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter, Articles 41 and 42, will bring
about the conditions favourable for the normalizationof
the administrationof Rhodesia.“1

In the resultingconflagration,the administeringPower
assumedthe hopelesspostureof resignation,almosttantamount to tacit acceptance.The rebels’racialistneighbours
provided military and economic support to them, and
collectively the minority regimesbeganto threaten the
stability and sovereigntyof independentStates,like mine,
to the north of the ZambeziRiver.
30. Having briefly outlined the Rhodesiansituation,I now
wishto explain our motive for requestingan urgentmeeting
of the Security Council. Wehave not comehere, in case
there is somedoubt in certain minds,to consultabout the
illegality of referendaby illegal rtgimes.To usit is obvious
that an illegal regime does not attain respectability, let
alone legality, merely becauseovernight the sameunrepresentative clique produces a new constitution. It would,
therefore, be over-indulgenton my part to take much of
your precioustime discussing
the forthcoming referendum
in Rhodesia.Suffice it for me to say merely that any
so-called“constitution” promulgatedby the rebels,especially if it is, asit canonly be, a rejectionof the principleof
self-determination,will never be recognizedby my GovernmenL I have every hope that this will be the view of all
peace-lovingnations.

35. It may be necessaryat this stagebriefly to outlinethe
kind of stepswe believe are necessaryto bring aboutthe
desiredresultsin Rhodesia.If the Security Councilwishes
to succeedin Rhodesia,then it must be preparedto apply
the provisionsof Articles 41 and 42 of ChapterVII of the
United Nations Charter. South Africa and Portugalwill
have to decide whether they wish to co-operatewith the
noble efforts of the Council or obstruct this Council’s
decisionsfor the sakeof merely supporting an illegalracist
minority regime in Rhodesia with the consequences
this
may entail.

31. The basic issueis the existenceof an illegal racist
minority regimein Rhodesiawhich hasdeniedthe majority
of the peopleof Zimbabwethe right to self-determination.
That is the basicissue,To removethat regimeand to bring
36. If, however, for reasons of trade and colour or
about the effective applicationof the principleof self-deter- racialism, as well as global military strategy, certain
mination, majority rule andsovereigntyis our goal.
membersof the Council are not preparedfor a confrontation with South Africa, the alternative is the useof forcein
32. Fortunately, having addressed
itself to the Rhodesian Rhodesiaitself. Wehave beenrealistic enoughto know that
the loss of life would have been, and would still be,
questionfor sometime, asearly as 1966this Council,in its
wisdom, determined “that the . . . situation in Southern minimized if the administeringPower had usedthat force,
Rhodesia”constituted “a threat to internationalpeaceand rather than the Security Council or any other organof the
United Nations. Unfortunately, however, hitherto the
security” (resolution 232 (1966)]. Indeed, even before it
had so determined, the Council embarked on various United Kingdom-and we must stressthat Rhodesiais its
measuresaimed at toppling the illegalregimein Rhodesia. responsibility-while at first talking about its intentionto
quell the rebellion, to restore constitutionality and ultiThose measures,voluntary and limited at first, but later
widenedby Security Council resolution253 (1968), have mately preparethe people for majority rule in Zimbabwe,
beenin operationlong enoughto give usa goodindication hasruled out the only weaponit could haveusedto achieve
those objectives.Instead, the United Kingdomhasresorted
whetherthey had any chanceof success.
to manoeuvreswhich ultimately aimed not at quellingthe
rebellionany longer, but rather at endingillegakity.
33. My country has been convincedfrom the very start
that the sanctionswere doomed to failure. Our co-operation with the sanctionspolicy, which hasbeento the best 37. However, we all know now that those manoeuvres
failed to succeedbasically becausewhat the rebelswanted,
of our ability, has not affected our conviction as to the
futility of that policy. Although we do not know the results as is now indicated in their latest proposals,could not
possiblybe a basisfor any negotiations,evenfor thosewho
of the review by the SanctionsCommittee,we have no
would wish to negotiate with the rebels.The rebelshadin
doubt at all that the conclusionswill not be of a nature to
cheerthe advocatesof sanctions.But the sadfact is that we mind the creation of a permanent police State, with
all knew, without having to wait this long, that aslong as censorship,preventive detention and restriction, abolition
South Africa and Portugalweredeterminedto frustrate the
1 Official Records of the Gmml ASSLW~!J~, TweWfirst SedW
sanctions,they had not the slightestchanceof succeeding. Plenary Meetings, 1464th meeting,para.50.
4

of an appeal system after trial on political charges,
compulsory powers to search and seize property, and the
denial of bail. All these measures, which do not obtain even
in the South African Constitution, could not be openly
granted on the Tiger or the Fearless.

escalate-I repeat, the racial conflict will escalate-and will
spread beyond the borders of Zimbabwe, and the administering Power will continue to be held responsible for the
inevitable flow of blood.

38. The principal arguments against the use of force by
the administering Power were that there would be an
unnecessary loss of life and property, that the African
people of Zimbabwe would suffer most in the event of an
armed conflict, and, further, that possibilities for a negotiated settlement existed. Unfortunately, today there is no
possibility for a negotiated settlement; nor can we lightly
talk about avoiding the loss of life, because a lot of lives
have already been lost, and a lot more will be lost.

44. I am happy to say that the people of Africa have
clearly demonstrated that they are not racialists. Nevertheless, let me make it quite clear that in the twentieth century
the people of Africa will not accept domination in their
own countries by white people. The oppressed millions of
Zimbabwe who have been let down by the timidity, the
tepidity and the duplicity of the British Government will
continue to struggle for freedom. Zambia’s concern is to
avoid bitterness, to avoid loss of life and to attain majority
rule under conditions that are conducive to harmony.
/*

39. While previously the administering Power had given
the indigenous people the impression that majority rule
would eventually be granted-indeed, while the disastrous
proposals on the Fearless put off majority rule for a rather
lengthy period of time-the present impasse has for ever put
off the possibility that Britain will grant independence to
the people of Zimbabwe on the basis of majority rule. The
mirage has disappeared; the people of Zimbabwe know
where they stand; as a result, their determination to rid
themselves of the oppressive racist minority regime has
grown immeasurably.

4.5. I hope I am not being over-optimistic in believing that
the Council shares Zambia’s concern in regretting the
bitterness that will inevitably be generated by the armed
struggle in Zimbabwe. I believe that the Council deplores
the loss of life in Zimbabwe. I am convinced that the
Council has the capacity to take effective measures on this
matter. Should the Council fail to take effective measures,
it will have helped to consolidate racialism and oppression
in southern Africa. On the other hand, if the Council takes
effective measures now, it will have made a great contribution to the welfare of mankind.

40. The racial war which we all wanted to avoid is, I am
afraid, with us. One would like to ask whether the British
Government, which has in the past claimed to be a practical
peace-keeper, will want to continue to sit idly by while
southern Africa is engulfed in strife. Does it still see a
distinction between peace-keeping operations in the Mediterranean, or so-called police action in the southern
Atlantic, and the use of force south of the Zambezi River?
And, if they do, what is the distinction?

46. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated from Rench): The
first words I have to say, Mr. President, are to offer you the
congratulations of my delegation, which, for many months
now, has been in a position to admire your smiling
courtesy, your tact and your ability. Nor shall we forget
your predecessors, who have presided over our Council with
distinction in recent months.
47. We come before this Council today to focus the
world’s attention on some extremely serious developments
that have actually been taking place for some years in the
British colony of Southern Rhodesia. You will not hear any
insults from me: they would not help the freedom fighters
in Southern Rhodesia; furthermore the situation is one that
must be treated with dignity, lucidity and absolute composure. But I am entitled, am I not, to hate evil?

41. Whatever is the answer to those questions, the
administering Power would be better advised to know that
force is the only answer; and the question is merely
whether that answer is to be supplied by the administering
Power or by the indigenous people of Zimbabwe themselves.

48. The decision by the white minority in Salisbury to
hold a so-called referendum on 20 June next in order to
have a constitution adopted was, in fact, predictable. Ian
Smith still defies international opinion without caring
about the decisions of the Security Council and the United
Nations General Assembly, because he has the benefit of
certain favours from several great Powers.

42. To sum up, I should like to reiterate that, whatever
internal changes may take place in Rhodesia, all those
changes stem from one cardinal issue: legality. To us, all
that matters is the right of the people of Zimbabwe, as a
whole, to self-determination, majority rule and independence. The restoration of constitutional rule can only be a
step towards that final objective. The United Kingdom, in
its capacity as the administering Power, has the responsibility for the human blood which is flowing in Zimbabwe.

49. We were told here last year that the economic
sanctions imposed against Ian Smith’s illegal regime would
be sufficient to make the de facto authorities in Salisbury
back down. We expressed our scepticism at the time and
declared that force was the only way of putting Ian Smith
and his clique out of mischief and preventing them from
disturbing international peace and security.

43. We are aware that several capitalist countries still have
clandestine connexions with Rhodesia but we are satisfied
that if Portugal and South Africa were prevented from
co-operating with the rebels those activities would also
come to an end. The sanctions have failed, Therefore we
have no choice but to use force to put down the rebellion,
and it is logical and, given the racial nature of the conflict,
proper that the United Kingdom should use that force.
Unless such measures are taken, the racial conflict will

50. Our words are regrettably borne out by the situation
today and, knowing intimately the course of events in
Southern Rhodesia, we affirm once more that the use of
5

force is the only way to bring down the regime of Ian
Smith and his clique and to enable the Zimbabwe people to
exercise freely their right to self-determination.
51. It would not, moreover, be the first time that the
Government of the United Kingdom had resorted to the use
of force against one of its colonies. The most recent
intervention by that Government, as YOU know,
was
directed against the little island of Anguilla. But of course,
Anguilla is not Southern Rhodesia: the moral, sentimental,
economic and financial interests to be safeguarded in
Rhodesia are certainly more important to the United
Kingdom than those in Anguilla; moreover, the authorities
in Pretoria who protect the white minority of Salisbury
must be treated gently. With each passing day the system of
apartheid becomes more firmly implanted in Southern
Rhodesia.
52. As you know, the two mainstays of racial segregation
in Southern Rhodesia are the law governing the housing and
registration of Africans in urban areas, and the/law on land
distribution. That is a strangely similar situation to the one
existing in the so-called Republic of South Africa.
53. In an investigation that I conducted as leader of a
group of experts, we collected some impressive evidence
which led us to the conclusion that the systemin force in
Southern Rhodesiawas similar to that infesting South
Africa. Yet voicesin WesternEurope aresilent,though they
are always ready to wail over certain situationsin Africa
which Africans alonehave the duty to settle.
54. One witness,speakingof the white Rhodesians,
told
us:
“They arepeoplewho areenabledby the economicand
socialstructure in Rhodesiato live asthey imaginetheir
superiors used to live in Europe. In other words, a
mechanicwill go there and have an incomethat automatically allowshim a house,servantsandmembershipof
a club . . . which hasnothingin-commonwith the manner
of living of the working class he belongedto in his
country in Europe.”
55. TO illustrate that statementI shouldlike to inform
you, if you do not know already, that the leader of the
Rhodesiansettlers, Mr. J. DouglasSmith, is the son of a
Scottish immigrant, a knacker by trade, who, after working
in a butcher’sshopin Bulawayo,later becamethe owner of
a ranch near Salisbury. To bring into focus the collusion
between the authorities of South Africa and Southern
Rhodesia,I may mention that in Southern Rhodesiathe
number of prison staff recruited from South Africa has
increased.At the Salisbury prison, for example, it is
estimatedthat about 80 per cent of the white wardersor
officers are Afrikaans-speaking. One English-speaking
warder complainedthat he wasleavingthe servicebecausea
knowledgeof Afrikaans wasbeing madea prerequisitefor
employment. The same English-speaking
warder stated:
“The South Africans will showthe Rhodesians
how to treat
the Kaffirs.”
56. We are not surprised,therefore, to see the same
detestabletortures being usedagainstthe freedomfighters

in Southern Rhodesiaasin South Africa: sharpenedbicycle
spokes thrust into the urethra; testicles squeezedwith
pincers;live snakesput into occupied cells;fatal beatings
during interrogation; electric shocks; execution of injured
freedom fighters; random firing on villagersunder the
pretext of “killing freedom fighters”; prisonerslthrown out
of helicoptersin flight.
57. Weshouldvery much like to know the reactionto this
picture of inhuman and degradingtorture of thosewho are
so concernedabout what is going on in a certain part of
Africa amongAfricans.
58. According to The New York Times of 11 December
1968, 118 prisoners were then awaiting execution in
SouthernRhodesia.
59. More seriousstill-if a scale of gravity can be estahlished in this hateful system-the courts have becomean
instrumentfor the defenceof white supremacy.
60. But we mustbe honestand recognizethat somewhites
do attempt to showtheir opposition to the developmentof
totalitarianism.One witnesssaidto us:
“In this society the white liberal who opposesthe
regime is particularly vulnerable; he can easily be destroyed. If, for instance, he wants to break through the
colour bar he literally cannot do it; he cannot join his
friendsand colleagues
who happento be blackand go and
live with them. That is quite impossiblebecauseby so
doing he would be committing an offence, c’ontravening
the law on the housingand registration of Africans in
urban areas,which states among other things that any
European living in an African area, or the reverse, is
committing a punishableoffence.”
61. Recently, on Saturday 7 June 1969, I read the
following newsitem publishedby France-Presse
Agency:
“The five Catholic bishopsof Rhodesia,in a pastoral
letter, bitterly condemned Prime Minister [an Smith’s
latest draft constitution,
“ ‘That draft runsin many respectscompletely counter
to Christian teaching’, the bishops stated; and they
emphasizedthat it must therefore be rejected ‘for the
good of our peopleand of all men of goodwill’.
“The bishopsaredistressedto find no tracewhatever of
a senseof justice or of brotherly love in the draft, which
they considerwascomposednot with the common good
in mind but with the deliberate aim of ensuringthe
permanentdomination of one segmentof thepopulation
over the other.
“ ‘This policy, which is completely irreconcilablewith
divine law, will one day have the most tragic consequences
for the whole country’, the prelatescontinued.
‘It canonly bring ushatred and violence’, they added.
“The bishopsconcluded,‘If this draft is actually usedIS
the basisfor a new constitution, it will b’e extremely
difficult for us to counsel moderation to a people Who

have shown such patience during the long period in which
discriminatory laws have been in force end who are now
subjected to this Vprovocation’.”
62. On 8 June fiance-Presse
report:

actions in Rhodesia. We shall have other opportunities to
do that. Still less did it seem to me an occasion when we
wished to show to Rhodesia and to the world divisions and
disputes here in the United Nations. It also seemed to me
that it would be well at this moment to avoid violence of
accusationamongstourselves.Rather, I thought that today
was an occasionwhen we should considertogether what
action is bestsuitedto the needsof the time, It seemedto
me of the utmost importance that we should act together
and act unanimously.So it can be that what we do and say
togethertoday will have the maximumeffect,

Agency gave us a further

“In a joint declaration on Sunday, most of the Christian
churches in Rhodesia clearly indicated their disapproval
of Mr. Ian Smith’s plans for a constitution, which will be
submitted to a ‘referendum’ on 20 June,
_

“The Anglican bishops of Mashonaland and Matabeleland, the Catholic Archbishop of Salisbury and five of his
bishops-who
had severely condemned the draft on
Saturday-the heads of the Methodist, Presbyterian and
Congregationalist churches and the United Church of
Christ, the Bible societies and the consistories of Salisbury and Bulawayo all declared that the artificial restrictions placed in the draft on the development of the
individual were incompatible with the Christian conscience.

67. MY mind goesback to November 1965 when we first
met together in this Council to take action following the
illegal declarationof independence.I well rememberthat
we then decided to condemn that action by the racist
minOritY in Southern Rhodesia,and we alsocalledupon all
Statesnot to recognizethis illegal racistminority regimein
Southern
Rhodesiaand to refrain from rendering any
assistance
to it.
6X. That was our first act together. I remember the
proposalput to usby the Ambassadorof Jordan (1258th
meeting]. I well rememberthat we readily rallied to his
proposal.It was anhistoric decision,and it isimportant to
seethat no country in the world hasdisregarded
the call we
then made.No country in the world has recognizedthe
illegalr&me.

“The church dignitaries criticized the fiscal, electoral
and agrarian provisions of the draft, and the grounds
given for the method of granting civil liberties, particularly freedom of expression. ‘No government that is truly
intent on serving the people would agree to base its
authority on such proposals’, they stated, emphasizing at
the same time that the draft utterly contradicts the
teachings of freedom and justice in the New Testament.”

I
/
:f
,i
I
/
:/

69. Since then my country has repeatedlybrought proposalsto the Council for economic measures
againstthe
illegal regimeleadingup to resolution 253 (196X) of May
1968 imposingfor the first time in history comprehensive
and mandatory sanctions,Our decisionwas unanimous
(ibid.]. I do not pretend that there were not serious
differencesbetweenus, asindeed there still are, but that
resolution, adoptedjust over a year ago, was, asall of US
who then were present well remember,a major effort in
internationalcompromiseand co-operation.

63. Despite all these voices that have been raised, despite
the heroic struggle of the indigenous people of Southern
Rhodesia, Ian Smith continues to shut thousands of people
up in uninhabitable camps where wild animals live, and goes
on executing freedom fighters in contempt of the decisions
of the administering authorities. It is high time the United
Kingdom showed a firmer hand, as it managed to in
Anguilla, and used all means, including force, to put an end
to the racist rBgime that infests Southern Rhodesia under
the protection of the fascist regime in Pretoria.

70. Now, we are faced with a new development.It is a
developmentof someimportancebut its importance must
not be overrated. The minority rBgimein Rhodesiahas
called for a referendumamongstthe minority in Rhodesia
and that minority referendumis to take place on 20 June.
What is the right action to take in this Council in the face
of that newdevelopment?It is my earnestargumentto the
Council that our reaction should be not to divide but to
unite. If we divide we givecomfort and supportto a r&me
whosepolicieswe all regard with disgust.We should give
comfort and support at a time when we shouldbe giving
exactly the opposite. But if we unite and speakwith the
authenticvoice of the wholeinternational community, then
we can exercisea valuableinfluence.

64. We hope and pray for the establishment in that part of
southern Africa of a multiracial society founded on the
principles of equality, peace and liberty, where every
individual will be able to live a ‘decent life and enjoy the
benefits of modern scientific progress.
65. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I intended to
speak as early as possible in this debate, and as I have
listened to the eloquent speeches made this morning, I
wished all the more that I could have spoken earlier. I
would wish, too, before going further, to pay very sincere
tribute to the very remarkable speeches to which we have
listened this morning. As I listened to those speeches, I
remembered that Scripture tells us that the Lord was not in
the great and strong wind, nor in the earthquake nor in the
fire, but in a still small voice.* And in a still small voice 1
wanted to put a limited but straightforward proposition to
the Council.

71. What then do I propose? I proposethat we should
condemnthe illegal r&ime. We shouldcondemnthe denial
of human and political rights. We deplorethe limitation of
the referendum to a minority. We should, above all,
condemnthe proposalsfor a new constitution. That is the
action which I strongly recommendto the Council.

66. It did not seem to me that this was the best occasion
to attempt to review the long and unhappy story of illegal

/
72. Again, I repeat that it seemsto me of the Utmost
importance that prior to the referendumnext week we

2 SeeI Kings 19: 11-12.
7

present course of denying recognition and :maintaining
sanctions against an illegal regime which denies human
rights.”

should act in unity. The last thing we should do would be
to divide in disagreement and dispute.
73. What can we say about the referendum? The minority
in Rhodesia will say what they want. Are they determined
to drift further into political isolation and international
ostracism and economic stagnation? Or have they the
courage and the good sense to break away from that
negative and reactionary course, and seek not frightful
conflict but fruitful conciliation?

80. Our commitment is clear. I trust that our actions will
be opportune and well directed. On the general situation in
Rhodesia we can consult together later. What we need to do
now is to act, and to act quickly and to act unanimously.
81. Let me finally say this. I have myself been concerned
in the problems of Rhodesia and of all southern Africa for a
number of years. I do not need to be told of the evils of
racial discrimination and racial domination. They are
monstrous evils. As the representative of Senegal has so
righ.tly said, we are all entitled to hate those hills. So I have
long been convinced of these evils. If the policies of racial
injustice are pursued in southern Africa they will, so I have
long believed, lead to conflict and to catastrophe of vast
proportion. I do not underestimate the dangers.

74. That is the choice they have to make. We should leave
them in no doubt that if they vote for isolation and conflict
they will do so in the face of the condemnation of
representatives of the whole world.
75. What can we say about the proposed constitution?
Certainly it is not necessary to go into detail. Nearly every
clause discloses racial discrimination and racial repression
and racial injustice. The provisions of this so-called constitution offend against every decent democratic principle.
They entrench for ever the position of the minority. They
provide for only a handful of popularly-elected African
members of the lower house of the legislature and none at
all in the upper house. To the so-called declaration of rights
there is no judicial safeguard and so no possibility of
challenge by the courts to any legislation adopted by the
minority-dominated parliament. Franchise qualifications
are not entrenched and not included in the constitution
itself. It would even be easy for the white members of
Parliament to secure amendment of the entrenched clauses
of the constitution.

82. Moreover, I have long maintained that no solution of
the racial problems of southern Africa can be found except
on the basis of consultation with the people, all the people.
Their interests must be paramount.
83. Of all the principles which have been stated and
confirmed in the long consideration of this matter, the
principle I have always thought most important is the
principle that no settlement can be accepted which is not
approved by the people of Rhodesia as a whole. In the
words of my Government, that principle is “transcendent
and overriding”.

76. This is a blatantly racialist constitution. So its authors
have admitted. So it is recognized by the world, We have an
obvious duty to condemn it and to condemn it unanimously.

84. Moreover, I do not believe that solutions will be found
by violent speeches or wild gestures. We all know the
necessary, the unavoidable, limitations. I have often said
that the task in southern Africa is a job not for the cavalry,
but for the sappers.

77. So I come back to the contention which I am so
anxious to put before the Council, It is that prior to the
referendum next week we should at the earliest possible
moment declare our unanimous condemnation of the
constitution. We should, moreover-going back to the first
action we took in 1965call on all States to refuse to
recognize the illegal regime in whatever form, That is the
right action to take on the referendum,

85. Our progress must be slow. I greatly hope that it CISI
be well considered and wisely judged and unanimously
agreed.
86. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): The Security Council should
no doubt be grateful to the fifty-nine Asian ;and African
States Members to whose initiative we owe the present
meeting. We are also beholden to the Foreign Minister of
Zambia and the Secretary-General of Foreign Affairs of
Algeria for coming here and, by their cogent ;and forceful
statements, infusing in us a due sense of urgency and of the
gravity of the situation that obtains in Rhodesia. Nevertheless, the fact cannot be over-stressed that in considering the
situation we are not so much accommodating ;ademand of
one or more Member States as we are discharging a
responsibility independently of that demand.

78. What should take place thereafter? Let me tell the
Council what I think should take place. The British
Government will wish to consult other Governments,
particularly African Governments, after the referendum.
My Government is already committed to continuing consultation with Commonwedth Governments. That commitment was confirmed at the Commonwealth Conference
earlier this year.

87. The problem of Rhodesia has been the subject of
action under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. Consequently, it remains the continuing responsibility of the Security Council to keep under review the
efficacy or otherwise of the measures which it has taken
towards bringing the illegal minority regime to an end. The
question before the Security Council is whether or not the
sanctions imposed under resolution 253 (1968) of 29 May

79. All of us must then face the hard facts and consider
together what more can be done. I can assure the Council
that we shall not go back. As my Foreign Secretary said in
the Howe of Commons last month:
“It is quite clear that Her Majesty’s Government and
indeed all the Governments of the world-because this is
mankind’s problem-must resolve to pursue steadily the

8

L

I968 have been effective and, if not, how they can be
reinforced by other possible measures under Chapter VII.
This is a question altogether different from an adjudication
of rights and wrongs, a balancing of claims and counter.
claims. There is no controversy here of questions of law or
morality. The issue before us is predominantly of an
executive nature; it has to be faced with candour. If
acrimony is undesirable, equivocation is also out of place,

94. In considering these further measures we must keep
two things in view: first, the facts regarding the effects of
the sanctions under resolutions 217 (1965), 232 (1966) and
253 (1968), and, second, the scope of the provisions of
Chapter VII of the Charter.
95. As far as sanctions are concerned, it cannot be gainsaid
that so far they have failed to make any decisive impact on
the economy of Rhodesia, far less on its political situation.
In its annual survey of economic development, published in
April last, the Smith regime claimed that it had succeeded
in breaking economic sanctions in 1968, and forecast an
even better economic outlook for 1969.

88. Last month the illegal regime dared to throw an open
challenge to the entire international community by announcing its plan to perpetuate the domination by a small
white minority over the majority in Rhodesia more than
sixteen times its number. The question inescapably arises:
what further measures is the Security Council prepared to
adopt?

96. What are the facts? There has been a net capital
inflow of $25 million into Rhodesia in 1968 which has
almost entirely offset the deficit in current account.
Agricultural production is likely to increase markedly in
1969. Higher sales of products, including nickel, may also
ease the strain on Rhodesia’s external payments. Manufacturing output is at a record level, Taxation has not
increased. No immediate necessity is being felt for devaluation of the Rhodesian pound. European immigration into
Rhodesia in I968 exceeded the figure for 1965. The general
level of economic activity, which declined in 1966 under
the immediate impact of sanctions, is now slightly above
that of 196.5 in real terms. All these facts appear to lend
confirmation to Ian Smith’s assertion regarding the state of
the economy.

89. The so-called constitutional proposals and the plan to
submit them to a “referendum” serve notice to the United
Nations that the Salisbury clique is determined to deny to
the people of Zimbabwe their inalienable right to majority
rule and independence and to impose on them the system
of apartheid for all time to come. Nothing could make it
clearer that the usurper regime has finally refused to recant
its unilateral declaration of independence. It has defied
sanctions. It is prepared to repudiate the British Queen and
Parliament. It has slammed the door to negotiations with
the Government of the United Kingdom. The breach is
therefore irrevocable.

97. In the face of these facts, it would be self-deception
on our part to conclude that economic sanctions have had
more than a marginal effect’ or have caused anything more
than a partial dislocation of Rhodesia’s economy. During
1968, in which the scope of sanctions against the illegal
regime was extended to cover Rhodesia’s imports also
under this Council’s resolution 253 (1968), the illegal
regime claims that its exports fell from $264 million in
1967 to $256 million only, that is, a decline of a little more
than 3 per cent, while the value of its imports rose from
$262 million for that year to $290 million.

90. This is not a subjective evaluation. The world press
views the recent developments in the same light. To give
but two examples: The New Y&c Times commented in an
editorial of 24 May that the new constitution “stripped
away Mr, Smith’s remaining trappings of moderation and
exposed him for what he unquestionably has been all along,
a white supremacist”.
The Washington Post, on 5 June
reported from Salisbury that there is “a growing feeling
among Government supporters here that South Africa and
Rhodesia ultimately are going to be thrown together”.
91. For its part, the Government of the United Kingdom
now seems to appreciate that all the efforts for a
compromise, whether desirable or not, have now totally
collapsed. Indeed, in his television interview on 20 May, as
reported in The New York Times of 21 May, Prime Minister
Wilson, referring to a negotiated settlement, recognized that
“Perhaps there never was a chance”.

98. South Africa alone accounted for $80 million of
Rhodesia’s exports and a very large part of its imports. The
Governments of South Africa and Portugal, in defiance of
the decisions of the Security Council, refused to take any
measures to implement the provisions of the various
sanctions resolutions and continued to maintain close
economic, trade and other relations with the illegal regime
and to permit the free flow of goods from Southern
Rhodesia through the territories of South Africa and the
colony of Mozambique and their ports and transport
facilities.

92. I need hardly dwel1 on the so-called constitutional
proposals of the Ian Smith regime. They are predicated on
the assumption that the white, being white, has the
inherent right to rule over the none-white and that there is
no such thing as the dignity and worth of the human person
as far as the African or Asian is concerned.

99. The illegal regime also carried on a clandestine trade
with other States which, according to one estimate, in I968
amounted to approximately $44 million. The origins and
destinations of goods were disguised by false documents
and false labels. Many ’ States failed to prevent their
nationals from engaging in activities to promote the.export
of goods of Southern Rhodesian origin and the import into
Southern Rhodesia of goods needed by the illegal regime or
the use of ships and aircraft of their registration or under
charter to their nationals.

93. My delegation would urge that the Security Council at
once condemn the impending so-called “referendum”, that
it rule null and void any verdict in favour of the so-called
constitution, and proceed forthwith to the consideration of
further measures under Chapter VII of the Charter to
reinforce the sanctions in order to end the settler regime
and remove the threat to peace.
9

legality. Then it was announced that the United Kingdom
would not insist on a withdrawal of the UDI, if Ian Smith
agreed to a “broadbased administration” including Africans. The stand on no independence before majority rule
was relaxed.

100. It has become very clear that as a result of the refusal
of South Africa and Portugal to take the necessary
measures and the failure of some other States to fully
implement the provisions of resolution 253 (1968), sanctions against the illegal r&gime have not yet brought about
the results desired by the Security Council.

107. Finally, even the hope of securing some de:mocratic
advance, let alone guarantees of unimpeded progress
towards majority rule, has been brutally shattereNdby the
so-called constitutional proposals.

101. Speaking in the Security Council at its thirteen
hundred and thirty-first meeting on 8 December 1966, the
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of the United
Kingdom said:

108. Now that the illegal regime has fi. ally ended all
hopes of a negotiated settlement, how does the administering Power plan to end the rebellion and fulfi its solemn
obligation under the Charter of the United Nations to lead
the people of Zimbabwe to unimpeded majority rule and
independence?

“The object of the programme of sanctions has been to
reduce Rhodesian economic activity and prospects to a
point where even the most stubborn members of the
Rhodesian Front party could see that there would be no
tolerable economic future for their country if their
present policy were pursued. The best way of achieving
this was and still is to strike directly at Rhodesian earning
power by action against the exports which are most
important to it in international trade.” [133lst meeting,
para. 12-j

109. We feel that the moment of truth has arrived. Would
it be too much to hope for an agonizing reappraisal’?
110. It is indeed disturbing that The Times of London of
22 May should, in an editorial, conclude that: “The
eventual decision is likely to be the result of the world’s
increasing reluctance to police the policy of sanctions and
the growing indifference of the British electorate.”

102. Mr. George Brown gave this rationale in the context
of the debate which led to the adoption of resolution 232
of 16 December 1966, imposing selective mandatory
sanctions on the export of fifteen major groups of
commodities considered to be of critical importance to
Rhodesia’s foreign trade. Resolution 253 (1968) extended
the scope of sanctions to include Rhodesia’s imports and in
other directions. And yet, after three and a half years of the
application of sanctions, the economic pressures on the
illegal regime have remained so tolerable that the Rhodesian
Front feels emboldened to cross the Rubicon and to slam
the door to all negotiations for a settlement with the
administering Power.

111. If the administering Power were to permit itsself to be
influenced by such a thought, world confidence in its good
faith and fidelity to its Charter obligations would be
undermined. If the United Nations should weaken in its
resolve to pursue the policy of sanctions against the Smith
rkgime, it would do well to contemplate the history of the
League of Nations after its failure to enforce sanctions
against Mussolini.
112. Speaking at the time of the adoption of resolution
253 (1968) at the 1428th meeting of the Security Council,
I said that that resolution was not the end of the road and
that further measures must follo,w until the rebellion in
Rhodesia was ended and the people of Zimbabwe attained
their freedom and independence. It is to this thought that I
should now like to turn.

103. The history of this denouement has been melancholy
and unedifying. At every stage, beginning with the notice
by the Salisbury regime to proclaim a unilateral declaration
of independence, the United Kingdom as the administering
Power, thought it the path of wisdom to assure Ian Smith
that force would not be used to quell the rebellion. This
was the constant theme in the pronouncements of British
statesmen-in the British Parliament, at the Commonwealth
Conferences and in the United Nations. Is it surprising that
as he took each further step on the path of illegality and
interposed each additional obstacle to the advance of the
Rhodesian Africans to majority rule, he felt emboldened by
these repeated assurances.

113. In the deliberations of the Sanctions Committee of
the Security Council, it became only too manifest, on the
basis of all the evidence at its disposal, that principally
because of the defiant attitude of South Africa and
Portugal to implement the sanctions resolutions; of this
Council, the economic pressures against the illegal r&me
have not been sufficently serious to bring the stubborn and
recalcitrant men in Salisbury to the path of reason and
legality.

104. The administering Power, with its long experience of
an imperial role, chose to adopt the entirely novel tactic of
confronting armed rebellion by argument and persuasion.

114. Therefore, it is the view of my delegation that unless
the Security Council turns its attention to a consideration
of extending the sanctions to Portugal and South Africa, at
least in respect of the major commodities groups imported
and exported by Rhodesia, the present sanction:3 cannot
succeed.

105. That is how the United Kingdom reacted to the
unilateral declaration of independence. That was its
position at the Tiger talks. It adopted the same attitude at
the Fearless meeting.
106. At each of these critical moments, the United
Kingdom was compelled to retreat. First, the administering
Power implied that it would condone the rebellion if it was
ended and the illegal regime returned to the path of

115. It is a matter of record in the documentation of the
Sanctions Committee that despite the mandatory prohibition in paragraph 4 of resolution 253 (1968), there was a
10

L

net capital inflOW Of Some E2.5 million into Rhodesia, of
which &21 million was in the corporate sector, which
enabled the illegal regime to offset almost the entire current
account deficit of 226.8 million, In the view of my
delegation, ways and meansmust be devisedforthwith to
stop this inflow from all sources,including subsidiaries
of
foreign companiesand by suppliersof credits for capital
goods.
116. Paragraphs8, 9 and 10 of resolution253 (1968) deal
respectively with emigration, possiblefurther action under
Article 41 of the Charter and the withdrawal of all consular
and trade representationin Southern Rhodesia.Statesnot
complying with the provisions of theseparagraphscontend
that they are not obligatory. It is therefore necessaryto
strengthen those provisions in a suitablemannerto make
their impact felt by the illegal regime.In particular, my
delegation considers it important to make it clear in
unmistakable terms that all the twelve countries which
continue to maintain consular representationin Southern
Rhodesia must withdraw such representation without
delay. Resolution2 17 (1965) in paragraph6 :aBedupon all
States not to recognize the illegal regime and not to
entertain diplomatic or other relations with it. That
provision needsto be complementedby the prohibition of
consularrepresentationin order that the apartheid regime
in Salisbury may be effectively ostracizedby the international community.
117. Theseare someof the further stepsthat, in the view
of my delegat:ion,the Security Council might consider
taking to meet the new and the gravest challengeyet
thrown out by the illegal regime.I should,however,like to
make it clear beyond any doubt that any action which may
be taken by this Council doesnot in any mannerabsolve
the United Kingdom Government of its solemnresponsibility under the Charter of the United Nations and the
constitutional law of the United Kingdom to quell the
racist minority rebellion in Southern Rhodesia by all
necessarymeanswithout exception.

ever impossible.That this is the deliberateaim of the new
constitutionalproposals
is undeniable.The evidenceon this
point is clear. It can be found in the introduction to the
documentpublishedon 21 May by the regimein Salisbury
and entitled “Proposalsfor a New Constitution for Rhodesia”.
120. The first paragraphof that document explains the
needfor a new constitution by declaringthat the Constitution of 1961“containsa numberof objectionablefeatures,
the principal ones being that it provides for eventual
African rule andinevitably the dominationof one race by
another, and that it doesnot guaranteethat government
will be retainedin responsible
hands”. It then assertsthat
the new constitution “will ensurethat governmentwill be
retainedin responsible
hands”.By that phrasethe authors
clearly meanthat the rule of the white minority is to be
guaranteedin perpetuity. Evidently they do not object to
the domination of one race by another so long as the
dominantraceis white.
121. The intentions of the regime have been further
expoundedin recent statementsby Mr. Ian Smith. In a
speechon 7 May he explainedthe purposeof the new
constitutionas“to retain Westerncivilization in Rhodesia”
and “to stemthe tide of rampantblack nationalismon the
Zambezi”. In a radio addresson 21 May, he complained
that throughout the discussions
with the United Kingdom
“the British have been obsessed
with the question of
majority rule”.
122. It is a curious view indeed which seesnothing in
commonbetweenWesterncivilization and the concept of
majority rule; but that is the view whichappearsto prevail
amongthe constitutionwritersin Salisbury.

123. I shallcommentonly briefly on the constitutional
provisions.Theprovisionson franchiseandon the composition and powersof the legislaturewere written to assure
that the decisivepolitical power will remain for ever in
white hands.The mainlegislativepoweris to be lodgedin a
118. The Pakistan delegation standsready to enter into
lower houseconsistingat the outsetof fifty Europeansand
consultationswith the delegationsof other Statesmembers sixteen Africans. Half of the Africans will be chosenby
of the Security Council to reach agreementfor taking
tribal councils.Provisionfor aneventualincreasein African
further effective measuresunder ChapterVII of the Charter representationin the lower houseis tied to an income tax
commensuratewith the objective of ending the illegal formula that is virtually certain to prevent any such
regimeand removingthe threat to peacein southernAfrica.
increasefor many yearsto come;and an African majority
in eitherhouseiscompletelyruledout.
119. Mr. YOST (United States of America): The Security
124. The provisionson land tenure stipulate that the
Council meets at a deeply disturbing moment in the
troubled history of the problem of SouthernRhodesia.On European and African areasare to be approximately
“equal” in size, if not in quality-meaning the same
20 June there will be presented to the voters of that
quantity of land for the 5 per cent who are white asfor the
Territory certain proposalsfor a new constitution and for
the conversion of the Territory into a so-calledRepublic. 9.5 per cent who are black. Given the distribution of
Those proposalsemanatenot from the United Kingdom, political power,it would not be surprisingto seethe ruling
which is the lawful sovereignPower, but from an illegal minority changethe recipeevenfurther to their advantage.
white minority regime. They will be voted on not by an
125. One other feature deserves
notice: a chapterentitled
electorate representativeof the 4.5 million people of the
Territory, but by some90,000 voters, nine-tenthsof whom “Declaration of Rights”. It is a curiously ironic title for a
are white in a country whose population is about 95 per chapter which explicitly authorizes, amongother things,
preventivedetention,restriction of individualswithout bail
cent black. The proposals themselvesare conceived in
or trial, the power to requirean accusedpersonto testify
racism. Their designis to perpetuate the rule of the white
againsthimself;andcensorship
of broadcasting,newspapers
minority and to render majority rule or the attainment of
and other publications.As if theseprovisionsdid not give
poltical equality by the membersof the black majority for
11

enough scope to a police state, it is further provided that, if
a bill in parliament is found to violate the Declaration of
Rights, it can nevertheless be enacted if the upper house
holds it to be necessary in the national interest, or if the
lower house decides to pass it anyway.

so precisely relev,ant to the situation in Southern Rhodesia
that I wish to quote it at this point:
“Our stand towards southern Africa . . .“-thle Manifesto declares-“involves a rejection of racialism, not a
reversal of the existing racial domination. We beleve that
all the peoples who have made their homes; in the
countries of southern Africa are Africans, regardless of
the colour of their skins; and we would oppose a racialist
majority government which adopted a philosophy of
deliberate and permanent discrimination between its
citizens on grounds of racial origin. We are nut talking
racialism when we reject the colonialism and apartheid
policies now operating in those areas; we are demanding
an opportunity for all the people of these States, working
together as equal individual citizens, to work out for
themselves the institutions and the system of government
under which they will, by general consent, live together
and work together to build a harmonious society. , . .

126. With such a flimsy bill of rights as this, no man,
whether white or black, can feel that his liberty is safe. For
the sake of denying the rights of the black majority, the
members of the white minority are being asked to leave
their own liberties unprotected.
127. Since these proposals-despite all the trappings of law
in which they are dressed-are intrinsically unjust, and since
they emanate from an unlawful rigime, they will be
without legal effect, regardless of the results of the voting
on 20 June. Nevertheless, their political significance is a
matter of grave concern. By these steps the present
authorities in Salisbury propose to turn their backs on the
United Kingdom and on the long effort to find a basis for
independence which would be lawful, acceptable to aI1 the
people, and compatible with the principle of majority rule.
The same authorities who announced a spurious independence in 1965 have now, it seems, abandoned all pretence
of wishing to legitimize their country’s status in the
international community. They have abandoned all pretence that the 95 per cent of Rhodesians who are black
might ever, at any time, aspire to their just share in the
government of their own country, They have set their faces
toward a bogus, usurped independence based on perpetual
white supremacy in a nation that is overwhehningly black.
The road which they thus propose to travel is lonesome and
dangerous. It is al1 too likely to lead to the racial
polarization, extremism, and lawless violence which its
proponents profess to fear.

“To talk of the liberation of Africa”-the
Manifesto
continues-“is
thus to say two things. First, that the
peoples in the territories still under colonial rule shall be
free to determine for themselves their own institutions of
self-government. Secondly, that the individuals in
southern Africa shall be freed from an environment
poisoned by the propaganda of racialism, and given an
opportunity to be men-not white men, brown men,
yellow men, or black men.”
131. In the light of the Lusaka Manifesto, words about
“stemming the tide of rampant black nationalism along the
Zambezi” come with singular ill grace from Mr. Ian Smith.
Not only from London, but also from his neighbours in
Africa, he and his associates have been invited for years to
accept the hand of friendship and co-operation. They have
spurned that invitation, apparently in the belief that either
the white minority must suppress the black majority, or the
other way around: that no middle ground, no equality, is
possible. Yet in truth, the only possible ground on which to
build peace and progress in Africa is precisely the middle
ground of non-racialism. The course of action which
Mr. Smith and his colleagues now advocate cannot lead to
peace and progress, but rather to extremism and bitter
strife in which the cause of peace is sure to suffer.

128. The conclusion is inescapable that the r&lme in
Salisbury has arrived at this racist policy because of a
fundamental misreading of the events of recent years in
Africa. They seem literally to see all events in terms of
black against white, and to perceive no alternative except
that one must dominate the other. If this were to become
the ruling principle of political life in Africa, the destiny of
that continent would be tragic indeed.
129. Fortunately, other and wiser voices can be heard in
Africa today. There are many among the white minority in
Southern Rhodesia itself who have expressed deep misgivings about the policy of the Smith Ggime. In recent
weeks we have seen growing evidence of such misgivings
among churchmen, educators, students, journalists and
business leaders within the white community. Their views,
in turn, are in harmony with a larger body of opinion
elsewhere in Africa. I refer to those who see the future
hopes of Africa for peace and progress founded on the
principle of non-racialism.

132. We have all Iearned that the evils of white racism in
southern Africa, and particularly in Southern Rhodesia, are
more durable than we had feared. But their duration does
not make them any less evil, nor does it make our united
opposition to them any less important.
133. In November 1965, when the Rhodesian authorities
first announced the purported “independence” of their
country, they sought to mislead public opinion by dressing
up their announcement in the stolen plumage of the
American “Declaration of Independence”, beginning with
the very opening words “When, in the course of human
events . . .“.

130. Only two months ago that principle was given
particularIy eloquent expression in what may well become a
major document in African history: the Lusaka Manifesto
of Central and East African States, signed by the leaders of
fourteen nations on 16 April. Proceeding from the belief
“that all men are equal”, the Manifesto contains a passage

134. Never were noble words borrowed to camouflage a
more sordid enterprise. This so-called “independence” was
claimed, and is still claimed today, not for the 4.5 miIlion
people of Southern Rhodesia, but only for the 5 per cent of
2

them who happen to be white. It is an independence
conceived from the outset in racism, and maintained-as the
new constitutional provisions clearly show-by the ugly
practices of the police state. From those practices, no
dissenter, be he black, brown or white, can hope to remain
immune.

also again condemn that regime itself, This action should be
taken at once, well before 20 June, Having taken this
action, we can then consult together about what further
steps on the part of this Council in regard to Southern
Rhodesia might be appropriate, useful and effective.
137. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I have
to inform the members of the Council that during this
meeting I received a letter from the Chairman of the
Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968), submitting to the Council the
Committee’s second report, This is now being circulated as
document S/9252 in all the working languages of the
Council,

135. It is little wonder that the so-called “Unilateral
Declaration of Independence” in 1965, even while it
borrowed the celebrated phrases of Thomas Jefferson,
skipped silently over the most famous words of all from the
American original of 1776: The “self-evident truth” that
“all men are created equal”. For obvious reasons, the
authors of the Salisbury document had no stomach for that
little word “equal”. Yet it is a word that will not die; and
indeed we live in a time when it has begun at last to take on
its full meaning for men of all races. It finds expression in
the United Nations Charter, in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and now in the Lusaka Manifesto. No
amount of censorship or police repression can bury it. Its
realization is one of the essentials of enduring peace in
Africa and in the entire worhi and one of the goals to which
my Government remains unalterably committed.

138. I still have a number of speakers on my list but, in
view of the lateness of the hour and if the Council agrees, I
propose to close this meeting.
139. As agreed in informal consultations held during this
meeting, our next meeting on the subject of Southern
Rhodesia will take place this afternoon at 3.30 p.m.
140. In closing I should like very briefly to express my
gratitude to the representative of Senegal for his kind words
about myself,

136. I can only conclude that at this time, before the
referendum among the minority takes place, we in this
Council should condemn the proposed constitution, which
would further entrench the illegal racist regime, and should

The meeting rose at 1.5 p.m.

1

-- -__--

_---

---

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

Les publications
des
dQporitaires
do monde
Nations
Unier, Section

COMO

CONSEGUIR

be obtained
or write

Nations
Uniet
ront
entier.
Informer-vour
der venter, New York

PUBLICACIONES

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations.
Sales Section,

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

en vente
dons
ler librairies
et les ogencer
auprbs
de vatre librairie
au adresser-vour
6:
ou Get&e.

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicacianer
de Ias Naciones
Unidas
ertdn
en todar
porter del mundo. Consulte
a su librero
Ventar,
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

en venta
o dirijare

UNIDAS
en libreriar
y casas dirtiibuidorar
a: Nacianes
Unidor,
Seccibn

de

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

82060-December

1972-2,050
