UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/46
25 August 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3418th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 August 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Somalia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council takes note of the Report of the SecretaryGeneral to the Security Council on Somalia (S/1994/977) and briefings by
the Secretariat.
"The Security Council, appalled by the killing near Baidoa on
22 August of seven Indian soldiers and the wounding of nine more serving
with UNOSOM-II, strongly condemns the premeditated attack on United Nations
peace-keepers who were providing essential support and assistance to the
humanitarian effort of the international community in Somalia carrying out
the mandate of the Security Council. The Council expresses its condolences
to the Government of India and the families of the soldiers who made the
ultimate sacrifice in assisting the people of Somalia.
"The Council expresses grave concern regarding the deteriorating
security situation in Somalia and deplores attacks and harassment directed
against UNOSOM-II and other international personnel serving in Somalia.
"The Council considers that a durable political settlement remains an
indispensable prerequisite for restoring peace and security,
re-establishing central governmental structures and services and commencing
the process of rehabilitation and reconstruction of the economic and social
fabric in Somalia.
"The Council is gravely concerned by the lack of progress in
reconciliation among Somali factions. It is particularly concerned by the
fact that the national reconciliation conference, to which the 15
signatories of the Addis Ababa Agreement had agreed in Nairobi on
24 March 1994 and which was scheduled for 15 May 1994, has not taken place.
The Council commends the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to reinvigorate the process of national reconciliation,
including through the encouragement of local and regional initiatives and

94-34227 (E)

250894

/...

S/PRST/1994/46
English
Page 2

conferences. In this regard, it attaches great importance to an
accelerated inter-clan reconciliation, in particular, among the Hawiye
sub-clans, with the involvement of all concerned.
"The Council stresses that the nature and the duration of the
international support and resources the international community is
committing to Somalia, including the continuing presence of UNOSOM-II,
depend very much on the resolve of the Somali parties to achieve political
compromise.
"The Council reminds the Somali parties that the future of their
country lies in their hands and urges them once again to make every effort
to advance the process of political reconciliation in Somalia.
"The Council believes that the Secretary-General’s proposed initial
reduction of the UNOSOM-II troops is appropriate in the circumstances
prevailing in Somalia. It stresses that priority attention should be given
to ensuring the safety and security of UNOSOM-II and other international
personnel, including the staff of non-governmental organizations. In this
context, it underlines the responsibility of the Somali parties for the
security and safety of these personnel.
"The Security Council invites the Secretary-General to submit to the
Council well before 30 September 1994 a substantive report on prospects for
national reconciliation in Somalia and on the possible options for the
future of UNOSOM-II."

-----
