20

General Assembly-Twenty-ninth Sesaion

1. Condemns the use of napalm and other incendiary weapons in armed conflicts in circumstances where
it may affect human beings or may cause damage to
the environment and/or natural resources;
2. Urges all States to refrain from the production,
stockpiling, proliferation and use of such weapons,
pending the conclusion of agreements on the prohibition of these weapons;
3. Invites all Governments, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the specialized agencies and
the other international organizations concerned to transmit to the Secretary-General all information about the
use of napalm and othcr incendiary weapons in armed
conflicts;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
report on this subject, based on information received
under paragraph 3 of the present resolution, to be submitted to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session.
2309th pleMry meeting
9 December 1974
3256 (XXIX). Chemical and bacleriological
(biological) weapons

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 2454 A (XXIII) of
20 December 1968, 2603 B (XXIV) of 16 December
1969, 2662 (XXV) of 7 Decernber 1970, 2827 A
(XXVI) of 16 Decernber 1971, 2933 (XXVII) of
29 Novernber 1972 and 3077 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973,
Convinced that the process of détente in the world is
conducive to the implernentation of further disarmament measurcs and of general and complete disarmament under effective international control,
Stressing the contribution that early agreement on
the complete prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on
their destruction would make to general and complete
disarmament under effective international control,
Recalling that it has repeatedly condemned all actions that are contrary to the principies and objectives
of the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War
of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of
Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva
on 17 June 1925, 2º
Reaffirming the need for the strict observance by
ali States of the principies and objectives of that Protocol,
Convinced that the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction 21 constitutes an important step
towards agreement on the effective prohibition of the
developrnent, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their elimination from the arsenals
of ali States,
RecaUing, in this connexion, the undertaking contained in article IX of the Convention to continue
negotiations in good faith with a view to reaching
early agreement on effective measures for the prohibition of the development, production and stockpüing
of chemical weapons and for their destruction,
20 League

p. 65.,

of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV, No. 2138,

21 Resolution

2826 (XXVI), anne:11.

Having considered the report of the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament,22
Noting that draft conventions on the prohibition of
the development, production and stockpiling of chemical weapons and on their destruction ·as well as many
other working documents, proposals and suggestions
have been submitted to the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament,
Desiring to contribute to the successful conclusion
of negotiations on effective measures for the complete
prohibition of the development, production ~nd stockpiling of all chernical weapons and for their destruction,
1. Reaffirms the objective of reaching agreement
on the effective prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and
on their elimination from the arsenals of a.U States;
2. Urges ali States to make every effort to facilitate
agreement on the effective prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their destruction;
3. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue negotiations as a matter of
high priority, bearing in mind existing proposals, with
a view to reaching early agreement on effective. measures for the prohibition of the development, production
and stockpiHng of all chemical weapons and for their
destruction;
4. Invites all States that have not yet done so to
sign and ratify the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
Their Destruction, with a view to its entry into force
and effective implementation at an early date;
5. Invites all States that have not yet done so to
accede to or ratify the Protocol for the Prohibition of
the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other
Gases, and of, Bacteriological Methods of Warfare,
signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925, in the course of
1975 in commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of
its signing, and caMs anew for the strict observance by
all States of the principies and objectives contained
therein;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament all
documents of the First Committee relating to questions
connected with the problem of chemical weapons and
chemical methods of warfare;
7. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to report on the results of its negotiations
to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session.
2 309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974
3257 (XXIX). Urgent need for cessation df,. nuclear and thermonuclear tests und conclusion
of a treaty designed to achieve a comprehensive test han

The General Assembly,
Gravely disturbed at the continuance of nuclear
weapon testing since the twenty-eighth session of the
General Assembly,
22 A/9708-DC/23'7. For the printed text, see Ofjicial Records
o/ the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement
No. 27 (A/9627).
