TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING: 5 JUNE 1967

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1347/Rev. I )

. . +. , . . , . + , . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . I . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . , . . . . , , . . . , . . . . .
Letter dated 23 May I967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902) , . . . . .
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907) , . . . . . . . . . . . .
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/7910) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV. 1347

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FORTY-SEVENTH

Held in New York, on Monday,
President:

Mr. Hans R. TABOR (Denmark).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark, EthioPia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 347/l?ev.l)

1, Adoption

MEETING

5 June 1967, at 9.30 a.m.
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber in order to participate without vote in the
discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. Rafael (Israel),
Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr. M. H.
El-Farra (Jordan), Mr. A. Daoudy (Syria), Mr. G. Ha&n
(Lebanon), Mr. A. Pachachi (Iraq), Mr. A. T. Benhima
(Morocco), Mr. G. Al-Rachach (Saudi Arabia) and Mr. G. A.
Al-Rashid (Kuwait) took the places reserved for them.

of the agenda.

1. Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).
i, Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).
1. Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910).
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
.etter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/7902)
:ompIaint of the Representative of the United Arab.
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security” (S/7907)

2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
continue its discussion of the three items inscribed on its
agenda. I would draw the attention of members to a letter
dated 5 June 1967 which I received this morning from the
Permanent Representative of the United Arab Republic to
the United Nations and which has been circulated as
document S/7926.
3. It will be recalled that the 1346th meetihg of the
Security Council, on 3 June, was adjourned on the
understanding that members of the Council should hold
themselves available for an urgent meeting of the Council
before Monday afternoon, 5 June, in case of any new
developments which might require the convening of the
Council.
4. At 3.10 this morning, the Permanent Representative of
Israel to the United Nations informed me officially, in my
capacity as President of the Security Council, as follows:
“1 have just received reports that Egyptian land and air
forces have moved against Israel and Israel forces are now
engaged in repelling the Egyptian forces.”
5. The Israel Permanent Representative told me that he
wished to make an urgent communication about this to the
Security Council when it was convened. He then read the
following communiqud from the Israel Defense Forces:
“Since the early hours of this morning fierce fighting
has broken out between Egyptian air and armoured
forces, which moved against Israel, and our forces,which
went into action to contain them.”

,etter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council‘ (S/791 0)

6. At 3.30 this morning the Permanent Representative Of
the United Arab RepubliC informed me as follows:

, The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
reviously taken by the Council, and with the consent of
le Council, I now invite the representatives of Israel, the
lnited Arab Republic, Jordan, the Syrian Arab Republic,
ebanon, Iraq, Morocco, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait to take

“Israel has committed a treacherous premeditated
aggression against the United Arab Republic this morning.
The Israelis launched attacks against the Gaza Strip, Sinai,
airports in Cairo, in the Suez Canal area and severalother
airports within the United Arab Republic. Preliminary

reports indicate that twenty-three Israel airplanes have
been shot down and that several Israel pilots have been
captured.

denied the report of the raid on Cairo. The United Arab
Republic authorities also informed General Rikhye that at
0800 hours local time Israel forces had attacked El Kuseima
in Sinai. At 0915 hours local time, United Arab Republic
artillery in Gaza started firing towards Israel-controlled
territory. Firing stopped at 0930 hours local time, but
resumed again at 1000 hours local time. The Commander of
UNEF is taking all possible steps to ensure the security of
UNEF personnel still in the area.

“In repelling this aggression, I wish to inform you, upon
instructions from my Government, that it has decided to
defend itself by all means, in accordance with Article 51
of the Charter of the United Nations.”
7. Information
which I have received from the Secretary
General confirms that exchanges of fire and air activity
have been going on in the area since the early hours of this
morning.

14. General Bull, Chief of Staff of UNTSO, has informed
me that firing in Jerusalem commenced at 1125 hours local
time and was continuing. General Bull requested an
immediate cease-fire at the highest local levels. The senior
Jordanian delegate to the Israel-Jordan Mixed Armistice
Commission accepted a cease-fire for 1200 hours local time.
In a meeting between General Bull and the Israel authorities
on the morning of 5 June, General Bull was informed that
United Arab Republic planes had crossed the border and
that Israel aircraft had been sent to meet them.

8. In the light of that information I felt it my duty, in the
exercise of my responsibilities as President of the Security
Council, to convene the Council for this urgent meeting.
9. I now calI ‘upon the Secretary-Genera1 to make a report
on the actual situation in the area.

15. At 1145 hours local time, Israel informed General Bull
of its acceptance of his request for a cease-fire at 1200
hours local time, Most firing had ceased by 1210 hours
local time, although a few mortar rounds continued to be
fired from Jordan and near Mount Scopus. One mortar
round landed in the Government House compound, which
is the headquarters of UNTSO. No casualties are reported.

10. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Mr. President, in response to your invitation I present to the Council all the
information
that I have received from United Nations
sources in the Middle East on the outbreak of hostilities. Of
course, the United Nations sources have no means of
ascertaining how the hostilities were initiated. As usual,
reports coming from the parties are conflicting, but all
agree that serious military action on land and in the air is
taking place at a number of points and is spreading.

16. Since sporadic mortar firing from Jordan continued
after the cease-fire, a second cease-fire was proposed for
1230 hours local time and accepted by both sides.

11. I have instructed both the Chief of Staff cf the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) and the
Commander of the United Nations Emergency Force
(UNEF) to keep reporting urgently all information available
to them and I shall keep members of the Council informed
as new information comes in. This information is unavoidably fragmentary.

17. On the Israel-Syrian armistice demarcation line,
United Nations military observers reported overflights by
Syrian jet fighters between 1155 hours and 1206 hours
local time on 5 June and reported air battles, anti-aircraft
fire and explosions from aircraft bombing. The senior Israel
delegate to the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission
informed the UNTSO officer-in-charge at Tiberias, at 1218
hours local time, that Israel considered itself in a state of
war with Syria. The Chairman of the Israel-Syrian Mixed
Armistice Commission reported that Damascus airport was
being attacked by Israel aircraft at 1110 hours local time.

12. As far as information
from the United Nation,s
Emergency Force is concerned, it must be remembered that
the Force is no longer on the Line, but is concentrated in
its camps and is in the process of withdrawal. The
information
given by the Commander of the Emergency
Force is therefore, of necessity, somewhat general, and
much of it has been given to the Commander by the Ur&ed
Arab Republic liaison service in Gaza.

18. The Commander of UNEF reported that at 1245
houi~ local time Israel artillery opened fire on two camps of
the Indian contingent of UNEF which were in the process
of being abandoned, and soon thereafter United Arab
Republic tanks surrounded one of the camps which S@
contains one reduced Indian company. Orders have been
given for the Indian personnel in both camps to be
withdrawn immediately.

13. General Rikhye, Commander of UNEF, reported that
at 0800 hours local time today two Israel aircraft violated
United Arab Republic air space over Gaza town. One of
these aircraft was shot down by anti-aircraft fire and fell
into the sea. The pilot bailed out and was picked up by a
motor-lauch. Also at 0800 hours local time, two Israel
aircraft violated United Arab Republic air space over El
Arish and were fired on by anti-aircraft guns. The United
Arab Republic claims one Israel aircraft was shot down.
Personnel of the Emergency Force in Rafah Camp reported
heavy firing between United Arab Republic and Israel
forces across the international frontier south of Rafah,
starting at 0800 hours local time. United Arab Republic
authorities in Gaza informed General Rikhye of a largescale Israel air raid throughout the United Arab Republic
including a raid on Cairo. I am informed that Israel has

19. General Rikhye also reported that a UNEF convoy
immediately south of Khan Yunis on the road between
Gaza and Rafah was strafed by an Israel aircraft on the
morning of 5 June, although the vehicles, like all UNEF
vehicles, are painted white. First reports indicate that three
Indian soldiers were killed and an unknown number
wounded in this attack, The Commander of UNEF has sent
an urgent message through the Chief of Staff of UNTSO to
the Chief of Staff of the Israel Defence Forces urging him
again to give orders to Israel Armed Forces to refrain from
firing on UNEF camps, buildings and vehicles.
2

20. After hostilities began on the morning of 5 June, the
Chief of Staff of UNTSO drew the attention of Israel and
Jordan to the inviolability of the Government House area
and asked them to ensure that this inviolability would be
fully respected. Both sides gave him the required assurance.
However, at 1330 hours local time today approximately
one company of Jordanian soldiers occupied the garden of
the Government House. General Bull in person protested to
the Commander and asked him to withdraw his troops. He
also protested in the strongest terms to the senior Jordanian
delegate to the Israel-Jordan Mixed Armistice Commission
against the violation of United Nations premises by
Jordanian soldiers, whose withdrawal within half an hour
he demanded. He also informed the Israel authorities of
these developments and requested them to ensure that
Israel soldiers would not enter the Government House area.
By then an exchange of fire had already begun between the
Jordanian soldiers in the Government House garden and
Israel soldiers nearby. General Bull later ihformed me by an
emergency message that Jordanian troops had not withdrawn and were demanding to enter Government House
itself and had demanded that no telephone calls be made
from Government House. Firing was continuing and mortar
shells were now landing within the Government House
compound. United Nations Headquarters lost radio contact
with UNTSO headquarters in Jerusalem at 0852 hours New
York time, at which time Jordanian troops occupied
Government House.’ This also means that United Nations
Headquarters has lost direct contact with headquarters
UNEF, whose messagesare routed through UNTSO.
21, In view of these developments I have addressed the
following urgent appeal to the King of Jordan:
“His Majesty
“King Hussein
“Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
“Amman, Jordan

I thank the Secretary-General for

23. The representative of India has asked to make a brief
statement. The member of the Council whose name is on
my list of speakers has yielded so that the representative of
India may now make this brief statement. I call on the
representative of India.
24. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): We are meeting at a
grave hour. We have listened to the sombre report presented
by the Secretary-General on the serious developments in
the Middle East. I shal1 speak again on this situation, but
my purpose in intervening now is to express our profound
shock and grief at learning from the Secretary-General that
three members of the Indian contingent of the United
Nations Emergency Force have been killed and an unknown
number wounded in a wanton strafing attack by Israel on
the withdrawing columns of these forces.
2.5. Our soldiers went to the area ten years ago assentinels
of peace and in the service of the international community.
That Israel armed forces should have attacked treacherously
and brutally these soldiers of ours makes them martyrs in
the cause of peace. We condemn this Israel action and
protest most vigorously against it. I reserve my Government’s right to take further action in accordance with
international law and practice.
26. All I can say now is that my Government feels that the
Council should condemn this wanton, irresponsible and
brutal action by the ruling circles in Israel. I hope that
henceforth the security of the remaining UNEF forces in
the processof withdrawal will be safeguarded.
27. The PRESIDENT: The members of the Council have
heard the officia1 communications which I have received
from the Permanent Representatives of Israel and the
United Arab Republic, and the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the actual situation in the area, in so far as it has
been possible to collect information through the means at
the disposal of the Secretary-General.

“Your Majesty,
‘? have just been advised at 0900 hours local time that
ail communications with Government House have ended
because of its occupation by Jordanian troops. This is a
breach of extreme seriousness. I appeal to Your Majesty
with utmost urgency to order the immediate removal of
Jordanian troops from the grounds and buildings of the
Government House compound in Jerusalem. As Your
Majesty knows, this compound has been respected’by
both parties to the Hashernite Kingdom of Jordan-Israel
Mixed Armistice Commission as the headquarters of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization and therefore under the exclusive United Nations occupation and
control.

28, The representatives of Israel and the United Arab
Republic have asked to make statements to ,the Council. I
would suggest that the‘best course we might follow under
the prevailing circumstances would be for the Council to
hear the two parties and then to have a short recess for
urgent consultations among the members as to the course
of action to be taken by the Council in this emergency
situation, If there is no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agreesto follow this procedure.
It wassodecided.

29. I now invite the representative of Israel to take a place
at the Council table in order to make his statement.

“U THANT
“‘Secretary-General

22. The PRESIDENT:
his report.

of the United Nations”

1 In the interest of historical accuracy, it is to be noted that the
report that Jordanian troops had “occupied” Government House

30. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): I wish to draw the Council’s
attention to the grave news that fighting has erupted on
Israel% frontiers and that the Israel Defence Forces are now

was originally based on incomplete information owing r0 a
communications breakdown caused by the eventsin the Govern-

Government House on 5 June 1967 were as follows: at approxi-

actual facts as regards the reported entry of Jordanian

by UNTSO staff to leave the building after about ten minutes.

ment Housearea,On the basisof a review of events anda checking mately 1445 hours local time, three Jordanian soldiers entered
with the Chief of Staff of UNTSO, it was later determined that the
Government House over the protest of UNTSO, but were persuaded
trOOpS

into

3

Cairo, right in the heart of the United Arab Republic,
airports in the Suez Canal area, far away from the
demarcation lines, and other airports have been bombarded
since the early morning of today. The preliminary reports
indicate that dozens of Israel airplanes were shot down and
several pilots captured.

repelling the Egyptian Army and Air Force. I have SOfar
received only first reports about the developments. From
these it is evident that in the early hours of this morning
Egyptian armoured columns moved in an offensive thrust
against Israel’s borders, At the same time Egyptian planes
took off from airfields in Sinai and struck out towards
Israel. Egyptian artillery in the Gaza Strip shelled the Israel
villages of I&s&m, NahaldOz and Ein Hashelosha. Netania
and Kefar Yavetz have also been bombed. Israel forces
engaged the Egyptians in the air and on land, and fighting is
still going on.

37. This treacherous aggression was accompanied by other
acts of aggression in Gaza and Sinai, and heavily against
Khan Yunis. One of the captured pilots was interrogated
and appeared on United Arab Republic television, admitting that he was earlier instructed to attack Cairo airport
today at G o’clock in the morning, Cairo local time.

3 1. This is a situation of the utmost graVity.
TfiOUgll
the
reports in my possession are incomplete, one thing is
already clear: the huge armies which Egypt had concentrated in Sinai in the last fortnight are now carrying out the
order of the day of their commander, General Mortagi, who
said on 3 June:

38. The Israelis, moreover, in an attempt to block the
Suez Canal and thereby hinder world navigation in that
waterway, have bombed a tanker in the canal.
39, Reports indicate that the dimensions of the Israel
attack are so wide that no one can doubt the premeditated
nature of this aggression, Israelis are attacking, all of a
sudden and simultaneously, the Gaza strip, Sinai, Cairo
airports, and Sharm el Sheikh, together with other places.
And yet we have just been told that the Israelis did not
initiate any action and that they were in fact attacked by
us.

“The eyes of the whole world are on you in your
glorious war against the Israelis’ aggressivenesson the soil
of your homeland, hoping to see the outcome of your
holy war in victory for the rights of the Arab people.
“The outcome of this special moment is of historic
importance for our Arab people and its holy war for
restoring the rights of the Arabs which were plundered
from them in Palestine. Reconquer the stolen land with
God’s help and the power of justice and with the strength
of your arms and your united faith.”

40. These Israel manoeuvres are not new. The happenings
of the early hours of the day indicate beyond doubt that
the Israelis have, as usual, engineered and planned this
aggression of today,

32, The Egyptian forces met with the immediate response
of the Israel Defence Forces, acting in self-defence. In
accordance with Article 51 of the Charter, I bring this
development to the immediate attention of the Security
Council:

41. We cannot but recall history, which is in fact repeating
itself today, The world has indeed not forgotten the black
days of 1956 when Israel, in defiance of all norms of law
and decency and in flagrant contravention of the United
Nations Charter, planned and engineered the treacherous
aggression of those evil days against my country. At that
time also they said that they were the victims - in essence,
the same story. But who is not aware of the facts, the real
and staggering story?

33. The Israel Minister of Defence addressed the following
messageto the Israel Defence Forces:
“Soldiers of the Israel Defence Forces: We have no aim
of conquest, Our sole objectives are to put an end to the
Arab attempt to conquer our land and to suppress the
blockade and the belligerence mounted against us. Egypt
has recruited and taken command of the armed forces of
Syria, Jordan, and Iraq. Military units from *Kuwait to
Algeria have joined them. Their numbers are greater than
ours, but we will prevail over them. We are a small but
brave people. We want peace, but we are ready to fight
for our land and our lives.”

42. They are repeating themselves in this, They are
continuing their defiance of the United Nations and its
Charter, in accordance with their designed policy. This
happens at a time when the Council has been thoroughly,
actively and constructively engaged in finding a way for
securing the utmost restraint and in seeking a method to
avoid any actions that would aggravate the situation.
43. While we in the United Arab Republic, both within
and without this Organization, have declared our intention
not to initiate any offensive action and have fully cooperated in the attempts that were made to relieve the
tension in the area, Israel has never reciprocated this
declaration of ours.

34. I am, to the best of my ability, remaining in
communication with my Government in Jerusalem and I
shall keep the Council informed of further developments,
35. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the repreqntative of
the United Arab Republic and ask him to take his seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

44. We have, furthermore, requested formally that the
Council examine the status of the Egyptian-Israel General
Armistice Agreement and we have, moreover, proposed
definite measures to bolster the United Nations machinery
in the area in an endeavour to lessen the tension and keep
the peace. This, as you know, was not the view of Israel.

36. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): At this
moment while I am addressing the Security Council, and
for several hours now, the Israel Armed Forces and the
Israel Air Force have again committed a cowardly and
treacherous aggression against my country, Airports in
4

45, You all know, as’was announced yesterday, that the
Vice-President of the United Arab Republic, together with
the Deputy Prime Minister for Foreign Affairs, was
scheduled to arrive in Washington the day after tomorrow
for talks on the subject. This amply proves our peaceful
intention and goodwill.

Egyptian El Mureig airfieiu, his unit Carried attack from
Israel military airfield Jackor. This clear evidence proves
Israel started aggression.”
51. Without entering into the details of the Secretary.
General’s factual report, I would ask: Is there any doubt
about the movements and actions committed by Israel? I
submit that the report speaks for itself, as it makes clear
that the Israel Air Force started this aggression at S a.m.
local time, which coincided with the bombing of Cairo
airports, proving that this wasa concerted and co-ordinated
aggression.

46. The record of my country is known. The shameful
record of the Israelis is vivid in our minds. They have
established their policy on aggression, premeditated aggression, and again today the evidence indicates beyond doubt
that the aggression of today was a further calculated,
premeditated and carefully planned one,

52. Moreover, the Israelis not O&J committed aggression
against the inhabitants of the Gaza strip, but also attacked
the United Nations Emergency Force. I beg the Indian
delegation to accept our profound expression of sympathy;
we hope that the condolences of our delegation will be
conveyed to the families of the victims,

47. I have just received the following information by cable
from my Government, and with your permission, Mr.
President, I shall read it to the Council. My Foreign
Ministry has announced the following statement:
“Israel conspiracy getting clearer. While Israel started
aggression today, morning, on United Arab Republic by
air raiding airports Cairo and Suez Canal zones, Israel
United Nations delegate claimed United Arab Republic
started aggression trying deceiving world and putting
responsibility of starting fighting on United Arab Republic. But Israel conspiracy started getting clearly
uncovered after few hours as Israel aircraft attacked
French tanker crossing Suez Canal; United Arab Republic
air forces repelled them, forcing them to flee. It is dear
Israel aims at two objects: first, hampering navigation
through Suez Canal, second, pulling third party into
conflict. United Arab Republic draws attention all nations to Israel conspiracy and clarify the Israel aggressive
objectives towards Suez Canal and its pulling other parties
into armed conflict which Israel started.”

53. In view of this treacherous aggression, my country
has no other choice than to defend itself by all means at its
disposal, in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations. We will most certainly continue to do
so. This aggression should be vigorously condemned by the
Security Council.
54. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now, in accordance with the decision already taken, recessfor urgent
consultations. I would ask all members of the Council to
hold themselves available for these consultations.
The meeting was suspended at 11.15 a.m. and resumed at
10.20 p.m.

55. The PRESIDENT: I should like first to draw the
attention of the Council to the supplemental information
submitted by the Secretary-General in document S/7930, a
report which only stressesthe very grave situation pmvailing in the Middle East.

48. I shall read out another statement from the Foreign
Ministry:
“Foreign Minister received French Ambassador to Cairo
and made clear Israel started aggression today on United
Arab Republic as Israel Air Force raided Egyptian
airports in Cairo and Suez Canal zone; also made clear
Israel Air Force attacked French tanker while crossing
Suez Canal. Foreign Minister made clear that Israel tries
putting responsibility
on United Arab Republic for
starting aggression, also hampering navigation through
Suez Canal and pulling third party into current armed
conflict .”

56. I do wish to apologize to members of the Council for
having kept them waiting most of the day. I had hoped
indeed that the recess would be considerably shorter.
However, consultations are still going on; they have been
going on the whole day without any recess.They are still
going on, as I have said, and will continue tomorrow
morning.
57. I understand that it is the wish of members of the
Council that we should adjourn now until tomorrow
morning at 11.30. I would ask members of the Council to
hold themselves available for consultations about an hour
before the scheduled time of the meeting tomorrow
morning.

49. I should also like to read out the following statement:
“Foreign Minister informed United States Ambassador
to Cairo that Israel started aggression this morning on
Baited Arab Republic by air raiding Egyptian airfields in
Cairo and Suez Canal zone and that our armed forces
repelled aggressors.”

58. If there is no objection, I shall take it that it is so
decided.

50. The following is a military announcement:

It was sodecided.’

“Nine Israel pilots were captured. Israel Captain Lavo
Mervekhay confessed his unit received orders to attack
United Arab Republic at 6 a.m. today; task was attacking

The meetingroseat lo.25 p.m.

5

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United

Nations
publications,may
world,
Consult
your
bookstore
or Geneva.

the

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publications
der
d6positaires
du monde
Notions
Unies,
Section

Litho

in

U.N.

Notions
Unier
sent
entier.
Informer-vour
des venfes,
New York

nOJlYql4Tb

M3AAHMfl

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Las

publicacioner

be obtained
or write

de

les

Naciones

$U.S.

DES NATIONS
en

and

distributors
Sales Section,

throughout
New York

UNIES

dons
de votre

les libratries
et les ogencer
librairie
ou adressez-vous
6:

ou Gen&ve.

06bEAMHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES
Unidas

0.50

vente

qup&r

OPrAHMSAlJ,MM

del mundo.
Consulte
York o Ginebro.

Price:

from
bookstores
to: United
Nations,

LES PUBLICATIONS

KAK

en todos
porter
Ventos,
Nueva

PlJ8LlCATlONS

est6n

en venta

a su librero

o dirijose

(QI equivalent

HAL&ifi

UNIDAS
en

in other

librerios

y cosar

a: Nacioner

currencies)

Unidar,

dittribuidoros
Secci6n

de

08353-November

1970-2,100
