United Nations

S/PV.6625

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6625

th meeting
Thursday, 29 September 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Salam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lebanon)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Mashabane
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2011/590)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-52328 (E)

*1152328*

S/PV.6625

highly respected by us all, was a shock to all of us. But
Afghanistan and the Afghans have shown so many
times over thousands of years the capacity to recover
again and again from tragic and sad losses, and we
know and feel that their resolve in the search for peace
will not be deterred. That was said recently by
President Karzai himself.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2011/590)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Security Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the representatives of
Afghanistan, Australia, Canada, Japan, Kyrgyzstan,
Pakistan and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Zalmai
Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, Acting Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/590, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I shall now give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: I thank Minister Rassoul for
being with us today. His presence sends a strong signal
at a time when, as the Lebanese presidency has
reminded us, Afghanistan is going through a terrible
time. His presence reminds us of the departure of
Mr. Rabbani, and we need to hear from him about how
Afghanistan will once again confront a difficult
moment.
We meet today at a sad moment indeed for the
people of Afghanistan. The recent killing of former
President and head of the High Peace Council,
Mr. Rabbani, who was a friend to many of us and

2

It remains unclear who was behind this attack. As
Mr. Rabbani’s son said at the funeral in Kabul, we
must continue to work for peace — the same peace that
Mr. Rabbani had started and to which he had
committed himself and sacrificed his life in his role as
Chairman of the High Peace Council. History shows
that reconciliation efforts are particularly vulnerable to
attack when they start to gain traction and precisely for
that reason. In recent years, there has been increased
interest shown by many relevant parties in the idea of a
peace process. Under Mr. Rabbani’s leadership, the
High Peace Council in fact started to generate a form
of dialogue that was definitely needed to address the
trust deficit before talks could become more concrete.
The road to peace is never smooth. We know that.
The death of Mr. Rabbani is not the end of the peace
process. That has been said by many Afghans, in
particular the highest authorities of the country. This is
a moment for the Afghans to recalibrate — a moment
that calls for national unity among the leaders and
people of Afghanistan as they again endure another
tragic loss.
I myself was recently invited to a showing of an
Afghan film celebrating the achievements of four
young Afghans who, with no previous experience and
without the support of outsiders, were able to
overcome the highest physical obstacle in Afghanistan
to become the first team of Afghans to stand on the top
of Mount Noshaq, the highest mountain in the country.
That serves as a reminder to all of us that the Afghan
Government and people, with the support of others like
us, will eventually be able to work together to find a
peaceful solution to their problems.
There is no alternative to a political solution.
There is a window of opportunity, albeit very narrow
and clearly fragile, for talks to begin, and we need to
pursue it. Peace is not an event but a process that, if it
is to be sustainable and deliver lasting results, must be
broad-based and include Afghans from all walks of
life, including civil society. The priority must continue
to be a dialogue among and led by Afghans themselves,

11-52328

S/PV.6625

with non-Afghans like us playing a supporting role, if
and when required.
At the national level and as proof of its continued
commitment to searching for peace, we support the
Afghan Government and hope that it will proceed with
the swift appointment of an authoritative voice not to
replace Mr. Rabbani — who is not replaceable — but
to persist in the efforts he led within the High Peace
Council.
Peace efforts are also very much about redressing
local grievances. Here, I should like to pay my respects
to and single out Minister Stanekzai, who is a friend to
whom we wish a swift recovery from his wounds. His
efforts to advance the Afghan Peace and Reintegration
Programme as a critical process at the local level have
been crucial and need to continue as a dispute
resolution mechanism, in addition to other, similar
mechanisms. That is why we wish to praise and
commend the timely convening of a recent conference
on the Afghan Peace and Reintegration Programme in
Kandahar, which offered an opportunity to further
promote reintegration, particularly in the South where,
in all frankness, there has been less progress than in the
northern part of the country.
Furthermore, regarding the Programme, we
should remain vigilant in ensuring a proper and
rigorous vetting mechanism. Our memories of the
tragic events in Kandahar, along with our experience in
Mazar-e-Sharif and now with Mr. Rabbani, remind us
of how important vetting can and should be.
On a positive note with respect to the Afghan
National Police and the Afghan National Army, we
have noticed increasing positive progress in the
development of both institutions. They have been
showing that they are capable of taking on more
security responsibilities and of becoming more selfsustaining. That is why, in spite of all these incidents,
the transition is going forward. Recent security
incidents, while regrettable due to the loss of life, have
also shown the increased ability of the Afghan national
security system to manage such incidents in a
controlled and proportionate manner. I shall give
another personal example of that, if I may.
In August, among the many attacks that had taken
place, there was an attack in Abdul Haq Square that
lasted several hours. On that occasion, a Lieutenant
Colonel who was the chief police officer in the area
embraced the suicide attacker who was moving

11-52328

towards the people in the square; he exploded with him
and died. In doing so, he saved many lives, including
those of his own team. These are the types of incidents
that make us foreigners in Kabul feel that it is not mere
rhetoric to say that the Afghan National Police is
growing in the respect it enjoys from the people and in
the fulfilment of its functions.
The human cost in terms of the lives of average
Afghans is still too high, as President Karzai is
constantly reminding us. While security incidents, and
certainly military incidents, may be fewer in
number — and there is no question about that, as
compared with the past — the overall level of civilian
casualties, is still, unfortunately, too high; even one
civilian casualty is one too many. We are increasingly
concerned about the rising number of casualties and
the use of certain tactics, particularly by the Taliban
and by the insurgents, because — and we have been
seeing this — they are indiscriminately targeting the
civilian population.
Errors still occur, but there is an improvement in
the right direction; however, the need for a surge in the
protection of civilians needs to be our constant focus.
The Afghan State, which has done a great deal, must
continue to distinguish itself by putting respect for
universal human rights at the centre of its own policies
and practices, including in the treatment of prisoners
and detainees, an area in which we have already seen
substantial and encouraging movement in the right
direction. And when such progress takes place, we
should acknowledge it, as in the case of the very
encouraging improved regulation on women’s shelters,
which could potentially go a long way towards
protecting Afghan women and girls, who often have
been at risk of violence and abuse.
Today we are having an important meeting at a
very sad and important moment in Afghan history. This
is one of the meetings being held in preparation for two
crucial meetings that will be convened later this year,
one in Istanbul and the other in Bonn. We hope that
they will be an opportunity for a collective
determination to support and reassure the Afghan
Government and people that we will be with them in
the long run. It is our responsibility to ensure that the
upcoming conferences, particularly the two that I
mentioned, are not ceremonial — we know that they
are not going to be ceremonial — but complementary,
substantive and forward-looking.

3

S/PV.6625

The Istanbul Conference on Afghanistan, to be
held on 2 November, will be an important rendezvous
that we hope will represent an opportunity for
representatives of the region to gather in Istanbul with
the intent of setting in motion measures to establish
what is being defined as a benign regional order, one in
which Afghanistan and its neighbours will exchange
mutual assurances aimed at creating a stable and
prosperous heart of Asia.

will also have had other meetings in other forums
where the Afghan authorities and the International
Security Assistance Force will make clear their views
on how to substantially, we hope, increase the
transition momentum; promote support beyond 2014,
because they need to feel that they will not be
abandoned once again; and facilitate whatever progress
has been made, hopefully in the direction of
reconciliation.

Afghanistan feels, and we share those feelings,
that it should not be the subject of but the catalyst for
this conference, at which the region can discuss
concrete, not theoretical, ways to develop confidencebuilding measures aimed at addressing common
challenges. A great deal of constructive work has been
done already, particularly on the economic side. I think
that is what the Istanbul conference aspires to address,
in keeping with the wishes of the Afghan people. We
want to thank the Turkish authorities for their
hospitality and their vision in offering this opportunity
to address political and security issues as well as
economic ones.

There were clouds on the horizon last time I had
the honour and the privilege of meeting with Council
members here. The first cloud was the electoral followup and the parliamentary crisis, and the other was
related to the Kabul Bank. I do not wish to be
perceived as overly optimistic, but I think that I am
honest enough to tell the Council that both clouds are
dissipating.

We believe that the upcoming preparatory
meeting in Oslo, to be held in two days’ time, will
ensure that there is a clear idea among regional players
and others about the possibility of brainstorming on
this issue, so that we can come up with a stronger
declaration, or something along those lines, in Istanbul,
and possibly some type of follow-up structural
approach in order to ensure that whatever is discussed
in Istanbul does not remain just a statement.
UNAMA encourages and supports those efforts,
of which it is a part, while, of course, recognizing the
strong leadership of the two co-chairs, particularly
Afghanistan and Turkey. We support all initiatives,
including the New Silk Road, that are in the interest of
Afghanistan, its neighbours and the broader region, in
areas where we should be investing our attention.
Only trust among Afghanistan and its neighbours
and trust among individuals can create an atmosphere
in which private investment becomes more active and
thrives, as we hope it will.
We are looking forward to the Bonn conference,
to be held on 5 December. It has the potential to have a
historic impact, although, as always, we should be
cautious in our expectations; but our hopes are very
high. This will be a crucial opportunity for assessing
the transition, which is moving ahead. By that time we

4

The first cloud is dissipating thanks to a very
courageous and wise decision by President Karzai.
Indeed, the Independent Electoral Commission was
recognized as the final authority on electoral issues, as
in any other part of the world where democracy is
moving in the right direction. We have therefore come
to the conclusion of a difficult but probably useful trip
related to the electoral process.
I believe that we will be on a much smoother path
for the next elections, whenever they take place,
because recognizing that the Independent Electoral
Commission is the final authority is a very good
starting point for future elections and for the
democratic process of the separation of powers in
Afghanistan, like anywhere else. So there is good
movement in the right direction. Nothing is perfect —
of course, nothing is perfect anywhere, not only in
Afghanistan — but there is movement in the right
direction, and we feel that the cloud is moving away.
On the issue of the Kabul Bank, we see light,
strong light coming from behind the cloud, to the point
where sometimes it does not even look like a cloud,
frankly. There is a possibility of seeing an agreement in
principle on an International Monetary Fund (IMF)
programme, and we believe that can be reached
through the ongoing negotiations. An IMF technical
mission will arrive in Kabul tomorrow, 30 September,
and stay there for 10 days to finalize discussions. The
IMF Board meting is scheduled for mid-November.
That also means that another important element, the
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund, which is

11-52328

S/PV.6625

basically a special window of financial support for the
short-term funding of key national priority
programmes, is looking much more positive.
Additional funds are required, but already many
countries have indicated that they will continue to fund
it while waiting for the cloud to totally disappear.
In that context, I think that, along with my friend
the Minister of Finance, we are likely to be able to
co-chair and convene a joint coordination and
monitoring board, which is a kind of common board
between the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community on joint economic activities,
which has been suspended during this period. We hope
to do this in November, before the Bonn conference.
With respect to the review, which, as members
are aware, we take very seriously — and the Afghan
authorities, rightly, also take very seriously — we will
continue to work to ensure that the terms of reference
are satisfactory to everyone, in particular to the Afghan
authorities, and work in close cooperation with them
and, of course, with full respect for the Security
Council mandate.
On the humanitarian front, although we recognize
that there are many other areas in the world where
humanitarian priorities require the Council’s attention,
we believe that the drought is an issue of concern. The
humanitarian community, together with the Afghan
authorities, will need to keep a close eye on the
situation since, in addition to insecurity, the drought
may produce food shortages. That is why we look
forward to seeing the outcome of the 2011 consolidated
appeals emergency revision, which focuses particularly
on the issue of drought.
With regard to combating narcotics, I will never
cease to remind the Council that current efforts are not
sufficient and that the issue remains serious both for
the Afghans as well as, quite frankly, neighbouring
countries and their people.
Finally, the next three months are likely to be
very challenging. From a security point of view, I am
afraid, the writing on the wall is clear. We will have to
endure, resist and go forward even if a pattern of
security challenges is likely to emerge. We are also
going to have other kinds of opportunities, such as
transition, second tranche, Istanbul and Bonn. When I
will have the honour to return here in December to
deliver my last briefing in my current capacity, I hope I

11-52328

will be able to bring good news. The Afghans deserve
nothing else.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. De Mistura for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Zalmai
Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan.
Mr. Rassoul (Afghanistan): I wish to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, and the Government of
Lebanon on assuming the presidency of the Council for
the month of September. I also thank my good friend
Special Representative Staffan De Mistura for his
briefing and presentation of the Secretary-General’s
report on Afghanistan (S/2011/590).
I am pleased to have the opportunity to address
the Council once again. Today’s meeting takes place
against the backdrop of yet another recent tragedy in
Afghanistan. A little over a week ago, the enemies of
peace in Afghanistan martyred the Chairman of the
High Peace Council, former Afghan President
Burhanuddin Rabbani. Mr. Rabbani will be
remembered for his distinguished service in the cause
of peace in Afghanistan. But I want to assure the
Council that, despite this national loss, our
reconciliation process will continue. On behalf of the
Afghan people and Government, I convey gratitude and
appreciation for the outpouring of condolences and
support received from around the world.
This year is of particular importance to
Afghanistan. First, it marks 10 years since the end of
the rule of the Taliban, culminating in the opening of a
new chapter in our modern history defined by a
concerted effort to achieve what has eluded us Afghans
for too long: peace, stability and prosperity. Over the
past decade, we have come a long way in our joint
efforts and have much to show for our progress in
building our State institutions, in ensuring our people
with essential services, in enabling democracy to take
root and in upholding the fundamental rights of all our
citizens.
Secondly, this year we also embarked on
transition, an ambitious process by which we Afghans
will take full responsibility for the security of our
country by the end of 2014. As President Karzai
emphasized in his statement to the General Assembly
last week,
“With the completion of the transition process,
we Afghans and our international partners will

5

S/PV.6625

achieve the most strategic goal of our 10-year
long partnership: the emergence of a sovereign
Afghanistan that is self-reliant and the peaceful
home of all Afghans; an Afghanistan that is at
peace, and lives in peace with the rest of the
world” (A/66/PV.18).
In addition to solid Afghan national resolve, the
success of the transition process will depend on the
continued support of the international community, most
importantly in building the capacity of our national
security institutions.
Alongside
the
transition
of
security
responsibilities, we are focused on doing what is
necessary to implement the economic pillar of the
transition process. This will be a more difficult task,
requiring more time and the sustained and long-term
engagement of our international partners during and
after the transition process.
In this regard, we are determined to maximize the
potential offered by our natural resources for
strengthening our economy. Furthermore, we have
prioritized attracting foreign investments and building
our infrastructure. Such efforts will enable us to play a
key role in broadening, deepening and strengthening
regional economic integration by reviving our historic
place as the land-bridge between Central Asia, South
Asia and the Middle East. In that connection, we are
pleased that the new Silk Road initiative has gained
momentum. We welcome the constructive discussion of
last week’s ministerial meeting here in New York,
which we co-chaired with Germany and the United
States.
Despite our efforts to stabilize our country,
Afghans are still suffering an endless campaign of
terror carried out by Afghanistan’s enemies. Over the
past months, terrorists have launched sophisticated
attacks, including the raid on the Inter-Continental
Hotel, the attacks on the NATO compound and the
United States embassy in Kabul, and a chain of
targeted assassinations of a number of Afghanistan’s
prominent and high-profile national figures.
The continued spate of attacks, which originate
from terrorist sanctuaries and safe havens beyond our
borders, has generated an unprecedented level of anger
and frustration among a wide spectrum of Afghan
society. Let me stress once again our repeated call for a
definitive end to these sanctuaries, which are not only

6

harming Afghans, but also destabilizing the region as a
whole.
To help end the conflict and meet the demands
and aspirations of the Afghan people for a durable,
dignified and inclusive peace, we will work to bring
back to social, economic and political life all members
of the armed opposition willing to renounce violence,
sever ties with terrorist groups, and accept our
Constitution, including respect for human rights and
women’s rights in particular.
Despite the assassination of Mr. Rabbani, which
was intended to disrupt the peace process, the High
Peace Council will pursue its mandate for peace and
reconciliation. If reconciliation is to succeed, we must
have the support of regional and international partners.
In this connection, I emphasize the importance of a
result-oriented role for the Islamic Republic of
Pakistan. At the same time, we wish to remind the
Council that we are committed at all costs to defeating
those bent on the destruction and destabilization of our
country.
We have an important political calendar ahead of
us. We look forward to the Istanbul and Bonn
Conferences, scheduled for November and December.
In Istanbul, together with the countries that make up
the heart of Asia and other international partners, we
will focus on defining a new vision for regional peace
and development. We will do so by soliciting concrete
commitments to enhancing confidence-building,
security and political cooperation centred around
Afghanistan. A peaceful, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan is not only an Afghan need; such an
Afghanistan is an absolute precondition for peace,
security and prosperity in the region.
In Bonn, we will brief the international
community on our achievements over the past decade,
with a specific focus on transition, reconciliation and
regional cooperation. We will also share our vision for
the 10 years after transition on consolidating our
stability, democracy and economic development.
Above all, in Bonn we will call upon the international
community for continued assistance beyond 2014.
Indeed, Afghanistan is already working with our
friends and allies on mapping out our enduring
partnerships, including with the United States, the
European Union and NATO. These partnerships will
help guarantee our security, stability and future
economic development.

11-52328

S/PV.6625

The United Nations has played a very important
role in our achievements thus far, for which we remain
grateful. On the way forward, this role must be
adjusted to reinforce Afghan sovereignty. We welcome
all efforts to ensure a more integrated, effective and
one United Nations approach, and look forward to the
joint comprehensive review of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. In
that connection, let me thank the Secretary-General
once again for authorizing the joint review.
In conclusion, I thank all Afghanistan’s partners
in the international community for standing beside us
in solidarity as we strive to strengthen the foundations
of peace, democracy and development we have laid
down in Afghanistan. Over the past decade, we have
come a long way in our joint efforts, which is
something we can all be proud of. But we are still not
completely out of the woods. We in Afghanistan are
convinced that, together with the support of the
international community, we will succeed in realizing
our common vision of a peaceful, stable and
democratic Afghanistan, a country that is self-reliant
and a factor for regional and global peace and
cooperation.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan for his
statement.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I wish to thank Foreign
Minister Rassoul for his most valuable statement and,
of course, for his presence here. Minister, it is a great
pleasure to welcome you to the Council today.
I am also grateful to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General de Mistura for his briefing. I
commend him, his entire staff in the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
wider United Nations family for their admirable work,
which was carried out under very difficult
circumstances. The support of the United Nations will
remain absolutely pivotal.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later in today’s debate by the European
Union.
Germany condemns in the strongest possible
terms the murder of the Chair of the High Peace
Council, Professor Rabbani. Allow me to reiterate the

11-52328

heartfelt condolences of the Government and the
people of Germany to the Afghan authorities and all
Afghans. We wish Minister Stanekzai, Chief Executive
of the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration
Programme, and all others who were injured a very
speedy recovery.
Germany welcomes the strong messages sent out
by President Karzai and his Government, at this
decisive moment in their unwavering determination to
stay the course in the peace and reconciliation process.
In that context, I wish to underline the commitment of
support reiterated by the Security Council in its
statement of 21 September (SC/10391).
The International Conference on Afghanistan to
be held in Bonn on 5 December will be a crucial
milestone for Afghanistan, as mentioned by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General de Mistura and
Foreign Minister Rassoul. As I outlined to the Council
in July (see S/PV.6574), a core aim of the Conference
is to further define the future engagement of the
international community, both during and after the
security transition, which will have been completed by
the end of 2014. In Germany’s view, security transition
marks a new beginning in, not the end of, international
support to Afghanistan.
Several factors need to be kept in mind. A clear
and unequivocal message of long-term support to our
Afghan friends is our bottom line for Bonn in terms of
ensuring security, building a sustainable administration
and, last but not least, fostering economic
development.
On that note, we are encouraged by the continued
progress in security transition. While we remain
concerned about the volatile overall security
environment, we note with appreciation that more and
more security operations in more and more parts of
Afghanistan are being handled by Afghan security
forces.
Regional cooperation is of particular relevance
for the success of the international Afghanistan
strategy. Germany strongly supports recent initiatives
to implement previous declarations on goodneighbourly relations. We particularly look forward to
the Istanbul Conference on Afghanistan, to be held on
2 November. Its results will be of paramount
importance for the future of regional cooperation in the
heart of Asia. Germany also welcomes the bilateral
steps that have been taken, particularly with Pakistan,

7

S/PV.6625

such as the recent formation of the AfghanistanPakistan Joint Commission for Reconciliation and
Peace.
As a complement to the ongoing political process,
I would like to emphasize the potential of increased
economic cooperation for positive change in the
region. Only one week ago, in the presence of more
than 15 foreign ministers, 30 delegations from the
region and beyond met here in New York to formulate
their common vision for a New Silk Road to increase
regional economic cooperation with Afghanistan.
That vision requires sincere regional efforts to
become a reality, but it will also need significant
international support over time. Looking towards
Bonn, the Co-chairs — Afghanistan, the United States
and Germany — invite partners to contribute to
charting out options for how best to turn this vision
into a reality, step by step by step.
As I mentioned, the support of the international
community will be required long after the transition
will have ended. From that perspective, our yardstick
must remain the principle of reinforcing Afghan
sovereignty.
In regard to the UNAMA review process
mentioned by Minister Rassoul, and in the light of the
Council’s March 2012 UNAMA mandate resolution,
Germany looks forward to the outcome of the review.
As I said earlier, the support of the United Nations will
remain absolutely pivotal. In that context, we note with
appreciation the continued progress of the United
Nations towards delivering as one.
Let me end by giving three recent examples that
underscore how cooperation between Afghanistan and
its international partners to implement the Kabul
process leads to continued progress on the ground,
every day, despite the volatile conditions in the
country.
First, despite serious setbacks, the Kabul process
itself seems to be getting back on track. Germany
welcomes signs that there is now greater clarity
concerning the next steps that need to be taken before
an International Monetary Fund programme can be
approved.
Secondly, while tensions continue between and
inside the different branches of Government after the
first legislative elections held under Afghan leadership,
there is now a solution backing the authority of the

8

Independent Electoral Commission that offers a
prospect for improved procedures, in line with the
commitments of the Government of Afghanistan to
long-term electoral reform.
Thirdly, the sincere and valuable support of the
Government of Afghanistan for the study undertaken
by UNAMA on the treatment of detainees in several
facilities managed by the Afghan security forces is
highly commendable. This clearly demonstrates the
common interest in the improvement of the human
rights. My Government is strongly convinced that,
once the report has been finalized, the Afghan
Government will find the right answers — and the
international community the right way to support them.
As we continue our support at the Bonn
conference and beyond, Germany will continue to
stand side by side with our Afghan friends.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): My
country also welcomes the presence in the Council
today of Minister Zalmai Rassoul and we thank him for
his important statement.
We would like to also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan
on the basis of the report (S/2011/590) before us.
We share the strong condemnations expressed by
the
international
community
following
the
assassination of former President Burhanuddin
Rabbani. Gabon commends his efforts as Chair of the
High Peace Council and the Government. Once again, I
hope that the Afghan people will continue his efforts in
the passionate quest for peace.
My delegation welcomes the resolve of the
Afghan authorities in seeking to rebuild confidence
following this great loss. The political process of
transition must run its course so that all programmes
can be implemented before the 2014 deadline.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/590)
that is under consideration underscores the significant
developments that have held our attention in terms of
dialogue and reconciliation, the political process,
security, the humanitarian and human rights situation,
governance and the rule of law and regional
cooperation.
At the last debate in the Council, we naturally
emphasized the importance of dialogue and

11-52328

S/PV.6625

reconciliation in this process (see S/PV.6574). That
dialogue must continue to build on confidence-building
measures, and should be inclusive and participatory,
particularly at this crucial time, when the negotiating
terms with all the parties involved must be reviewed.
To that end, my delegation welcomes the Afghan
Government’s readiness, as expressed in the last
general debate, to finally include the Taliban in the
transition process, so that they may play a constructive
role in that process. We therefore call on them to
respond to the hand extended to them. We welcome the
measures adopted by the authorities in the political
arena since the administration’s inauguration in
January. We of course encourage the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative in their support for
those efforts.
The humanitarian situation continues to be a
cause for concern, given the security issues and other
aggravating factors, such as the drought, which
undermine the significant improvements made in this
area. We call on the United Nations and the
international community as a whole to continue to pay
particular attention to this situation.
In order to build on the gains established through
dialogue and reconciliation, it is important that we
continue to work towards the goals of strengthening
governance and the rule of law in the context of the
Kabul Process. Here we welcome the information we
have received from the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul. We also commend the efforts that
have been made in terms of regional cooperation, as
well as the initiatives taken in that area, particularly the
Afghanistan-Pakistan Joint Commission for Reconciliation
and Peace, and, of course, the two conferences to be
held at the end of the year in Istanbul and Bonn.
That said, the terrorist threat persists, and the
protection of everyone involved — civilians, the
political authorities and personnel from international
forces, such as the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) or the United Nations
itself — remains a priority. The situation on the ground
still requires a military and police presence in the form
of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
as well as the Afghan National Security Forces. ISAF’s
mandate is coming to an end and must be renewed. The
tasks it will be assigned for the period to come will of
course take into account the Afghan security forces’
new strategies for securing the territory, strategies
whose preparation we encourage so that effective joint

11-52328

counter-terrorism operations can be conducted with
ISAF through upstream military action and involve the
judicial system in which the perpetrators of these
crimes can be brought to justice.
I would like to conclude by once again expressing
our support and appreciation of UNAMA and NATO
for their important role in supporting a Government
dealing with so many challenges. And naturally we
endorse the Secretary-General’s words of satisfaction
and encouragement to his Special Representative,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and to all the personnel at
UNAMA and the United Nations team for their work
on the ground. Finally, I also commend the
Governments of Turkey and Germany for convening
the conferences to be held in Istanbul and Bonn at the
end of this year.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Rassoul, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, for being here today and honouring us
with his presence. We are grateful for his remarks. I
also thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his briefing and
his continuing extraordinary service. I hope he will
also convey to the staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) the
enduring gratitude of the United States for the
important work they do every day throughout
Afghanistan, under considerable hardship, for the
benefit of the Afghan people. We are also grateful for
the important contributions of Deputy Special
Representative Martin Kobler, who is on his way to
Iraq to take up the post of Special Representative there.
This morning my remarks will focus on security,
upcoming events that frame the 2014 transition, and
the New Silk Road initiative. As we know, the United
States Embassy compound in Kabul was attacked
earlier this month. The Afghan National Security
Forces have responsibility for Kabul, and they
responded ably. They ended the assault on the
Embassy; there was minimal damage to Embassy
property and the compound, and no United States
personnel were killed. However, the insurgent attack
killed five Afghan National Police and 11 other
Afghans, including children.
While the security situation in Afghanistan
continues to present challenges, notably including the
insurgents’ continued targeting of fellow Afghans, our
goal remains to gradually shift to a supporting role as

9

S/PV.6625

the Afghan National Security Forces continue to
develop their capabilities. The deployment of
additional United States military service members,
together with additional troops committed by our allies
and partners, has helped stabilize more of the country
and shifted the momentum away from the insurgency.
Together we have made significant progress. The
tragic assassination of Afghanistan’s former President
and Chairman of the Afghan High Peace Council,
Mr. Rabbani, has only strengthened our collective
resolve. We will continue to work in support of the
Afghan Government and people to end the insurgency,
pursue justice against those who fund, direct and carry
out the violence, and realize a peaceful future for all
Afghans. President Obama has been clear that the
strong United States relationship with Afghanistan will
extend well beyond 2014. We continue to make
progress on our strategic partnership document, which
outlines our long-term cooperation during the
transition period and beyond. As President Obama and
President Karzai reaffirmed in their meeting last week,
we will have a strategic partnership between our
nations that provides a long-term framework for
bilateral cooperation on security, economic and social
development, and institution-building.
As Afghanistan moves towards the 2014
transition, we know that the Government alone cannot
grow Afghanistan’s economy, so we must all continue
to work to create an environment that attracts privatesector investment. Last week, Foreign Minister
Rassoul, the German Foreign Minister, Mr. Guido
Westerwelle, and Secretary of State Clinton met with
27 of Afghanistan’s neighbours and partners to advance
their shared vision of a New Silk Road. The New Silk
Road is an Afghan-led venture, a rallying point for
securing
Afghan,
regional
and
international
commitments to support Afghanistan’s transition and
develop a sustainable Afghan economy that will benefit
the whole region. The creation of a New Silk Road will
help Afghanistan and its neighbours maximize the
value of their natural resources, build human capacity,
create jobs, generate revenue to pay for needed
services and capitalize on the region’s economic
potential. The New Silk Road will also promote
women entrepreneurs, since we know that sustained
and successful development depends on women
becoming equal partners. The international community
has an important role to play in supporting Afghanistan
and the region’s efforts to make this vision a reality.

10

The New Silk Road initiative will reinforce the search
for diplomatic solutions to ending the war in
Afghanistan.
The year 2011 remains a pivotal one. The
international Conference on Afghanistan to be held in
Bonn at the end of the year will be a key opportunity
for the Government of Afghanistan and its neighbours,
as well as the international community, to strengthen
economic cooperation in the region. This will be
complemented by regional efforts to strengthen mutual
confidence and neighbourly relations at the conference
on security and cooperation in Istanbul in November.
We also welcome the start of the comprehensive review
of UNAMA’s mandated activities and United Nations
support in Afghanistan.
We reaffirm our gratitude for the crucial and
continued commitment of the United Nations. UNAMA
is working in partnership with the Government of
Afghanistan for the benefit of all Afghans in their quest
for peace, security and stability. We will continue to
support the Afghan Government and people, regional
partners and the international community as we work
to establish stability and prosperity in Afghanistan and
throughout the region.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. De Mistura for his analysis of
the situation in Afghanistan and welcome the statement
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan,
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul. Allow me through him, to express
our deep condolences to the Government and the
people of Afghanistan for the killing on 20 September
of the Chairman of the High Peace Council and former
President Burhanuddin Rabbani. His death reaffirms
the need to further enhance international efforts to
counter terrorism, which remains the primary
impediment to restoring peace and stability in
Afghanistan.
I should like to say a few words on the security
situation in the country. As we see it, the situation in
many provinces continues to worsen. Extremists are
expanding their activities. The number of killings and
abductions of Afghan Government workers and simple
citizens continues to grow, as eloquently expressed in
the data provided in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/590). The elimination of Osama Bin Laden has
not led to the anticipated breakthrough, as we see have
in particular in the latest spate of terrible terrorist
attacks and killings of senior Afghan officials, in the

11-52328

S/PV.6625

ongoing tensions in Pakistan, and in the increase in
losses of coalition and Afghan troops.
The situation is alarming in areas where
responsibilities for security have been handed over to
Afghans themselves, despite the fact that troops of
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), as we
understand it, are still there and supporting them and
their combat readiness.
There is particular concern about spillover of
terrorist activities from Afghanistan into the Central
Asian States as a consequence of the inefficacy of
NATO’s anti-terrorist activities in Afghanistan, which
are not eliminating the fighters but pushing them
primarily from the southern to the northern regions and
neighbouring States.
We share the concerns of the Secretary-General
with respect to the death of peaceful citizens as a result
of indiscriminate or disproportionate use of force by
those involved in hostilities. Responsibility for strict
compliance with the standards of international
humanitarian law is borne by all parties, including
ISAF.
Obviously, Afghan problems cannot be resolved
by military means alone. In this regard, we support the
efforts of the Government of Afghanistan to establish a
dialogue with the armed opposition. That process must
be steered by the Afghans, and the insurgents will need
to meet three well-known conditions: recognition of
the Constitution, breaking with Al-Qaida and other
terrorist and extremist organizations, and disarmament.
Meeting these criteria is a necessary condition for delisting from the Taliban sanctions list, but no one can
deny the need for the effective maintenance of the
Council’s sanctions as a crucial instrument in counterterrorism.
Terrorism is closely intertwined with drug crime.
Drugs are destroying Afghanistan and posing a serious
threat to countries of the region and to international
peace and stability. We have said repeatedly that the
drug threat needs to be comprehensively countered
with respect to all of its components, from destroying
drug crops and reducing consumption to denying
druglords access to precursors and putting them on
sanctions lists.
In this context, we attach particular importance to
the Paris Pact’s Third Ministerial Conference on Drug
Trafficking Routes to be held in Vienna in 8 December.

11-52328

We hope that the countries represented here will take
part in that conference at the level of heads of foreign
policy institutions.
We welcome the beginning of transfer of security
responsibility to the Afghans. It is too early to draw
any conclusions, but the very fact that this
responsibility is being transferred is critical. We need
to focus on making the process irreversible.
The declared reduction of the number of United
States troops and the gradual transfer to Afghan
security forces of full responsibility for ensuring
security must go hand in hand with appropriate
strengthening of the capabilities of these national
structures. As we see it, candidates for the army and
the police must be closely vetted for loyalty; the
quality of training for security forces must be enhanced
and they must be provided with modern weapons.
The international military presence must be
temporary. A clear timetable must be defined for
drawdown and reports sent to the Security Council on
the implementation of the mandate, which authorized
the deployment of ISAF. The departure of NATO
contingents and their allies should not be accompanied
by the maintenance of any foreign military presence
under any other umbrella, which would further
contribute to tensions in the military and political
situation in Afghanistan and the region in general.
After the withdrawal of foreign troops, it would
behoove Afghanistan, as a founder of the Non-Aligned
Movement, to consider restoring the status as a neutral
State which it had for many decades. That idea has
already been supported in the statements of a number
of key players in the Afghan arena, and in the Astana
Declaration issued on the occasion of the tenth
anniversary of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
on 15 June. Clearly, the initiative is up to the Afghan
people themselves. It is not a matter for the near future,
but for a time when the stabilization efforts in
Afghanistan will have been successfully completed.
But if Kabul already begins to identify the restoration
of neutrality as a task for the long term, it could ease
dialogue on reconciliation with the armed opposition.
Many have noted and we support the idea that
there is a need to promptly relaunch the Afghan
economy. That cannot be done without neighbouring
States, as clearly attested to by the recent spate of
regional initiatives that have been referred to here and

11

S/PV.6625

which will be discussed at
Conferences in Istanbul and Bonn.

the

forthcoming

An architecture of multilateral engagement in
place in Central and South Asia, including the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the group of four comprised
of the Russian Federation, Afghanistan, Pakistan and
Tajikistan. It would make sense to focus partners’
efforts on developing and enhancing these well-proven
structures of regional cooperation. Our view is that the
players external to the region, in their actions in this
area, should in fact respect the decisions taken by the
countries of the region in the framework of these
organizations.
In the context of regional economic development,
we give priority to the CASA-1000 project, which
established a new system of providing electricity from
Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan to Afghanistan and Pakistan,
and to building the TAPI gas pipeline through
Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan and India. We
reaffirm our readiness to engage Russian companies in
its implementation. At the recent summit of the four at
Dushanbe in early September, President Medvedev of
the Russian Federation stated our readiness to invest
$500 million in the CASA-1000 project.
In short, this entire range of problems
demonstrates the magnitude of the challenges facing
the international community, specifically the United
Nations Mission, in assisting and normalizing the
situation in Afghanistan. We hope that the close
cooperation of the United Nations with the
Government of Afghanistan will continue to move
forward and that the assiduous efforts of the
international community and the Government of
Afghanistan will be successful.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to welcome the presence of Foreign
Minister Rassoul in the Security Council this morning
and to thank him for his important statement. I also
wish to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2011/590) and Special Representative De Mistura
for his briefing. We pay tribute to his leadership and
the work of his team in Afghanistan.
I would like to begin by expressing my sincere
condolences to the family of former President Rabbani.
The United Kingdom condemns those responsible for
his appalling and cowardly murder. They took
advantage of Mr. Rabbani’s hospitality and good faith.

12

He was a negotiator and a peacemaker, and his efforts
should have been respected. Those responsible are
sending a signal that they do not want to play a role in
Afghanistan’s future. In the light of this tragic event,
we will want to consider further listings under the
sanctions regime of resolution 1988 (2011), and we
will continue to review very closely any request for
de-listing.
President Karzai and other Afghan political
leaders have pledged to continue the peace process.
This is a sign of their commitment to the Afghan
people. They have made clear that this attack will not
derail their efforts. Instead, they are ready to engage
with those elements of the insurgency that are
genuinely willing to work towards a stable, secure and
prosperous Afghanistan. I commend their stance and
emphasize the United Kingdom’s readiness to support
that work.
Despite this shocking event, progress is being
made in Afghanistan. The start of the transition process
in July saw seven areas begin the process of handing
over lead security to the Afghans. The latest reports of
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
confirm positive progress in these areas, with the
capability and capacity of the Afghan National Security
Forces continuing to improve. The Special
Representative reinforced that message this morning.
The recent attacks on the British Council, the
United States embassy and ISAF headquarters were
shocking, but demonstrated the increasing ability of the
Afghan National Security Forces to respond to such
events. We are on course for the next set of provinces
to begin transition towards the end of this year, and it
is encouraging that ISAF is keen to start the transition
process in the more challenging areas of Afghanistan.
The protection of the Afghan civilian population
remains at the core of our military strategy. ISAF
continues to work to reduce the level of civilian
casualties and has strict operating procedures both to
minimize the risk of casualties occurring and to
investigate thoroughly any incidents that do happen.
This is in sharp contrast to the insurgency, which
deliberately targets civilians and uses violent tactics to
intimidate the population. Around 80 per cent of
civilian casualties are caused by insurgents, and we
continue to strongly condemn all such attacks.
Transition
will
inevitably
impact
upon
Afghanistan’s economy as income sources decline and

11-52328

S/PV.6625

the costs of the Afghan National Security Forces come
under national control. Although revenue is growing, it
will not balance expenditure for several years. It is
therefore vital that the international community be able
to agree on a way to ensure continued funding for
Afghanistan’s security and development needs beyond
2014. Good progress has been made on a new
International
Monetary
Fund
programme
for
Afghanistan, and essential reforms to improve the
banking sector are now being implemented. A final
agreement is possible before the Bonn Conference in
December and will be an important milestone for the
long-term health of the Afghan economy.
As Minister Rassoul and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General highlighted,
we have two major international events that will
consolidate progress already made and set the context
for next year. The Istanbul Conference on 2 November
will be a key opportunity to enhance and expand
regional cooperation. We hope that the region will use
the opportunity to agree on a coherent approach,
building on language of the London and Kabul
conference
communiqués
on
good-neighbourly
relations. We look forward to the Conference, and
thank the Turkish hosts and the Government of
Afghanistan for their tireless work in its preparation.
Following Istanbul, the December Bonn
Conference will send a clear signal of the Afghan
Government’s growing ownership and leadership on its
path to self-sufficiency, and of the international
community’s long-term commitment to Afghanistan
beyond the transition process.
On long-term engagement, we believe that the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) will have a vital role to play both during
and beyond transition, and we therefore look forward
to the forthcoming review of UNAMA’s mandated
activities and United Nations support in Afghanistan.
We urge the review to focus on the post-2014
landscape and on how UNAMA and the United Nations
can support the Afghan Government in bringing about
the emergence of a strong, durable and self-sustaining
Afghan State.
The death of Mr. Rabbani will not deflect us from
our goals. Political aims cannot be achieved by
violence and extremism. The course of reconciliation
and greater political inclusion for all Afghan groups
will continue. The Bonn Conference will help drive

11-52328

efforts forward. I want to take this occasion to make
clear our message to the Taliban that there is no
military solution. Our commitment to Afghanistan’s
security and stability is enduring, and we will continue
to support the Afghan National Security Forces and a
strong Afghan State long after 2015. If the Taliban
believe that peace can be achieved through dialogue,
then now is the time to signal that belief, because the
window of opportunity will not remain open forever.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): My delegation welcomes
Foreign Minister Rassoul to this meeting and thanks
him especially for his very important statement. I
would also like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura for his very
comprehensive briefing.
Our intervention this morning will focus on three
principal areas: security, political post-electoral
development, and economic and regional cooperation.
Nigeria notes with deep concern the deteriorating
security situation in Afghanistan, which to a large
extent continues to distract the Government’s
commitment
and
initiatives
in
the
full
operationalization of the transition and the Kabul
process. The high toll in civilian casualties has reached
an alarming proportion, and this serious challenge must
be met with decisive action through the collaborative
efforts of the international community.
We condemn in the strongest possible terms the
senseless and meaningless terrorist attack last week in
Kabul that resulted in deaths and injuries. In the same
vein, the targeted assassination of former Afghan
President and Chairman of the High Peace Council
Rabbani, who had dedicated his life to campaigning
assiduously for a sustained peace and reconciliation
process in Afghanistan, was indeed a huge blow to the
peace process. This great loss and tragic incident must
not dampen our hopes for a new Afghanistan.
Nigeria reiterates its commitment to supporting
the Government of Afghanistan in its efforts to advance
the peace and reconciliation process, and indeed
supports the efforts of the international community in
combating terrorism. We should ensure that those
responsible for committing acts of terrorism are never
allowed to truncate the cause of peace, unity and
freedom in a new Afghanistan.
It is in this regard that we welcome the
formalization of the agreement to increase the size of

13

S/PV.6625

the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF), which
will enable it to effectively respond to the growing
security threat in the country. In addition, the formal
transition of security responsibility to the ANSF in
some critical areas is a welcome development. The
assumption of increasing control by the ANSF over
Afghan security would strengthen the country’s
independence and development towards long-term
stability. We hope that this approach will reinforce the
capacity of the Afghan forces to maintain security.
Suffice it to say that the transition of the first set of
districts and provinces to full Afghan security control
earlier in the year continues to face significant
obstacles, especially in the area of border protection.
It is gratifying to note that Afghanistan continues
to record positive progress in its reconciliation and
integration efforts, despite the cynical trend of events
in the country. Nigeria reiterates its support for this
process to be Afghan-driven in order to forge the
national unity envisaged within the framework of the
peace process. That process must be further
consolidated by Afghanistan’s democratic institutions
by way of resolving the legislative impasse created by
the announcement of some changes in the membership
of the National Assembly. While we support the need
for Afghans themselves to reach a negotiated political
solution to their problems, the reference point must
remain the application of the rule of law in accordance
with the Constitution. Other democratic and
constitutionally mandated institutions, including the
electoral bodies, must adhere to this ground rule. In
that regard, the pivotal role of women in the peace
process must not be undermined.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) continues to play an active role
in promoting constructive dialogue among all
stakeholders, as well as to assist the Government in its
framework for sustainable peace. We encourage all the
parties to renew their commitment to the consolidation
of the democratic peace process for the attainment of
lasting peace and security.
On economic development, we note the
Secretary-General’s observation that the sustainability
of the achievements recorded in Afghanistan will
depend on the success in strengthening institutions, in
particular at the sub-national level, the creation of jobs
and economic opportunities, and on access to and
delivery of basic justice. Moreover, the Government
will need long-term international support and private

14

sector investment to boost revenue generation and all
its ramifications. We therefore continue to support the
channelling of funds and other forms of assistance
through the Afghan budget system for greater
coherence and efficiency.
We welcome the increasing cooperation between
Afghanistan and its neighbours. Their joint efforts to
combat organized crime, including drug and human
trafficking and arms smuggling, will not only facilitate
the implementation of the Government’s national
priority programme, but also strengthen regional
security. We believe that the Istanbul Conference of 2
November, which has been referred to in various
statements, will provide yet another important platform
to focus on prioritizing areas for regional cooperation.
We extend our appreciation and support to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
De Mistura for his exceptional leadership, and to the
staff of UNAMA and all United Nations personnel for
their renewed commitment towards the sustainability
of a democratic Afghanistan.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): We
welcome the presence at today’s meeting of His
Excellency Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan. We listened with great interest
to his remarks today.
I thank the Secretary-General for his valuable
report (S/2011/590), and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura, for his
informative briefing.
We are deeply concerned about the security
situation in Afghanistan, especially regarding the
continually increasing loss of civilian lives due to
overall intensified fighting. We reiterate our
condemnation, in the strongest possible terms, of
attacks against schools and mosques, and we repeat
that such heinous attacks, which have taken the lives of
children and innocent civilians, are simply not
acceptable.
Furthermore,
we
condemn
the
targeted
assassination of high-ranking Government officials and
prominent political and religious leaders. We also
strongly condemn the recent tragic killing of the Chair
of the High Peace Council, Mr. Rabbani, and a number
of his colleagues. We express our condolences to the
Afghan Government and all Afghan people.

11-52328

S/PV.6625

Despite all these difficulties, we sincerely hope
that Afghanistan is now on the right path towards
sustainable Afghan-led reconstruction of governance
and of its economy, accompanied by the transition of
responsibility over security in the country.
We welcome the formal start, on 17 July, of the
transfer of security responsibilities to Afghan
authorities. The increase of Afghan National Police
forces and Afghan National Army will certainly and
considerably facilitate this essential process, which
should, in the end, bring greater security and stability,
and, consequently, opportunities for the country’s
development.
In that regard, we noted positively the recent
review conference organized by the Afghan
Government and welcome its conclusion that it is
necessary to include governance and development
strategies in transition areas. It is therefore important
that negotiation between the Afghan Government and
the International Monetary Fund soon result in an
agreement, which will protect the interests of the
Afghan people and facilitate the much-needed
reconstruction of the country. Furthermore, in the
context of post-conflict reconstruction, we strongly
support the mine clearance and demining programmes,
and welcome the recent results obtained in the field.
We have always strongly supported the process of
reconciliation in Afghanistan and, in that context, the
role of the High Peace Council. We believe that there is
no alternative to the national reconciliation process. We
commend UNAMA for the continuous assistance it
provides to the High Peace Council through its Salaam
Support Group.
We welcome the increase of reintegrated persons
who have joined the Afghanistan Peace and
Reintegration Programme, and express our hope that
this trend will continue in the future, with even greater
success.
Dialogue and reconciliation must be the priority
for all parties in Afghanistan for the sake of Afghan
children and their hopes for a better future, generations
of whom have already borne the enormous burden of
war. We are also very concerned about the findings of
the research conducted by UNAMA regarding child
recruitment by anti-Government elements for military
and suicide attacks. We call upon all parties to respect
the rights of the child and expect the action plan to

11-52328

tackle perpetrators to be implemented
authorities as a matter of the highest priority.

by

the

We also encourage UNAMA to continue to
observe detention facilities across Afghanistan and to
monitor and investigate arbitrary detention, ill
treatment and fair trial guarantees.
We reiterate our strong support for cooperation
between Afghanistan and its neighbours, and we
encourage all countries to continue strengthening it in
the spirit of friendly relations.
The Afghanistan-Pakistan Joint Commission for
Reconciliation and Peace certainly represents a good
example of how to improve the reconciliation process
in Afghanistan, bearing in mind the economic, political
and trade issues that are being improved with
neighbours.
We look forward to the conferences on
Afghanistan, to be held in November and December in
Istanbul and Bonn, respectively. We thank the Turkish
and German Governments for their efforts and for the
strong support they have given to Afghanistan’s peace
and prosperity.
With regard to UNAMA’s security issues, we
welcome the continuation of the process to upgrade the
physical security of its field offices.
In conclusion, we would like to thank all the
UNAMA and other United Nations staff for their
dedicated work and for delivering on their mandates in
a very difficult environment.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, His Excellency
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, and to thank him for his
statement. I should also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his precise
analysis and description of the situation in Afghanistan
and the prospects for the transition process. More than
a mere bureaucratic report, Mr. de Mistura’s briefing
was the testimony of someone who lives and works
side by side with the people and Government of
Afghanistan in restoring peace. UNAMA’s substantial
contribution to the stabilization and democratization
processes and its efforts to work in coordination with
the Government to lay the foundation for sustainable

15

S/PV.6625

peace and development in Afghanistan deserve our full
acknowledgment.
Colombia deeply regrets the recent incidents and
loss of lives, in particular the assassination of the
Chairman of the High Peace Council, Mr. Burhanuddin
Rabbani, who will be deeply missed by the
international community. We express our profound
condolences. As the Secretary-General has noted, such
attacks may be part of an intimidation campaign to
weaken the reconstruction and reconciliation dialogue.
I therefore welcome the statement made today by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs that, in spite of this and
other violent acts, the reconciliation process will
continue.
It is crucial to strengthen relations with local
authorities and community leaders in order to facilitate
a process of inclusive dialogue that will lead to
reconciliation with all segments of the population. It is
also essential not to waiver in our efforts to create a
climate conducive to ensuring that the transfer of
security sector responsibilities to the Afghan National
Security Forces takes place in keeping with the agreed
timetable, and that the Afghan forces will be able to
assume that leadership by 2014. On that point, the
efforts of the International Security Assistance Force
and the NATO Training Mission Afghanistan will make
a valuable contribution to enhancing the capacity and
professionalism of the Afghan National Security
Forces.
We underscore the timeliness of regional joint
initiatives in order to combat the various dimensions of
the global drug problem affecting Afghanistan and the
region. The Secretary-General noted that while the
eradication of poppy cultivation has increased by some
65 per cent as compared with 2010, the country
remains the main source of opium and heroin. We
agree with the Secretary-General that, given the global
nature of the drug problem, it must be addressed in all
its aspects based on common but differentiated
responsibilities, with the contribution of the entire
international community.
Afghanistan is facing a number of problems that
could threaten the sustainability of the gains achieved
so far. Violence remains a principal factor that has
affected progress and led to an increased need for
humanitarian assistance and increased numbers of
civilian deaths and internally displaced persons. We
call on all parties to the conflict to fulfil their

16

obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law and to take all necessary measures to
ensure the protection of civilians.
We agree with the Secretary-General with regard
to the need to broaden the scope of the transitional
process. While security is essential to restoring the rule
of law, the exercise of fundamental freedoms and
laying the foundation for economic progress,
governance and rule of law are fundamental elements
to guarantee a sustainable and definitive transition.
The international medium- and long-term
commitment to Afghanistan must include aspects such
as strengthened institutions, increased employment and
economic opportunity and access to justice.
Sustainable transition requires State structures able to
guarantee governance and economic stability at all
levels. That must be the aim of the international
cooperation efforts in Afghanistan.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I am pleased to welcome
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul and I would like to thank him for
his statement. I thank Special Representative Staffan de
Mistura for his briefing and for his extraordinary
leadership at the helm of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
I wish to express Brazil’s condolences to the
Afghan Government and people for the brutal
assassination of former President Burhanuddin
Rabbani, Chairman of the High Peace Council. His loss
is a loss to the peace process as a whole. Afghans
should not feel discouraged, however. They must find
the strength in themselves and in the support of the
international community to redouble efforts to promote
reconciliation.
Despite the difficulties, the transition process
towards Afghan security responsibility must continue
to advance. But let us not forget that the military and
political timetables must coincide. Until now, military
developments have outpaced progress in national
reconciliation. We expect all sectors of Afghan society
to continue to seek constructive dialogue.
Recent security incidents demonstrate that,
unfortunately, the tide of violence is not receding in
Afghanistan. On the contrary, rates of civilian deaths
and injuries have risen. Brazil reiterates the need for all
concerned to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and to abandon the use
of tactics that indiscriminately target civilians.

11-52328

S/PV.6625

In our high-level meeting on preventive
diplomacy this past week (see S/PV.6621), many of us
reaffirmed the need to address the link between poverty
and violence. Socio-economic development must be
central to our strategy for peace in Afghanistan. The
peace process will stand a better chance of being
embraced by all Afghans when they are able to realize
that stability brings concrete improvements to their
lives. In that sense, international support must fully
abide by the principles of Afghan leadership and
ownership.
As we approach the end of 2011, it is becoming
clearer that dialogue is the path to a solution for the
conflict in Afghanistan. This path must be strengthened
by all of the means at our disposal. We hope that the
international community will show strong support for
Afghanistan during the Istanbul and the Bonn
conferences. We welcome the focus of the Bonn
Conference on the civilian aspects of the transition,
including mediation, coordination of assistance and
long-term international support to Afghanistan and the
reconciliation process. Brazil will actively participate
in the Conference.
At the same time, the regional dimension of the
Istanbul Conference is particularly important to the
future of Afghanistan. Global solutions to the conflict
will have greater legitimacy and efficacy if
underpinned by the concerns, perspectives and support
of the countries of the region.
Brazil renews its commitment to working
together with the Afghan people and Government
towards a future of peace and prosperity.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. De Mistura for his briefing on the situation in
Afghanistan and Mr. Rassoul for his statement. I
endorse the statement to be made by the representative
of the European Union.
We were obviously shocked and saddened by the
attack that took the life of the former Afghan President
and Chair of the High Peace Council, Mr. Rabbani. The
terrorists are attempting to divert us from our goal;
they must fail. The international community must rally
around the message of unity and determination, as the
Council did on 21 September and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will
continue to do in Kabul. Our aim remains to support
the Afghan Government on its road to fully restored

11-52328

sovereignty in the framework of a consistent and
determined transition process.
As to France, the President of the Republic
announced our intention to reduce and redeploy our
contingent in cooperation with our allies and the
Afghan authorities. On the other hand, in parallel and
in the same context, the civil component of our effort
will gradually grow. France’s engagement will not end
in 2014, but it will have been changed by a friendship
and cooperation agreement between France and
Afghanistan to be signed this autumn.
These major changes are taking place in a
difficult security context, as recalled by the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2011/590). The insurgents
have demonstrated their capacity to carry out complex
attacks at the very heart of Kabul. The number of
civilian victims has increased as compared to the past
year thanks to the Taliban who no longer hesitate to
kill in hospitals and in mosques. That being the case,
the Afghan Security Forces are growing more powerful
and have demonstrated their resolve to fight. We need
to continue to focus on protecting civilians within the
framework of the International Security Assistance
Force. It is just as important to be able to demonstrate
that we are fighting on behalf of values that preclude
any practices that undermine human dignity.
The stabilization of Afghanistan entails its
integration into a regional dynamic based on new rules.
The Conference on the New Silk Road Initiative was
an opportunity to reaffirm the importance for
Afghanistan to once again become the centre of
exchange that it was in the past. With regard to the
ongoing military commitment and a vision for the
economy, there is a need to think deeply about the
regional parameters for security. We welcome the
upcoming Conferences in Istanbul in November and in
Bonn on 5 December, which will help us to move
forward on all of those issues.
At the Kabul Conference last year, the goal of
Afghanization was set forth with conditions — better
management of public finances, reducing corruption,
and the performance of the budget. The international
community cannot continue to effectively carry out its
commitment if those conditions are not met and
agreement is not reached between the country’s
authorities and the International Monetary Fund to
address the Kabul Bank crisis.

17

S/PV.6625

Moreover, Afghanistan cannot allow the
institutional crisis that has been taking place since the
last legislative elections to continue. We note the
announcement
by
the
Independent
Election
Commission to change the composition of the lower
chamber. We call on all Afghan institutions to work in
line with their respective purviews, in the framework
set out in the Constitution and the principle of the
separation of powers. That episode makes it all the
more necessary to carry out genuine electoral reform
with the support of the United Nations.
We are convinced that the United Nations in
general, and UNAMA in particular, will have a major
role to play in Afghanistan in coming years. Its
presence and its mandates will change based on the
transition. We look forward to the results of the
strategic review requested of the Secretary-General in
resolution 1974 (2011).
We would like to conclude by commending the
efforts of Special Representative Staffan de Mistura,
who has led UNAMA with great skill and the vision
necessary to refocus its actions and help it through
dramatic moments. I also pay tribute to the personnel
of UNAMA, who at the request of the Security Council
and UNAMA are working in challenging and
dangerous conditions in favour of the stabilization,
security and development of Afghanistan.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan Staffan de Mistura for introducing the
Secretary-General’s report on that country (S/2011/590).
South Africa also welcomes and appreciates the
participation at this debate of Mr. Zalmai Rassoul,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan.
At the outset, allow me, on behalf of my
delegation, to extend our sincere condolences to the
Afghan Government and people following the
assassination of Mr. Burhanuddin Rabbani, former
President of Afghanistan and Chair of the High Peace
Council. We join other members of the Council in
condemning that assassination in the strongest possible
terms — a malicious attack that is an unfortunate
setback to efforts aimed at political reconciliation.
We note that the report of the Secretary-General
paints a bleak picture, as violence has increased over
the past year. Although Afghanistan has begun its
journey to peace and stability, a number of challenges
remain. Those challenges, in our view, are not

18

insurmountable. With the committed assistance of the
international community, Afghanistan can finally chart
its own path through its own leadership in a process
that is Afghan-led and Afghan-owned.
On the political front, South Africa welcomes the
relatively positive developments that have taken place
over the past few months, especially the announcement
of the swearing in of the nine new members of the
lower house of the Afghan National Assembly. That, in
our view, lays the foundation for the stabilization of the
political process in Afghanistan. We are pleased to note
that the Afghan Government has committed itself to
resolving all outstanding issues within a legal and
political framework. South Africa continues to
welcome efforts to strengthen political outreach
activities. Political dialogue and reconciliation are
critical for the Afghan people and their Government.
The situation of children, youth and women
should continue to receive the highest attention during
this transition. South Africa commends the advocacy
work led by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) within civil society aimed at
involving women in decision-making structures. Our
view is that women have a critical role to play in the
political, economic and social development of the
country.
As we have stated previously, our delegation
continues to believe that there is an inextricable link
between development and security in Afghanistan. We
are pleased that the Afghan Government continues with
its commitment to address the socio-economic situation
facing the country. In that context, we encourage the
Government to increase its efforts aimed at improving
its institutional capacity to offer viable alternatives to
poppy cultivation and narcotics.
National ownership and leadership remain crucial
to political security and socio-economic progress in
Afghanistan. The international community should
continue its supportive role in the country’s transition
from conflict to stability and prosperity. South Africa
therefore continues to support the presence and the role
of UNAMA in Afghanistan.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like others, I too
wish to welcome Minister Rassoul to our meeting
today and to thank him for his very important
statement. I would like to say a special word of thanks
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Staffan de Mistura for his very comprehensive and, as

11-52328

S/PV.6625

usual, very lucid briefing. Let me also once again
commend him, his staff and his team for their constant
efforts and their perseverance in the midst of a very
difficult, dangerous and complex situation.
The statement by Minister Rassoul, the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2011/590) and the briefing by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General have
covered the essential aspects of the situation in
Afghanistan. Portugal naturally associates itself with
the statement that will be delivered later by the
observer of the European Union.
This summer has indeed been a difficult season in
Afghanistan. One of the most disturbing aspects of this
difficult summer — as the Special Representative
underlined — has been the political assassinations
targeting notable figures at the national, regional and
Government levels, of which Mr. Burhanuddin
Rabbani, former President of Afghanistan and Chair of
the High Peace Council, is the latest victim. Let me
reiterate my country’s utter condemnation of that
murder and extend our condolences, through the
Foreign Minister, to the Government and the people of
Afghanistan.
Those assassinations are one more effort to
distract us and the Afghan people from what is
happening on the ground — the gradual normalization
of the country and, ultimately, the defeat of the
enemies of a democratic Afghanistan. As the Minister
has said, however, we are confident that the
reconciliation process will continue and achieve peace
in Afghanistan.
With regard to transition, we note that regions
undergoing that process face, as the Secretary-General
mentioned, resilient insurgency. It is not surprising that
those areas are particularly targeted by insurgents, who
know that the Afghan and international efforts against
them will be judged by how the transition evolves. It is
also natural for national institutions at the security and
public service levels to show themselves in
autonomous action before the Afghan people and to
deliver. In that regard, allow me to quote once more the
Secretary-General’s report, in saying that what is
needed is
“effective governance and delivery of services to
the population. The momentum behind the
security transition should not be at the expense
of, or outstrip, efforts to invest in governance and
development processes”. (S/2011/590, para. 59)

11-52328

We also take positive note of the separation of the
sanctions regimes regarding Al-Qaida and the Taliban
and the de-listing of a number of individuals. We
believe it was a useful measure towards dialogue and
national reconciliation in Afghanistan.
The High Peace Council and the Salaam Support
Group, in which the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) plays an important
assistance role, are an unequivocally valuable tool for
fostering dialogue and outreach inside and outside
Afghanistan. Their relevance has only been reinforced
by the recent attacks on its President. We are sure that
the Special Representative will pursue his engagement
of the High Peace Council leadership, despite the latest
events.
At a regional level, the initiatives of Afghanistan
and its neighbours are noteworthy. Once more
integrated within its region and closer to its immediate
neighbours than ever before, Afghanistan is recovering
its place in the world and widening the horizons of
countless Afghans. The opportunity for business,
connectivity, investment and regional economic
cooperation will, I am sure, strengthen the country’s
independence and institutions and improve the lot of
ordinary Afghans.
Civilian casualties have been increasing in
numbers, notably due to suicide attacks cruelly
designed and undertaken against civilian targets, such
as hospitals and mosques. Those are, by any account,
crimes whose victims require justice and whose
perpetrators renew, at every occasion, their lack of
legitimacy to represent Afghans or Afghanistan.
Moreover, the use of children as soldiers and as
deliverers of weapons and explosive devices by
anti-Government forces is particularly heinous. That
practice, perhaps before any other, must be stopped,
and we welcome the efforts of the Afghan Government
regarding the recruitment and use of children by its
security forces. We hope that further progress can be
achieved within a short time frame.
The protection of civilians needs greater attention
as the numbers of their victims rise. That is a task, I
believe, that is too important and too essential for the
national reconciliation of Afghanistan to be left
without the strong participation, indeed ownership, of
Afghan institutions. Providing relief, care and
compensation to civilian victims is possible and
feasible within Afghan means, legislation and tradition.

19

S/PV.6625

Portugal follows with the utmost attention the
situation of Afghan women, and wholeheartedly
supports the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan
and of UNAMA to promote and protect the human
rights of women and in advocating and monitoring
implementation of the Law on the Elimination of
Violence against Women, as well as in promoting the
political participation of women in peace and
reconciliation processes.
I would also like to mention UNAMA’s assistance
to the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission.
I believe that the mainstreaming of human rights into
the justice system, and the independent monitoring
thereof, will surely reinforce the rule of law and the
legitimacy of the institutions.
I have a couple of words regarding the
humanitarian situation and the counter-narcotics
efforts. Food assistance to hundreds of thousands in
Afghanistan will be needed in the coming months. That
situation, beyond its evident humanitarian dimension,
is an emerging threat to the security situation as well,
as it may very well help in reversing the progress
achieved in counter-insurgency.
As regards the growing opium production, in
itself a very worrying development beyond its
connection to terrorism, Portugal encourages the
Government to pursue its national counter-drugs
policy, but also to seek regional solutions, including by
sharing information, material and strategies, to the
cross-border issues raised by drug trafficking and its
link to other forms of international crime.
I conclude by sharing the Secretary-General’s
view of the requirements for a successful transition: the
recognition that development, governance and the rule
of law are crucial; the need for capturing momentum
and accelerating sustainable development activities;
assessing operational and support costs for
development projects; and long-term international
support and private sector investment.
The coming Istanbul and Bonn conferences will
allow us to start discussing such decisive issues very
soon. They will be the stepping stones towards winning
the battle of peace, stability and economic and social
development in Afghanistan.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to welcome Foreign Minister of
Afghanistan Mr. Rassoul for his presence at this

20

meeting, and I thank him for his statement. I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mr. De Mistura for his briefing.
Through the efforts of the Afghan Government
and people, progress has been made in the Afghan
peace and reconstruction process. The results are
encouraging. However, challenges also lie ahead. The
security situation in Afghanistan remains unstable.
Terrorist attacks occur from time to time. Economic
development is slow. Comprehensive stability and
reconstruction will be a long process. It requires the
unremitting efforts of the Afghan Government and
people. It also needs the continued support and
assistance of the international community. In that
regard, I would like to underscore the following five
points.
First, China is seriously concerned about the
worsening security situation and the increasing number
of civilian casualties. We hope that, in the transfer of
security responsibilities to the Afghan Government, the
parties concerned will earnestly assume the
responsibilities to help Afghanistan strengthen its
security capacity-building in order to ensure a peaceful
and stable transition.
Secondly, China supports Afghanistan in its
continued efforts to push through the Kabul process. In
order to achieve Afghan peace, stability and
development, there is a need to fully respect its
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity so
as to genuinely achieve an Afghanistan run by
Afghans.
Thirdly, China supports the peace and
reintegration programme led by the Afghan
Government. In China, we express our shock and
condolences at the tragic death of former President of
Afghanistan Professor Rabbani following the attack on
him and condemn the attack. China fully respects the
Afghan Government and people in their choice of their
own accord and hopes to see progress in its peace and
reintegration programme.
Fourthly, the international community must
support Afghanistan in its comprehensive economic
and social development. Parties need to deliver and
meet their commitments to assist Afghanistan. The
priorities identified by Afghan themselves in the
context of the Afghan National Development Strategy
must also be respected and implemented. The relevant
initiatives for Afghan economic reconstruction will be

11-52328

S/PV.6625

seriously considered. We believe that we need to fully
heed the views of the Afghan Government and people
and to respect their sovereignty and ownership.
Regional countries must become involved and their
views be fully taken into account. The relevant
initiatives need to be implemented on the basis of full
consultations and consensus among the parties.
Fifthly, China appreciates the active efforts of the
United Nations to push through the Afghan peace and
reconstruction process. China supports the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in its continued leading role in coordinating aid to
support the Afghan peace and reconstruction. We hope
that UNAMA will strengthen its communication,
coordination and cooperation with the Afghan
Government.
As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China is
consistently committed to good-neighbourliness and
friendship between the two countries. China attaches
importance to and actively participates in the Afghan
reconstruction process. China will continue to provide
assistance to Afghanistan within its capabilities, and
will work with the international community to
contribute to an early achievement of peace, stability
and development in Afghanistan.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for scheduling
today’s debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I
welcome His Excellency Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Foreign
Minister of Afghanistan, to the Council and thank him
for his statement. We are grateful for the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2011/590) and appreciate
the briefing by Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Staffan de Mistura.
We are deeply concerned that the overall security
environment in Afghanistan continues to deteriorate.
The latest Secretary-General’s report notes that the
average monthly number of security incidents is up
39 per cent as compared to the same period in 2010.
While the process of transition of security
responsibilities to the Afghan National Security Forces
has been ongoing since July 2011, it is, indeed,
worrisome that there has been no let-up in terrorist
violence.
The Taliban has opted for attacking high-security
targets, assassinations and launching complex suicide
attacks in urban centres, including Kabul. Important
political figures and Government officials have been

11-52328

killed in the recent past, including Ahmad Wali Karzai,
Chair of the Kandahar Provincial Council, and Ghulam
Haydar Hamidi, the Mayor of Kandahar. The
Intercontinental Hotel, the British Council and the
United States Embassy in Kabul have also been
targeted.
We
unreservedly
condemn
last
week’s
assassination of Mr. Burhanuddin Rabbani, Chair of
the High Peace Council and former President of
Afghanistan. Tragically, the forces of terror and hatred
have silenced yet another powerful voice of reason and
peace in Afghanistan.
As we have repeatedly stressed in the Security
Council, such attacks point to a dangerous osmosis of
ideologies, ambitions, training and operations among
the syndicate of terrorism in the region, with suicide
terrorism as its main technique and targets not limited
to Afghanistan. The resilience of insurgents and their
ability to target areas otherwise considered safe and
secure is a grim reminder that the security gains are
still tenuous.
For peace, stability and security in Afghanistan, it
is imperative that the ongoing transition be linked to
the realities on the ground, rather than rigid timetables.
In its hurry to withdraw from a combat role in
Afghanistan, the international community will only
ignore that at its own peril.
The latest report (S/2011/590) of the SecretaryGeneral underscores that, for the success of the
transition, it is important that the Afghan National
Security Forces continue to demonstrate enhanced
independent capability and professionalism to assume
an increasing level of responsibility and accountability.
We support the further strengthening of the Afghan
National Security Forces, which must go hand in hand
with the enhancement of their capabilities and adequate
enablers. It is important that the transition be Afghanowned and planned and implemented in a systematic
manner. It must also ensure the protection and
promotion of the human rights of all Afghans.
For the security and stabilization of Afghanistan,
it is important to isolate and root out the syndicate of
terrorism, which includes elements of the Al-Qaida,
Taliban, Lashkar-e-Taiba and other terrorist and
extremist groups operating within and outside
Afghanistan’s borders. These groups are ideologically
and operationally fused, and their bonds have
strengthened over the years. It will not be possible to

21

S/PV.6625

consolidate the gains on the security front unless the
international community is able to firmly deal with
safe havens for terrorist groups outside Afghanistan’s
borders.
We fully support an Afghan-led, inclusive and
transparent process of reconciliation, adhering to the
red lines enunciated by the Afghan Government in the
Kabul and London communiqués. As we have stressed
earlier, that must be accompanied by an inclusive
political process and intra-Afghan dialogue and include
a renunciation of violence, the cutting of ties to
terrorist groups and respect for the Afghan
Constitutions, with its protections for human rights,
including the rights of women.
Afghan ownership and leadership are also vital to
development and reconstruction in Afghanistan. That
also implies greater coherence, coordination and
further streamlining of the international community’s
development-related
efforts,
including
aligning
assistance with Afghan national priorities and
increasingly working through Afghan institutions. We
are happy to note efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in that
regard.
With the onset of the drawdown of foreign
security forces and the transition process, it is all the
more important for the international community —
especially the countries of the region — to remain
committed in this crucial phase, when Afghan national
institutions are still being developed and consolidated.
It is also important that Afghanistan’s growth
strategy be built upon the country’s comparative
advantage of abundant natural resources and its
strategic geographical location. Those will have to be
the building blocks of our vision for Afghanistan as a
hub lining Central and South Asia through pipelines,
trade and transit routes for the common good of the
people of our region and the world. We support the
New Silk Road Initiative, which is an important step in
that direction.
India remains committed to partnering with the
Government and people of Afghanistan in the building
of a peaceful, stable, democratic and pluralistic nation.
India’s assistance programme is spread across
Afghanistan, spanning almost the entire gamut of
economic and social development activities. We are
undertaking reconstruction and development activities
in Afghanistan with a total bilateral assistance

22

commitment of approximately $2 billion. We have
placed special emphasis on capacity building and
human resource development, which, in our opinion,
are the building blocks for a robust and self-reliant
economy.
Indian companies have evinced interest in the
exploitation of Afghanistan’s iron ore reserves. India is
also participating in the Turkmenistan-AfghanistanPakistan gas pipeline project. Those are projects that
call for large investment. We express our resolve to
cooperate with Afghanistan on plans involving regional
integration for the mutual benefit of all stakeholders.
The South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation, of which Afghanistan is a full member, is
an important vehicle for regional economic cooperation
within the South Asia region. We have always
considered Afghanistan as a South Asian country with
natural complementarities and synergies with other
countries of South Asia, and one that is uniquely
placed to build bridges even beyond it. India’s rapidly
growing economy and its large market make it a
natural destination for Afghan exports. Similarly, India
can be a cost-effective and efficient source of Afghan
imports.
As the security transition moves forward,
Afghanistan needs the long-term commitment and
support of the international community. We look
forward to the forthcoming Istanbul and Bonn
Conferences and the comprehensive review of
UNAMA’s mandated activities and United Nations
support in Afghanistan by the end of this year. We hope
that this will contribute to efforts towards lasting peace
and the stability, economic sustainability and regional
integration of Afghanistan in the years ahead.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Lebanon.
I would like to begin by joining my colleagues in
thanking
Mr.
Staffan
de
Mistura,
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his briefing and his efforts in that
country. I should also like once again to welcome
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, as well as to thank him for his statement
and his presence here. I should now like to make a few
comments.

11-52328

S/PV.6625

With the beginning of the gradual handover of
responsibility for security to Afghan authorities, the
difficult security situation continues to be a source of
major concern for Afghans as well as for the
international community. Undoubtedly, the resolution
adopted to increase the number and preparedness of
national military forces will contribute to improving
the security situation in the country.
In the light of the increasing number of civilian
losses and injuries, we reiterate our call on all parties
to abide scrupulously with the provisions of
international humanitarian law and to do everything
possible to protect innocent persons from violence, as
well as mosques and hospitals, which have not been
spared from attack in recent months.
Lebanon condemns the assassination of
Mr. Burhanuddin Rabbani, former President and Chair
of the High Peace Council (HPC), which was intended
to undermine the efforts made by the Council to
achieve dialogue and reconciliation among all
components of Afghan society. We extend our sincere
condolences to the Government and people of
Afghanistan, including the family of the deceased.
In that context, we call for moving ahead with the
policy of dialogue, reconciliation and confidencebuilding as the only alternative to violence, with a view
to achieving the desired peace.
The sanctions Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) will have an important role to
play in ensuring the success of the HPC in a matter that
is of no less importance than the political and security
situation. We call for decisive efforts to improve the
human rights situation in Afghanistan, particularly by
enforcing the law prohibiting violence against women
and protecting women from injustice, coercion and
discrimination, as our Organization demands. Although
the efforts of UNAMA have yet to stem the tide of
violence and injustice against women, they have helped
to mitigate it. In that regard, we welcome UNAMA’s
focus on situations of arbitrary detention and detainee
abuse and on guaranteeing fair trials, which are
prerequisites for good governance and the rule of law.
Perhaps the most horrendous situation described
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2011/590) is the
ongoing recruitment of children by the various parties
to the conflict for military and even sexual purposes.
We call for zero tolerance for that phenomenon and due

11-52328

punishment for those responsible, with the aim of
preventing such abuse.
I also recall the importance of moving ahead with
the implementation of the provisions of the Kabul
process, and look forward to agreement on the
International Monetary Fund country programme, the
absence of which would adversely affect the
reconstruction and socio-economic development of
Afghanistan.
At the regional and international levels, we
welcome the efforts of Afghanistan’s neighbouring
States to consolidate security and economic
cooperation, particularly with respect to border control
and the fight against drug trafficking and terrorism.
The stability and prosperity of Afghanistan will have
an impact on the region, and we look forward to the
convening of the Istanbul and Bonn Conferences in the
coming months. They represent the international
community’s reaffirmation of its commitment to
supporting Afghanistan.
In conclusion, we reiterate our appreciation for
the efforts of the international community in general,
and the United Nations in particular, in all fields. The
Organization is working with courage and resolve in
difficult security conditions for a better future for
Afghanistan, a country rich in civilization, potential
and yearning for peace and progress.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): Let me begin by
thanking Foreign Minister Rassoul for his presence
today with us and for his statement to the Security
Council this morning. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his briefing today and for
the continued good work being done by him and his
team in Afghanistan.
As we near the end of 2011, representatives from
the Afghan Government, its neighbouring countries and
all their international partners will take part in a series
of regional and international meetings that will
culminate with the Bonn Conference on 5 December.
These meetings will allow us to work together towards
achieving tangible results for the transition of
responsibilities for governance and security to the
Afghan government. The new Bonn Conference will

23

S/PV.6625

also be an opportunity to strengthen our common
vision of a better-governed and more stable
Afghanistan that will never again serve as a refuge for
terrorists.
A sustainable transition of responsibilities for
governance and security to the Afghan Government is
central to this vision and will remain at the forefront of
our efforts. With this objective in mind, we need to rely
strongly on the progress that has been made since 2001
in order to continue to support Afghan efforts towards
political reconciliation, increased regional cooperation,
and strong and more autonomous Afghan institutions
that are able to provide essential services to the people
of Afghanistan.
Through its renewed engagement in Afghanistan,
Canada maintains its fundamental objective of
contributing to the country’s reconstruction as a
complement to the priorities identified by the Afghan
Government and the international community in the
context of the Kabul process in 2010. In this regard, we
are satisfied with the work that the standing
committees of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board accomplished over the summer, and look
forward to the Board meeting scheduled to take place
next month. Canada’s new engagement until 2014 will
build on our significant experience and investments in
Afghanistan to date, and sustain progress in key areas
that are essential to a better future, such as the future of
Afghan children and youth, security, the rule of law
and respect for human rights, regional diplomacy and
the delivery of humanitarian aid.
Children and youth are the country’s future.
Using effective and accountable development
assistance, Canada will continue to invest in education
and health, building on our significant contribution to
date in these areas. Canada will continue to support the
Afghan Government in improving access to quality
primary and secondary education, especially for girls
and young women. We will also continue working on
the transparency and accountability of the Afghan
national educational sector to help foster a secure
learning environment for all children. Today, over
2.2 million Afghan girls go to school. This is a
dramatic increase over the number in 2001, when girls
were forbidden to attend school. Moreover, 29 per cent
of the 158,000 teachers in Afghanistan are women, a
significant increase to the 21,000 there were in 2002.
In the health sector, Canada will help the Afghan

24

Government in its work to improve maternal, newborn
and child health.
Canada is also renewing its commitment to the
Afghan Government and its international partners to
supporting the Kabul process and meet the objectives
of the national priority programmes in terms of
education, health and human rights, especially for
Afghan women and girls. Particular attention must be
paid to the rights of Afghan women in particular. They
are at the forefront of Canada’s development efforts in
Afghanistan. Canada has committed to providing peace
and security to all through its Action Plan for the
Implementation of United Nations Security Council
Resolutions on Women, Peace and Security.
(spoke in French)
The violent incidents that took place over the
summer, including a number of political assassinations
and attacks on civilian targets, as well as the recent
attacks on the International Security Assistance Force,
the American embassy and Afghan security in Kabul,
remind us of the importance of tirelessly continuing
our efforts to improve the security situation in
Afghanistan. To that end, it is essential that we increase
the capacities of the Afghan National Security Forces,
which will assume responsibility for security in
Afghanistan in 2014.
The Afghan forces will soon have reached the
required number of personnel under the objectives of
the NATO Training Mission Afghanistan. The
continued development of professional skills and
institutional capabilities will therefore be at the
forefront of the continued mission until 2014. By
contributing to the efforts of the NATO Training
Mission Afghanistan, Canada will help to implement a
security force with the discipline, professionalism and
efficiency required to ensure the country’s stability and
to promote peace and economic development for the
population.
Moreover, the credibility and professionalism of
the Afghan National Police are essential to the
country’s stability, to the people’s and communities’
sense of security, and to strengthening the rule of law
in Afghanistan and respect for human rights. Canada
will therefore support the training of the Afghan
National Security Forces by providing up to
950 instructors and support staff to the NATO Training
Mission for the next three years. In addition, the
deployment of 45 police officers who will help train

11-52328

S/PV.6625

members of the Afghan National Police will contribute
to these same objectives. It is essential that the
continued support of Canada and the international
community to Afghan transition be based on the
implementation of credible reforms by the Afghan
Government that will strengthen the confidence of
donors, investors and the Afghan people.
Canada is pleased that the transition of
responsibilities for governance and security is already
well under way in a number of districts in Afghanistan.
According to the joint assessment of the Afghan
Government and the NATO mission, the first tranche of
Afghan districts studied have now successfully
assumed responsibility for their governance and for
their security.
That said, stability in Afghanistan cannot be
achieved by military force alone. We strongly condemn
the assassination of former President Burhanuddin
Rabbani, head of the Afghanistan High Peace Council.
That cowardly and brutal act must not slow the efforts
of the Afghan people towards reconciliation. The
political reconciliation efforts led by Afghans must
include dialogue with all stakeholders in society,
including women and vulnerable persons.
Canada supports the efforts being made by
Afghanistan to establish a dialogue with those who
have renounced violence, respect the Constitution, and
have no ties with Al-Qaida or other terrorist groups.
(spoke in English)
It is also by relying on lessons learned that
Afghanistan can continue its progress towards a
transparent democracy that listens to its people. In this
regard, we have noted the great efforts made by the
Afghan Government and all parliamentarians to resolve
the parliamentary election deadlock, and we hope that
these recent developments will finally allow
Parliament to fully assume its role in the governance of
the Afghan State. We encourage the Afghan
Government, the Parliament and all stakeholders
involved to continue their efforts to promote the
electoral reforms needed to further develop democracy
in Afghanistan. Strong, transparent and democratic
institutions must be the basis for the reconstruction of a
strong Afghan Government that is willing to serve all
of its citizens.
Canada also believes that the prospect of a
prosperous and stable Afghanistan is conceivable only

11-52328

in the context of increased regional cooperation and
integration. In this regard, Canada welcomes the New
Silk Road initiative. We are very pleased by the
prospect of helping to further develop this project,
which will be an important element of the Bonn
conference, and this in close collaboration with the
Afghan Government and other international partners.
Moreover, the Canadian Government will continue its
efforts to promote dialogue and propose concrete
measures to improve cooperation between countries in
the region, especially Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Since 2001, substantial progress has been made in
establishing and coordinating regional cooperation and
planning mechanisms. Canada will continue to make
the most of those gains to create a sustainable regional
engagement strategy, notably by supporting efficient
methods of managing the border between Afghanistan
and Pakistan so as to promote legitimate trade.
Regional diplomacy is one of our key priorities for
engagement between now and 2014.
In conclusion, over the past 10 years Afghanistan
and its partners have endeavoured to create an
Afghanistan that is more democratic and more
responsible for its own security and governance. Since
the fall of the Taliban in 2001, 157 members of the
Canadian armed forces, as well as a diplomat, a
journalist and three humanitarian workers from
Canada, have all been killed. It is now up to all of us to
maintain a strong engagement in Afghanistan in order
to honour these sacrifices and those of the Afghan
people, who have fought for peace in the country to
ensure the sustainability of the progress made to date. I
can assure the Council that Canada will not renounce
its efforts to work with Afghanistan so that it can
become a peaceful, secure and stable country that will
never again serve as a refuge for terrorists.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by warmly
greeting His Excellency Minister Ambassador Rassoul
and Special Representative Staffan de Mistura. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2011/590) and the Special Representative for his
briefing.
Before I go any further, I would like to express
once again our sorrow and indignation at the
assassination of Mr. Burhanuddin Rabbani, Chairman
of the High Peace Council and former President of
Afghanistan. We strongly condemn this heinous attack
and offer our deepest sympathy and sincere

25

S/PV.6625

condolences to his family as well as to the people and
the Government of Afghanistan. We also wish a speedy
recovery to Mr. Mohammad Masoom Stanekzai, Chief
Executive of the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration
Programme.
It is incumbent upon Afghanistan and all of us to
make sure that Mr. Rabbani’s death will not have been
in vain. Such attacks will not and cannot deter the
Afghans and the international community from the
pursuit of a peaceful, secure and democratic
Afghanistan. It will certainly take time and dedicated
efforts, but it is critical that credible progress be made
towards reintegration and reconciliation. Thus we
continue to strongly encourage Afghanistan’s regional
and international partners to continue to provide the
necessary support to these efforts as requested by
Afghanistan.
In addition to Mr. Rabbani’s assassination, we
have seen a recent spate of attacks by the insurgents
against high-profile Afghan and international targets,
as also enumerated in the Secretary-General’s report.
These attacks show that the security situation remains
fragile. They are also an indication that recent
developments, both in Afghanistan and in the region,
increase the risks and challenges faced in the transition
process that has recently been put into motion. A
careful handling of these challenges will enable us to
correctly identify the problems and find the necessary
solutions. At the same time, we are convinced that the
response of the Afghan military and police to the
attacks have overall been effective. We consider this to
be an important indicator of the fact that the training
provided to the Afghan National security forces has
begun to bear fruit. We should relentlessly continue our
efforts in this area.

engagement of the international community in
Afghanistan. We have established 2014 as the target
date for the transfer of security responsibilities to
Afghanistan. However, as we have said numerous
times, this is not the date for an exit and the end of our
commitment to Afghanistan. After 2014, the
international community will continue to be engaged
comprehensively in Afghanistan, albeit in a
transformed manner.
Before the Bonn meeting, on 2 November we will
hold the Istanbul Conference on Afghanistan, on the
theme “Security and Cooperation in the Heart of Asia”.
We hope that this meeting will be a milestone event in
terms of charting the way forward for regional security
cooperation.
Afghanistan today is at a critical juncture. It still
faces significant security, political, economic and
development challenges that transcend its borders.
Those challenges cannot be addressed without the
constructive support of Afghanistan’s neighbours and
regional partners. Efforts to meet such challenges are
most effective when they are regionally owned and
driven and pursued in a transparent and constructive
manner. In that regard, the conference will be an
essentially Afghan-led event with Turkish facilitation,
but it will be critical for all participants to display full
ownership, leadership and vision. Therefore, it is most
encouraging that all the participants have told us that
they are ready to show the necessary level of
commitment.

Our common objective in Afghanistan is to
ensure that the Afghans have the means and
capabilities to take charge of their future in a fully and
meaningfully sovereign Afghan State. Afghanistan’s
neighbours and partners have important contributions
to make and should continue their multidimensional
efforts towards the solidification of Afghanistan’s
sovereign institutions.

There have been a number of initiatives so far
that have been aimed at contributing to enhanced ties
among the countries of the region. All of those
initiatives have been pertinent to our joint endeavours.
What we will try to do in Istanbul is not duplicate them
but rather borrow their most useful aspects and try to
build on them in order to achieve complementarity and
added value. What we hope to achieve is the creation
of a regional security and cooperation initiative, with a
view to building greater confidence in the political,
security and military fields and to strengthening
cooperation in the economic, trade, environmental,
cultural, energy and drug-control fields.

Two important events relating to Afghanistan
scheduled for later this year will provide opportunities
to realize these goals. In December, we will meet in
Bonn, at the gracious invitation of the German
Government, to discuss and to define the long-term

As always, we look forward to the strong support
of the international community. We have already
started the preparations and are working closely with
Afghanistan, the United Nations and all other relevant
countries and organizations. As we speak, our

26

11-52328

S/PV.6625

representatives are travelling to Oslo for a preparatory
meeting tomorrow, which will be followed by another
one in Kabul on 15 October. My country remains
steadfast in its commitment to, and support for,
Afghanistan. In that vein, we will do our utmost so that
the conference brings forth concrete deliverables that
reflect Afghan goals and visions.
Last but certainly not least, I would like to
acknowledge once more the dedicated and outstanding
work that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) is carrying out in fulfilment of
its mandate in the face of very real and serious threats
in Afghanistan. We are particularly grateful for the
effective leadership shown by Special Representative
Staffan de Mistura. We are also thankful to him for his
valuable contributions. UNAMA’s work in Afghanistan
is critical now, and will remain so later on. As such,
UNAMA has our full support.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the
Security Council today. I also wish to thank Foreign
Minister Rassoul and Special Representative
De Mistura, for both their presence and their
leadership. Australia continues to strongly support the
work of the United Nations in Afghanistan and
reaffirms its commitment to international efforts in
support of Afghanistan.
A sustainable transition beyond 2014 requires
genuine long-term engagement by the global
community. As our Prime Minister has said on a
number of occasions, we will remain engaged in
Afghanistan through this decade at least. We see that
continuing beyond. Following the conclusion of the
transition in 2014, we will continue to provide civilian
and development assistance, training and other defence
cooperation.
Since the Council’s debate on Afghanistan in
March (see S/PV.6497), we have seen some worrying
security developments, especially the increased
momentum of the campaign of intimidation and
targeted assassinations. Despite these serious concerns,
our own assessment is that the fundamental trajectory
on the security front is in the right direction, which is
why we think that the insurgents are resorting to the
sort of dramatic attacks we are seeing.

11-52328

We have seen the successful beginning of the
security transition in the first tranche of provinces and
districts announced by President Karzai in July. Afghan
forces themselves are performing increasingly well and
effectively. We admire that.
The current campaign of terror is very worrying,
but we must not allow it to derail the transition. We
condemn the shocking murder Mr. Burhanuddin
Rabbani, former Afghan President and Chair of the
High Peace Council. We extend our deepest
condolences to the people and Government of
Afghanistan for his loss. But the process he embodied
must continue. We reiterate our support to the
Government of Afghanistan in its efforts to advance an
inclusive peace and reconciliation process, as well as
for the successful reintegration of former fighters into
Afghan society.
It is encouraging to hear President Karzai’s
statement that the people and Government of
Afghanistan remain undeterred. It is essential that the
international community stand forthrightly with the
Government and people of Afghanistan at this time.
A sustainable transition to Afghan security
leadership will obviously depend on continued
improvements in governance and development. In
Uruzgan, where an Australian leads the provincial
reconstruction team and where Australian security
forces are concentrated, we are seeing progress; but
that progress is fragile. We need to remain serious
about protecting the gains that we have been made.
More important, we need to focus much more
intensively on building the capacity of the Afghan
institutions in Uruzgan so that they can deliver
concrete and consistent results on the ground.
We were pleased to participate in the ministerial
meeting on Afghanistan held here in New York on
22 September, which provided a clear message of
support for the New Silk Road concept. The vision
behind that concept will be a critical element in
accomplishing the security transition and to advancing
regional economic development, which would underpin
long-term security. A lot of work needs to be done to
give that vision real substance, but we have to make
the effort. It is encouraging to note that some
infrastructure projects under the initiative have already
begun. That work is absolutely essential to creating a
strong network of trade and economic linkages across

27

S/PV.6625

the region and to providing the Afghan people with a
long-term vision of economic prosperity.
Constructive engagement by Afghanistan’s
neighbours is critical to the prospect of a secure and
prosperous Afghanistan and, in turn, for the Central
Asian region itself. Australia welcomes the Istanbul
conference to be hosted under Turkey’s very
constructive leadership and supported by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
A successful meeting in Istanbul will provide important
and essential support for the Bonn meeting to be held
in December. In Bonn, the international community
and the Government of Afghanistan will need to
demonstrate a robust and coordinated approach to
building a stable, secure and prosperous country. Much
more work is needed over coming months to ensure
that we can achieve that result.
The role of United Nations agencies in
coordinating development and humanitarian assistance
is obviously becoming increasingly prominent as
transition proceeds. Australia supports UNAMA’s
efforts to improve aid coherence and to encourage
longer-term commitment to development. We ourselves
are committed to working closely with donors and the
Afghan Government. That includes support for
capacity building in the mining and agriculture sectors,
which we think will become a firm basis for much of
the economy of Afghanistan in the near term.
Our own development assistance increased by
35 per cent in the past year. Afghanistan is now the
fourth largest recipient of Australian aid. Our overall
aid budget will increase to $10 billion in the next
couple of years. That support to Afghanistan will
continue to increase.
Before I conclude, I would like to take a moment
to remember those civilians who have been killed or
wounded in Afghanistan since 2001. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2011/590) notes, we have seen an
increase in civilian deaths and casualties, largely due to
the continued use of improvised explosive devices and
suicide attacks. Australia urges all parties involved in
the armed conflict in Afghanistan to strengthen efforts
to protect Afghan civilians.
In conclusion, I would like to express our
appreciation for the strong leadership demonstrated by
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative for
Afghanistan, Staffan de Mistura, and the dedication
and sacrifice of UNAMA personnel working in

28

Afghanistan. We strongly supports all efforts to ensure
that those who work in support of Afghanistan’s future
are able to do so with the necessary security to
complete their difficult but indispensable tasks. We
will continue to work with the Secretary-General and
the General Assembly, through the Fifth Committee, to
ensure that the necessary finances are made available
for that.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to thank
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, for his presence here today and for his
statement. I would also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Staffan de
Mistura for his very comprehensive and informative
briefing. And I would like to take this opportunity to
express Japan’s gratitude to all the men and women of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) who have demonstrated their deep
commitment to this very difficult mission.
At the outset, I would like to join my colleagues
and previous speakers to express my sincere
condolences for the demise of Mr. Burhanuddin
Rabbani, Chair of Afghanistan’s High Peace Council.
Japan expresses its firm condemnation of such
atrocious acts of terrorism.
As we have seen from various instances, the
security situation in Afghanistan continues to be
challenging. There have been targeted assassinations of
high-ranking officials and suicide attacks, as described
in the recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/590). Security remains a priority that we have
to tackle.
It is significant that the process of transferring
security responsibility officially started in July. As I
have stated on previous occasions, it is indispensable
to peace and security in Afghanistan that a smooth
transition be conducted during the drawdown of United
States and other international forces, including by
strengthening the capacity of the Afghan National
Security Forces. During this period, Japan continues to
play its part towards achieving these goals through
assistance to the Afghan National Police.
The transition and sustainable security are
interlinked with the political process. The loss of
Mr. Rabbani further underscores the importance of

11-52328

S/PV.6625

continuing on the road of reconciliation and
reintegration that he spearheaded. In light of this
tragedy, it is important that all Afghanistan’s leaders
stand together in solidarity and demonstrate their
resolve to work in support of peace, reconciliation and
national unity. Now is the time for international
partners to contribute to the advancement of the
political process. Japan is determined to continue
making our contribution to achieving irreversible
progress in the Afghan-led reintegration programme.
The working group on reintegration of the
International Contact Group met here last week,
chaired by Ambassador Tanin and co-chaired by the
United Kingdom and Japan. The group reaffirmed its
commitment to the Afghan Government’s programmes
to reintegrate all those insurgents who are verifiably
willing to renounce violence and terrorism and respect
the Afghan Constitution, noting the need to provide
support to their families in order to facilitate this.
To ensure long-term stability in Afghanistan, we
have to accelerate regional cooperation among its
neighbours. Japan will play an active role in
strengthening regional economic cooperation to pave
the way for integrating Afghanistan into the regional
and global economy.
We appreciate the initiative of Germany,
Afghanistan and the United States to co-chair the
ministerial meeting on the New Silk Road last week.
Japan supports the basic concept of the New Silk Road.
Japan attaches importance to the following three points
for advancing regional economic cooperation: first is to
place emphasis on the southern route, which connects
Afghanistan with the Indian Ocean; second is to
promote the development of transport infrastructure,
contributing to the growth of agriculture, which
absorbs approximately 80 per cent of Afghanistan’s
labour population; and third is assistance to border
control and customs procedures.
Japan believes that there is a firm commitment on
the part the international community to the
reconstruction of Afghanistan. We expect to see further
progress at the Istanbul Conference in November and
the Bonn Conference in December. On the Afghan side,
the country needs to strengthen its capacity for
achieving real Afghan ownership and leadership.
Let me conclude by referring to the address by
the Prime Minister of Japan, Mr. Yoshihiko Noda, at
the General Assembly, in which he said:

11-52328

“In order to prevent Afghanistan from once again
becoming a breeding ground for terrorism, we
will continue to confront the problem with strong
resolve.”(A/66/PV.19)
We would like to express our sincere appreciation
for the dedication of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. De Mistura, and once again
reiterate our commitment to supporting the dedication
and tireless efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
At the outset, let me thank Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
friendly nation of Afghanistan, for their informative
briefings on the situation in Afghanistan.
Kyrgyzstan has a stake in a peaceful and stable
Afghanistan. We welcome the efforts of the
Government of Afghanistan to pursue democratic
reforms and implement a national development plan for
the country. We believe that effectively advancing the
Kabul process is important. Kyrgyzstan continues to be
of the firm view that lasting solutions to the ongoing
problems in Afghanistan and effectively tackling
transnational challenges requires a systemic and
comprehensive approach. This must include political,
economic and humanitarian aspects and calls for joint
action by all stakeholders, with the United Nations
central among them.
Illegal drug-trafficking and organized crime are a
serious barrier to development, not only for
Afghanistan but also the entire Central Asian region.
Kyrgyzstan therefore views the Afghan problem in the
regional context, and we welcome the country’s
participation in regional projects. In the light of new
realities, Kyrgyzstan proposes that the international
community step up its attention to Afghanistan,
particularly in strengthening border security, assisting
and countering illegal drug trafficking, training
personnel and taking a broader approach to studying
the impact of the growth of terrorist or radical groups.
We believe that any decision to withdraw troops
of the International Security Assistance Force from
Afghanistan should be taken after the situation there
has been tangibly stabilized. The key tasks of training

29

S/PV.6625

and genuinely strengthening the Afghan National Army
and Police must also be addressed to ensure that they
can assume the functions of ensuring the country’s
security.
Kyrgyzstan favours the effective implementation
of the United Nations strategy to combat illegal drug
trafficking and transnational crime in Central Asia, and
advocates enhanced joint action in this area. The
United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy in Central Asia should be an important
component in the strengthening of regional security. A
key outcome of its activities was the crafting of the
plan of action for the implementation in the Central
Asian region of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
whose adoption is planned to take place before the end
of the year.
We are certain that restoring peace and
strengthening Government power in Afghanistan
depends not only on the use of force but to a great
extent on the pace and methods by which social and
economic challenges are addressed. We call on the
countries of the region and the international
community in the framework of the United Nations to
modify the long-term economic recovery programme
for Afghanistan so that its implementation will involve
all neighbouring and adjacent countries.
Cooperation through the New Silk Road initiative
is key to the countries of Central Asia is. Kyrgyzstan
intends to actively participate in the initiative and in
the activities of the various contact groups on
Afghanistan with respect to recovery and development.
We believe that this situation can be
fundamentally changed by implementing major
economic projects in Afghanistan. One such strategic
area is the implementation of the Central Asia South
Asia Regional Electricity Market Project, or CASA1000, which provides for the transmission of electricity
from Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan to Afghanistan and
Pakistan. On 19 and 20 September, Kyrgyzstan held a
meeting of the Intergovernmental Board of CASA1000 at which a memo of mutual understanding on the
electricity transmission project and on further
development of the regional electricity market for
Central and South Asia. Kyrgyzstan is also
participating in the implementation of an international
railway project between China, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan,
Afghanistan and Iran that will undoubtedly contribute

30

to the social and economic development of Afghanistan
and the region in general.
Kyrgyzstan is participating in international efforts
to improve the situation in Afghanistan at the bilateral
and multilateral levels. In particular, together with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
on 9 July 2010 we began a project for training Afghan
customs officials at the customs training centre of the
State Customs Service of the Kyrgyz Republic. We
believe it is important to expand our partnership in this
area. Our hope is that the planned conferences on
Afghanistan in Istanbul and Bonn will define a genuine
programme for nation-building for a strong, secure and
peaceful Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, and your team on your able
guidance of the work of the Security Council for the
month of September and for convening today’s debate.
I would also like to pay my respects to and
welcome to the Security Council His Excellency
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, who joins us here today. And I offer my
appreciation of the briefing by Special Representative
Staffan de Mistura and the important work done by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) under his able leadership.
However, before I proceed any further, I would
like to speak about and offer a eulogy for that great
personage Ustad Burhanuddin Rabbani, who was
unfortunately martyred at a time when the world
needed him most. For those of us here who were not
aware of his contributions, his genius, his capabilities
and his immense efforts, he was a person who brought
together not only Afghans, but also the people and
Government of Pakistan with the people and
Government of Afghanistan. I am not terribly sure if
there is anyone who can step into his shoes, and I
would like to state that we stand by the people of
Afghanistan not only in this hour of grief but at this
tremendous moment of trial. He was martyred by the
enemies of peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan.
Those forces can be defeated only by an even
greater resolve for reconciliation and reintegration. A
reconciled Afghanistan was his dream until the very
last moment of his illustrious life. In fact, he ran back

11-52328

S/PV.6625

post-haste from Tehran to Afghanistan to meet this
awkward end. He was a person who had a dream and
who knew that the long-term solution to security
challenges was rooted in effective reconciliation and
reintegration. I feel that it is important to bring certain
aspects of this to the attention of this assembly of
personages in the Security Council.
I will now read from portions of an article by
Bashir Ahmad Gwakh of the Asia Times, contributed to
by Frud Bezhan of Radio Free Afghanistan and its
correspondent Zarghona Mangal. Mr. Rabbani was
summoned to his home to receive a man bearing a
“special message” from Afghan Taliban leader Mullah
Omar. Let there be no doubt about that fact. An
eyewitness from the National Directorate of Security
(NDS) of Afghanistan who was witness to this
gruesome act said that Rahmatullah Wahidyar, a
member of the High Peace Council and Deputy
Minister in the former Taliban regime, was the one
who brought the bomber to meet with Rabbani and
with top presidential adviser Mohammad Masoom
Stanekzai, who was also seriously injured in that day’s
attack.
Who is Rahmatullah Wahidyar? A document
issued by the Security Council itself de-listed him, at a
time when I sat here and said before the Council and
Mr. De Mistura, “We are de-listing a lot of people. I
hope we know what we are doing”. Unfortunately, it
seems that was not necessarily so. He was de-listed —
vide a letter dated 18 July 2011 from the Chairman of
the Committee established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1988 (2011).
The other important aspect of this was that after
this gruesome incident — and the revered President
Karzai himself has said that it was Mr. Stanekzai who
first alerted him that a messenger had arrived in Kabul,
bearing an important message from the Taliban —
initially, and very interestingly, the Taliban spokesman
Mr. Zabihullah Mujahid claimed responsibility for the
attack in an interview with Reuters. But as world
indignation built up, the same spokesman later wrote in
a statement to Radio Free Afghanistan that the group
did not know about the incident, which was very pat.
I will then go a step further. This is very
interesting; it reminds me of the last part of the film
Casablanca. Major Strasser has been shot dead:
“Round up the usual suspects”. Now, the next day, the
Balkh provincial Governor, Mr. Atta Mohammad Noor,

11-52328

tells Radio Free Afghanistan, that it was Pakistan’s
Inter-Services Intelligence that was supporting them. I
wonder where he got that from in Balkh. Anyway, this
was considered very credible by some people, I am
sorry to say. But then the NDS intelligence spokesman,
Shafiqullah Taheri, said that it was possible that the
Quetta Shura was involved. This was a new
interdiction. The Quetta Shura is the leadership council
of the Afghan Taliban that is believed to based in
Pakistan, which I find very intriguing; how this all
shifts into a mould with great ease.
Now it changes again. The same person says our
investigations are continuing, despite such major
accusations being made. As far as we know, it was a
person named Hamidullah Akhund who came to talk to
the Peace Council, claiming, and I stress this, to
represent the Quetta Shura. That means —
conclusion — that the Quetta Shura was involved in
the attack.
I have no time for the Quetta Shura or anyone
else who propagates violence. But I do wonder why it
is in a way moved towards Pakistan in matters that
normally become inamicable to my country. I now
quote what I have said to the Council itself many
times: “the opposition grouping headed by opposition
leader Abdullah Abdullah has strongly opposed the
idea of negotiating with the Taliban and has
characterized the group as unworthy of participating in
the Government”.
Those are all matters raised by Radio Free Kabul
and Mr. Gwakh in the Asia Times. I thought it pertinent
to read them out before the Council.
Mr. Rabbani’s untimely demise must not leave a
void. We hope that the Security Council will respect
his legacy. We respect the determination of the Afghan
Government and its people for a viable and resultsoriented reconciliation process. Only an Afghanistan at
peace with itself can ensure the security of its own
people, assets and visitors. Only when the Afghans are
settled will my country, Pakistan, be settled and face
less of a security threat than it does today.
The report of the Secretary-General under
consideration (S/2011/590) has rightly underlined the
need for constructive dialogue and reconciliation while
avoiding the politics of mistrust, intimidation, fear or
revenge.
We
agree
with
that
observation.
Reconciliation under the threat of coercion or
retribution is inferior at best.

31

S/PV.6625

Pakistan is working for Afghanistan’s security
and stability on three distinct layers. First, we have
maintained a robust presence of our forces along the
international border. We would hope that this is being
done on the other side as well. The total number of our
troops in paramilitary deployment in the border regions
far exceeds the number of international troops in all of
Afghanistan.

Pakistan is not oblivious to Afghanistan’s
developmental needs or the imperatives of a successful
implementation of the Kabul process. We will continue
our assistance programmes in Afghanistan, the largest
that we have with any country at the moment, being the
State that we are, despite our serious resource
constraints. We have also offered assistance in
capacity-building for Afghan security forces.

Secondly, we provide and seek cross-border
security and intelligence cooperation in concrete terms.
That is done under the auspices of the Tripartite
Commission, which also includes the United States and
the International Security Assistance Force. Since its
inception in 2003 in Islamabad, the Tripartite
Commission has met 35 times and remains a potent
platform for seeking operational clarity and
coordination on the ground.

We are still hosts to millions of Afghan refugees,
at very considerable cost to us. The present report on
the situation in Afghanistan does not update us on the
refugee situation. We hope it will do so in the next
report. We hope that the international community will
remain cognizant of Pakistan’s problems.

Thirdly, in terms of multilateral cooperation, we
are engaged in a number of important regional
initiatives in Afghanistan, with other friendly countries
like Iran, Tajikistan, Turkey, the Russian Federation,
China, the United States and even Kyrgyzstan. Besides
regional connectivity for economic cooperation,
security is a common theme of these initiatives.
Undertaken at the highest political level, the exchange
is credible and meaningful.
In deference to such concrete and comprehensive
interactions, we tend to avoid a blame game, even
when militants cross over from the other side and
attack our troops and innocent civilians. As stated by
our Foreign Minister in the general debate at the
General Assembly on Tuesday, we must work closely
together and as responsible partners in a cooperative
manner, and not rush to judgments or question each
others’ intentions (see A/66/PV.29).
The report of the Secretary-General has rightly
pointed out that development, governance and the rule
of law are crucial for irreversible transition processes,
as envisaged in the Kabul Conference. The SecretaryGeneral has stressed the need for capturing the current
political and financial interest in transition to set the
country on a sustainable course. He has also underlined
the value of long-term international support and private
sector investment in facilitating the transition. That has
not, despite many words here, quite materialized, and
has been the bane of the problem in Afghanistan. These
are valid observations that merit serious attention from
Afghanistan’s international partners.

32

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Serrano: I wish to convey the thanks of the
European Union (EU) for having been invited to
participate in this debate.
The candidate countries Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and
Iceland, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European Free Trade
Association country Norway, member of the European
Economic Area, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this declaration.
I would like to thank Special Representative
Staffan de Mistura for his briefing, and the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report on the situation
in Afghanistan (S/2011/590). Our thanks also go out to
His Excellency Foreign Minister Zalmai Rassoul for
his important presentation.
At the outset, let me reiterate how much
importance we attach to the United Nations efforts in
Afghanistan, especially those of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). The
work of the United Nations will remain vital to
Afghanistan’s fate for years to come. That is why we
all have to continue to support it, both politically and
financially. The European Union itself is also in it for
the long haul ─ hence our long-term partnership with
Afghanistan that is currently under preparation.
In July, concrete transition began with the
handover of security responsibility from the
International Security Assistance Force to Afghan

11-52328

S/PV.6625

forces in seven areas of the country. Elsewhere,
preparations are under way for more such security
transfers. We are encouraged by how well the Afghan
Security Forces have assumed their new role despite
the difficult context. That context should serve to
strengthen the international community’s resolve to
contribute to the success of the transition by effectively
training these forces.
During the previous Afghanistan debate in the
Council (see S/PV.6574), we noted with concern that
insecurity was on the rise, making transition harder.
Those concerns have not abated. The level of civilian
casualties, the vast majority caused by insurgents,
remains unacceptably high. Civilians are no longer safe
from anti-Government forces, even in hospitals and
mosques. Recent months have also witnessed the
violent deaths of several high-ranking Afghan officials
and, just last week, of Mr. Rabbani, the Chair of the
High Peace Council.
I wish to reiterate the European Union’s firm
condemnation of this heinous attack and convey our
condolences. Mr. Rabbani’s legacy can best be
honoured by redoubling reconciliation efforts. We
applaud the Government for committing precisely to
such efforts.
Against this security background, it is all the
more encouraging that the Kabul process is, in many
respects, gaining momentum. The European Union
would particularly like to commend efforts towards
resolving the Kabul Bank crisis and progress towards
resuming the International Monetary Fund programme.
Successfully tackling the final outstanding issues ahead
of the Bonn Conference is crucial to bolstering the
confidence of donors, including the European Union
and its member States, as they seek to do their part in
the context of the Kabul process.
Among other hopeful signs, we have seen a
number of national priority programmes move forward,
including in the area of justice reform. We welcome
what has been achieved in that particular area. After
all, independent and professional justice institutions
are indispensable. Afghanistan needs them for a better
security climate, a better investment climate and a
better human rights climate. Legislation will remain
void without the institutions to implement it.
Afghanistan’s commitments to international
human rights conventions are a case in point. On
human rights, let me say that the rights of women

11-52328

deserve special attention, during transition and beyond.
That is exactly why we need female leaders around the
table as we prepare for Bonn.
Small steps forward on some national priority
programmes should not be allowed to give rise to
complacency. The transition process will be viable only
if all national priority programmes move forward
together. In the area of governance, such positive steps
as the launch of the anti-corruption Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee need to be backed up with
structural measures that will bring down corruption and
bring about more transparency and accountability with
regard to public finances.
There can be no accountability without
parliamentary control. That is why we urge the Afghan
Parliament to fully resume its functions. This means
getting important legislative work done and providing
the necessary checks and balances when it comes to
State-building in Afghanistan. New legislation should
thus be submitted for parliamentary approval. There is
room for improvement here, and it is in this context
that the European Union stands ready to support
Afghan commitments to long-term electoral reform.
Of course we need to look beyond Kabul to the
provinces and districts and sub-national governance.
We need to strengthen the capacity and accountability
of provincial and municipal institutions. Only then will
the right services be delivered to the right people in the
right way. Also, to get their fair share of aid, provinces
and districts should have a better connection to the
centre. After all, in a post-transition Afghanistan, funds
will increasingly be channelled through the central
Government.
Now that I have spoken about Kabul and the local
level, I want to briefly address the regional context.
The neighbouring countries have a strong stake in and
a special responsibility for a stable and secure
Afghanistan. Building on our ongoing programmes, the
European Union stands ready to throw its weight
behind initiatives that promote regional integration and
cooperation. We look forward to the upcoming Istanbul
Conference, which represents an opportunity to give
new impetus to the regional agenda ahead of the Bonn
Conference. The New Silk Road initiative, launched
just last week, offers a vision for promising economic
cooperation from which Afghanistan and its neighbours
could benefit greatly.

33

S/PV.6625

The Afghan people — most of whom are poor
and many of whom are currently threatened by
drought — need to see concrete improvements in their
lives and livelihoods. We all need to play our part in
that. As the late Mr. Rabbani said at the Millennium
Summit of the United Nations:
“The combination of extreme poverty with
extreme inequality within and between countries
is an affront to our common humanity, a tragic
situation which requires urgent global solidarity.”
(A/55/PV.7, p.11)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Mr. Staffan de Mistura to respond to the
comments that have been made.
Mr. De Mistura: If Minister Rassoul will allow
me, I will say that both Afghanistan and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
feel highly hopeful, from what I have been hearing in
this meeting. This body is providing support for the
future of Afghanistan — in spite of the tragic events
that have occurred — and for the work of UNAMA, as
well as for continuing cooperation between the Mission
and the country. That support is going to help both of
us when we return to Kabul, as I will tomorrow. That
would be my only comment.
I would like to say a word about Lebanon, for
which I have great affection as I myself was posted
there. As have many other speakers, I wish to say how
pleased I am to see Lebanon holding the presidency of
this body.

(spoke in Arabic)
Thank you, Mr. President. I wish you every success
and may God bless you and grant you health and
serenity.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. De Mistura for his kind words towards Lebanon.
The representative of Afghanistan has asked for
the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Rassoul (Afghanistan): I wish to thank all
members of the Council for their expressions of
sympathy and condolence on the martyrdom of
Mr. Rabbani. I would like also to report that a serious
investigation is being conducted to find out how the
assassination happened. Of course, when we have the
final results, we will notify the Council.
(spoke in French)
Allow me, on behalf of my people and
Government, to thank the members of the Council and
the representatives of the countries that are friends of
Afghanistan for their lasting support and commitment
to my country. With their support, Afghanistan will
play an essential role in the peace, stability and
prosperity of the region, and will contribute to global
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

34

11-52328
