S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6066th meeting
Wednesday, 14 January 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lacroix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. Hu Bo
Mr. Weisleder
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Ashiki
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Puente
Mr. Zheglov
Ms. Ormancı
Mr. Butagira
Mr. Saltonstall
Ms. Lavin
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-20856 (E)

*0920856*

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank the delegation of France for having organized
this debate and Under-Secretary-General John Holmes
for his briefing this morning.
My country is grateful to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and to
other United Nations entities for their committed
efforts in the area of civilian protection.
I should like to focus my statement on the
following several points. First, the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is a permanent necessity and
requires the concerted action of many actors. The
Emergency Relief Coordinator has rightly mentioned a
number of specific situations that show the importance
of having a conceptual framework that is clear but that
is applied in a flexible manner. Our strategic objective
must be to strengthen the protection framework and to
ensure that it is actually implemented in conflicts on
the ground.
Secondly, we appreciate the work undertaken by
OCHA to update the aide-memoire. That very practical
text illustrates the developments made in this area over
the past few years. In terms of the work of the Council,
we identify several major challenges. It must ensure
that best practices are applied more systematically and
that the language of protection is better integrated into
country-specific resolutions. There must be further
development of specific implementation mechanisms;
hence the importance of the establishment of a group
of experts on the protection of civilians. Resolutions
should better reflect needs on the ground; this requires
better articulation of protection mandates in the terms
of engagement of peacekeeping operations, the
enhancement of monitoring capacities, more systematic
methods of information gathering and the integration
of some of these activities into the budgets of
peacekeeping operations.
Moving forward in that way, efforts to ensure
better coherence will also need to be stepped up. Good
practices learned in one case should be applied in
others. Representatives from throughout the United
Nations system and experts should be invited more
frequently to present their views, thus enabling the
Council to reach decisions fully aware of the facts.

2

Thirdly, the current situation in Gaza dramatically
illustrates the importance of the issue we are discussing
today. The main victims of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict are civilians. Switzerland is deeply shocked by
the high number of civilians who have been killed or
wounded, in particular the high number of children.
This situation underlines how important it is that the
law not go unheeded and that it be truly implemented.
It also reminds us that the protection of civilians
cannot be ensured by purely humanitarian means but
that political negotiations are the only path to
achieving lasting solutions.
Switzerland therefore reiterates its call for the
immediate cessation of hostilities, the protection of the
humanitarian space and the strict respect for
international law by all parties to the conflict. This
includes in particular the obligation to respect the
principles of distinction, proportionality and the taking
of precautions. Switzerland also wishes to recall that
all the parties to the conflict are under the obligation to
protect medical personnel, hospitals and other health
facilities.
We welcome the call made by the Security
Council in its resolution 1860 (2009) for an immediate
ceasefire and for the unimpeded provision and
distribution of humanitarian assistance throughout
Gaza. This call must be respected immediately by all
parties to the conflict. However, we are disappointed
that the resolution makes no mention of the importance
of respect for international humanitarian law. It is to be
deeply regretted that this body of law and therefore its
references to the Geneva Conventions have become the
object of political negotiation and discretion. It is by
insisting on the strict application of international
humanitarian law in situations of armed conflict that
the Council will be able to better protect civilians — a
fact that the Council itself underlined in its presidential
statement of 27 May 2008 (S/PRST/2008/18).
Furthermore, last week Switzerland called for an
impartial inquiry into the allegations of violations of
international law committed during these hostilities,
including the attacks on two schools run by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. In this context, it is
essential that light be shed on all allegations of
violations committed by all parties.
Although our attention is currently turned
towards the situation in Gaza, we should nevertheless

09-20856

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

not forget the other extremely worrying situations
concerning the protection of civilians. We are thinking
in particular of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including in terms of children in situations of armed
conflict. We are also thinking of the situation of
internally displaced persons in Sri Lanka. We also
remain extremely concerned by the situation in Darfur,
where humanitarian access remains a problem.
Finally, we are well aware that the often complex
realities of crisis situations demand considerable
training, clarification of law when necessary, and the
application of law in order to respond to realities on
the ground. In this regard, following a meeting of
experts held in July 2008, Switzerland is considering
drafting a practical guide for humanitarian actors
which would make explicit and clarify the relevant
legal framework. The Council could give political
support to this kind of expert work in implementing the
recommendations of the aide-memoire.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): The
State of Qatar attaches great importance to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I therefore
thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity
to participate in this important debate today. I would
also like to thank Mr. John Holmes, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, for his important briefing.
The Security Council has clear responsibilities in
the area of protecting civilians in armed conflict,
including situations of foreign occupation, which are
governed by the rules of international law.
International humanitarian law, and international
human rights law in particular, prohibit killing civilians
and exposing them to harm. They also prohibit
reprisals against civilians and civilian targets,
including health and educational institutions, and the
deliberate destruction of homes. These laws confirm
that the wilful commission of such prohibited acts
constitutes a war crime.
Despite the principles and provisions that
represent legal safeguards for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, such conflicts are still
claiming the lives of innocent civilians, whose
fundamental rights and freedoms are being violated.
The problem, therefore, lies in the non-implementation
of international legal instruments and in the use of

09-20856

double standards in addressing various situations in
which the international community has failed to
enforce international laws and resolutions and to hold
the perpetrators accountable before such laws. This in
turn emboldens the perpetrators and gives them carte
blanche to commit such acts.
Conversely, when the international community
has been determined to enforce the laws necessary for
the protection of civilians in times of armed conflict
and to achieve that through existing mechanisms, it has
succeeded on many occasions in fighting impunity,
ensuring the protection of civilians and strengthening
their human rights.
Today, the war on the Gaza Strip enters its
nineteenth day. Palestinian civilians in Gaza are subject
on a daily basis to relentless military attacks by Israel,
the occupying Power. Such attacks do not discriminate
between women, children, the elderly or people with
disabilities.
In a speech delivered on 4 January 2009, His
Highness Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani, the Emir
of the State of Qatar, called on the international
community to undertake efforts for the protection and
relief of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip. His Highness
highlighted that the Israeli war machine targets
everybody and does not discriminate among its victims.
He also said that a war waged with such force against
civilian targets cannot but constitute a war crime, as it
clearly violates international humanitarian law and
international human rights laws, including the Geneva
Conventions, and in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which includes provisions on the protection
of civilians under foreign occupation. The number of
Palestinian civilian killed in Gaza Strip has almost
reached 1,000. What are we going to do about it?
United Nations reports, including reports by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and UNICEF, highlight the dire situation in which
Palestinian children and their families are still living.
Entire families have been killed and buried alive under
the rubble of their homes. Those who have managed to
survive suffer psychological trauma that will haunt
them for the rest of their lives. Others have suffered
serious injuries and have become mentally and
physically disabled.
The Palestinian civilian population in the Gaza
Strip is subjected to a campaign of collective
punishment, as stated by Mr. Richard Falk, the Special

3

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
Palestinian territories occupied since 1967. The
infrastructure in Gaza, including hospitals and schools,
is also under constant attack. The continuous targeting
of such institutions leaves no safe areas for the civilian
Palestinian population to shelter.
This situation prompted Her Highness Sheikha
Mozah Bint Nasser Al-Missned, Consort of His
Highness the Emir of Qatar, in her capacity as
UNESCO Special Envoy for Basic and Higher
Education, to address a letter to the Secretary-General
on 5 January, calling upon the Security Council and the
international community to ensure the necessary
protection for educational institutions in Gaza with a
view to providing a safe haven for the children of Gaza
and their families, allowing access to humanitarian
assistance and basic materials and evacuating the sick
and the wounded.
The world has witnessed how Israel targeted the
Al-Fakhura School run by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. The school provided protection for the children of
Gaza and their families, who took refuge in the
premises, believing they were in a safe haven. Fortyfive people were killed and another 130 were wounded.
We reiterate our call on the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibilities, meet its obligations to
protect civilians in armed conflict and ensure respect
for the instruments of international law and Security
Council resolutions, which provide the legal basis for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, including
in situations of foreign occupation. The rule of law
constitutes a fundamental issue in armed conflict. It is
therefore imperative for us to realize that respect for
international law constitutes the true basis for a world
free of armed conflict.
The Security Council today, faced with the
indiscriminate aggression against the Gaza Strip, must
shoulder its responsibilities towards the Palestinian
civilian victims, especially the Palestinian women and
children who have been maimed, burned and buried
under the rubble by the Israeli war machine, which has
spared no one. We would like to remind the Security
Council that it is fully responsible for its failure to
enforce its most recent resolution, among several
others that provide for the protection to which the
afflicted Palestinian people are entitled, and to stop the
massacre being committed against them.

4

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by expressing my thanks to the
delegation of France for convening this debate under
its presidency. Allow me also to reiterate the
importance of such meetings, which facilitate
interaction between the Security Council and
non-member States. I would also like to welcome the
valuable briefing given this morning by the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs.
Ten years ago, this Council held its first open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
At the time, it was hailed as a milestone in the
Council’s work. Since then, the work of both the
Security Council and the United Nations as a whole
has witnessed some advances and various difficulties
in implementing policies intended to ensure the
protection of civilian populations in armed conflicts.
As noted by the Secretary-General in his most
recent report on this subject, within the Council the
normative framework for the protection of civilian
populations in armed conflict has been fine-tuned,
beginning with resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296
(2000). This has been reflected in the adoption of a
number of resolutions that emphasize the protection of
women and children in armed conflict and has been
bolstered by the adoption of resolutions 1674 (2006)
and 1738 (2006). That normative progress has been
complemented by the inclusion of activities pertaining
to the protection of civilians in the mandates of
existing peacekeeping operations. That illustrates how
the Council has gradually modified its focus on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Notwithstanding the progress made, Uruguay
notes with particular concern that, despite the reduction
in the number of conflicts throughout the world, as
pointed out in the latest report of the Stockholm
International Peace Research Institute, civilian
populations continue to experience acts of brutality and
degradation as a result of being in the wrong place at
the wrong time or being deliberately selected as
victims of atrocities in an environment of almost
complete impunity. Unfortunately, in recent days we
have witnessed the unfolding of actions whose result
has been aggression against civilian populations and
the obstruction of crucial humanitarian assistance to
the victims of those actions.

09-20856

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

Uruguay has demonstrated its unwavering
commitment to international humanitarian law, as
illustrated by our adherence to and implementation of
all the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their
Additional Protocols; the Rome Statute, which
established the International Criminal Court; The
Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict and its
Protocols’ and the Convention on the Prohibition of
Military or Any Other Hostile Use of Environmental
Modification Techniques. All those instruments
constitute the essence of international humanitarian
law.
On the ground, Uruguay, one of the largest troop
contributors to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, has demonstrated its unequivocal
commitment to the protection of civilians. In the
various peacekeeping operations to which Uruguay has
contributed, including those in which my country is
currently participating, Uruguayan contingents have
escorted and protected United Nations agencies, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and nongovernmental organizations providing humanitarian
assistance. They have helped refugees and internally
displaced persons return to their homes. They have
neutralized the harmful potential to civilians of antipersonnel mines. Uruguayan military and civilian
personnel have also initiated reconstruction efforts in
countries devastated by conflict, including in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Haiti.
Uruguayan personnel deployed in the field have also
carried out humanitarian campaigns to mitigate the
harm suffered by civilians in countries afflicted by
natural disasters.
Uruguay’s experience on the ground has also led
us to voice a crucial concern. On numerous occasions,
Uruguayan contingents have warned of the
impossibility of carrying out expanded humanitarian
assistance and civilian protection efforts due to the fact
that destabilizing forces in a given region were several
times greater in number than the personnel of
peacekeeping operations. We believe that such
situations give rise to the need, at the time that a
peacekeeping mission is established or renewed, for
Security Council mandates to envisage the necessary
strategic and logistical provisions to address the
implementation of those tasks as best as possible. As
pointed out earlier, in addition to clear and specific
mandates, it is essential that United Nations forces

09-20856

have at their disposal the essential means and
capabilities to effectively protect civilians. That
imperative need is both a great challenge and a
responsibility for the Organization and all its Member
States.
Uruguay shares the Secretary-General’s view
with regard to the four challenges that the international
community must address with regard to the protection
of civilians, namely, the need to ensure access to
civilians so that they can be provided the assistance
they need to survive; combating and eradicating the
heinous practice of sexual violence in armed conflict;
the need to more systematically address the effects of
conflict on homes, land and property; and the
importance of putting an end to the unacceptable
humanitarian consequences of cluster munitions. In
connection with those challenges, Uruguay would like
to reiterate its position, which we have previously
stated in other forums, that the activities of the United
Nations in providing humanitarian assistance must be
carried out in accordance with the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality, independence,
respect for international humanitarian law and security
for personnel on the ground — all the while bearing in
mind that the primary responsibility for the protection
of civilians lies with States.
The twentieth century witnessed atrocities and
abhorrent acts of aggression against innocent civilians
that had an impact on entire peoples. Sadly, the final
years of that century and the early years of the twentyfirst century have also produced events that have
shaken and disturbed the conscience of the
international community. Fortunately, the development
of the international community has provided us with an
excellent concept by which to make the world a more
humane place. In accordance with the provisions of
international humanitarian law, the protection of
civilians is a legal imperative. However, it is also an
ethical imperative that reflects the long evolution of
humankind towards civilizing norms that place respect
for life and human integrity and dignity at the core of
its values.
Lastly, I would like to highlight that, on
27 January, the delegations of Uruguay and Australia
will organize an open workshop to address the issue of
implementing the protection of civilians in the
mandates of peacekeeping operations. It will be an
opportune moment to better define the concept of the
protection of civilians as it contrasts with the concept

5

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

of the responsibility to protect. It will also be an
opportunity to analyze the challenges that must be kept
in mind from a practical point of view in implementing
the mandates of peacekeeping operations that include
protection of civilian components, as well as to become
aware of the experiences of the main troop contributors
and of the Secretariat.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Belgium.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): My
delegation fully associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Czech Republic
on behalf of the European Union (EU). We would like
to make a few observations based on our two years of
experience on the Security Council.
We listened with great interest to the statement
made by Mr. Holmes. He gave us a briefing that very
clearly illustrates that there is still much progress to be
made in the area of the protection of civilians.
International humanitarian law is not observed in
the course of hostilities in numerous conflicts. The
current situation in Gaza is a strikingly tragic
illustration of that. Civilians are forgotten when Hamas
utilizes residential buildings, schools and hospitals to
fire from and uses the civilians around them as human
shields. Civilians are equally forgotten, however, when
the Israeli army places its military goals above strict
adherence to international humanitarian law. The
civilian population is thereby twice victimized. In that
regard, we call for the immediate implementation of
resolution 1860 (2008).
The horrors of numerous wars prompted the
international community to develop humanitarian law
as we know it today, including with regard to the
protection of civilians in conflict situations. Likewise,
the mass atrocities committed against civilian
populations, even in non-conflict situations, have led to
the emergence of the idea of the responsibility to
protect. Belgium cherishes that concept, which was
adopted by the General Assembly in 2005, for it
emphasizes the duty of each State to protect its
population against the clearly identified ultimate
crimes of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity.
As the body responsible for maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council
has adopted civilian protection as an objective, as

6

established by humanitarian law. The Council must
also now integrate fully the notion of the responsibility
to protect into its work. It already does so in a number
of ways: by instituting good offices missions, fighting
impunity, combating the use of child soldiers and
through the Peacebuilding Commission. The Council
did so recently on 22 December in resolution 1857
(2008), which revised the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Council could have done
so even more resolutely and with greater conviction,
given the extreme gravity of the crimes it seeks to
prevent and that such crimes are firmly identified in
international penal law. My country will continue to
advocate to that end and to encourage our Organization
to establish the early warning instruments and rapid
response mechanisms vital to avoiding more mass
atrocities.
Belgium welcomes today’s scheduled adoption of
a presidential statement complemented by an update of
the aide-memoire on the protection of civilians. This
document remains a significant reference point for the
Council’s daily work. In this context, we also wish to
welcome the eminent establishment of a group of
experts which, on a relatively informal basis, will
discuss aspects related to protection of civilians in each
mandate up for renewal by the Council. This will
contribute to creating a more systematic approach to
the aspects related to the protection of civilians.
Finally, we believe that combating impunity is a
vital factor of the protection of civilians. The Council
must also make a contribution thereto through its
different instruments, such as its sanctions committees.
The Security Council and its sanctions regimes must do
a better job of shouldering their responsibilities by
punishing such phenomena as sexual violence or the
recruitment of and serious violence done to children.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of the United
Arab Emirates.
Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month.
Today, we meet once again to consider the subject
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict. It is a
matter of great concern, that in spite of the important
progress achieved by the international community

09-20856

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

since the middle of the last century in developing
international law mechanisms to promote the principle
of the protection of civilians and to determine criminal
responsibility for massacres committed against
thousands of civilians in armed conflicts, we continue
to witness new and tragic forms of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity. Such forms
include wilful killing, rape, the confiscation and
destruction of properties, forcible displacement and
other acts of intimidation, which constitute flagrant
violations of international law and international
humanitarian law. These acts, which include attacks on
humanitarian and media personnel with complete
impunity, are committed and used by warring parties as
a tool for exerting maximum political pressure to
achieve their goals in areas of conflict at the expense
of the security and safety of innocent civilians.
We believe that the reason such violations persist
is due not to the incapacity of the almost fully
integrated legal and humanitarian framework
established by the United Nations and represented in
international legal instruments on this issue —
including the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and
its two Additional Protocols of 1977 and the
resolutions and presidential statements issued by the
Security Council on the protection of civilians — but
lies rather in the non-compliance of some states parties
with their respective obligations under these
instruments and the selective approach in their
implementation in some areas of conflict.
It is deeply regrettable that we for 19 days have
witnessed a vivid example of the contempt of some
States for the resolutions of this Council and the
exercise of double standards and selectivity in their
implementation. Israel is pursuing its barbaric military
assaults against the population of Gaza for the sixth
day after the Security Council adopted resolution 1860
(2009), which calls for an immediate and permanent
ceasefire and a full withdrawal of Israeli forces from
Gaza. In its paragraph 5, it also condemns in plain
language all violence and hostilities directed against
civilians.
Despite the adoption of this resolution, Israel has
continued to commit war crimes against the Palestinian
people in Gaza by bombarding civilian areas with
internationally banned weapons, using excessive force
and imposing severe collective punishments against
unarmed civilians, including through siege, the closure
of crossing points and the obstruction of humanitarian

09-20856

assistance, in flagrant violation of the principles of
human rights and relevant international resolutions and
laws.
What is happening in Gaza Strip is testimony to
the serious impact of the international community’s
failure to implement the resolutions of international
legitimacy and the selectivity of their implementation,
and to its inability to shoulder its responsibilities and
legal commitments in the protection of innocent
civilians during conflicts. The death toll among the
Palestinian people has so far surpassed 1,000 people,
40 per cent of whom are women and children, and does
not account for the missing persons and those suffering
from serious injuries and physical and mental
disabilities, whose numbers have exceeded 4,000, half
of whom are children and women. Their numbers are
increasing daily.
The United Arab Emirates supports international
efforts to find a solution to the Palestinian question
through peaceful means, including the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Annapolis Understanding, and urges
the international community, and the Security Council
in particular, to revisit the implementation standards
relating to the protection of civilians when it considers
the situation in existing armed conflicts, in accordance
with its resolution 1674 (2006), which recognizes the
primary responsibility of conflicting parties for
protecting civilians in armed conflicts, as well as the
shared responsibility of the international community as
a whole to assist States to shoulder their responsibility
in this regard.
In this context, we affirm the importance of the
following.
First, pressure must be exerted on Israel to comply
with the provisions of resolution 1860 (2009). It must
immediately cease its aggression against the Palestinian
civilian population, fully withdraw from Gaza and open
all crossing points in order to allow for the delivery of
humanitarian aid and to alleviate the dire humanitarian
crisis being faced by Palestinian people.
Secondly, the international community must exert
pressure on Israel to resume peace negotiations, given
that the present crisis has shown the need to expedite a
serious and peaceful negotiating process. It must also
require Israel, the occupying Power, to shoulder its
responsibility and honour its previous agreements and
commitments, which would contribute to establishing
an independent Palestinian State as soon as possible.

7

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

Thirdly, an international commission of inquiry
must be established to investigate the war crimes
committed by Israel against civilians in Gaza and to
prosecute those responsible in accordance with the
resolutions of international legitimacy, the latest of
which is the resolution adopted by the Human Rights
Council.
Here, we would like to reaffirm the importance of
strengthening the international role that the Security
Council must play in collaboration with specialized
departments and committees established by the
Secretariat, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Human Rights Council,
particularly in taking effective, swift and decisive
action to prevent the suffering of civilians in conflict
areas. That includes providing a safe and secure
environment for civilians in armed conflicts, which,
under the Charter of the United Nations, is one of the
Security Council’s priority tasks in maintaining
international peace and security and in building peace.
In that connection, we emphasize the need to
develop methods for monitoring acts committed
against civilians during armed conflicts and the need
for measures to be taken to persuade all countries and
parties to conflicts throughout the world to fulfil their
commitment not to target civilians and to protect their
lives, property and legitimate interests without
applying double standards, bearing in mind the need to
fully respect the sovereignty of States and the principle
of non-interference in their internal affairs.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the Permanent Observer of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Palestine welcomes
this open Security Council debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We firmly share the belief
that the protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
matter of immense importance and that the Council’s
attention to that issue is both appropriate and
necessary. We hope that the Council will continue to
address the issue in an effective manner until the
serious protection of civilians in armed conflict is
ensured in all cases, without selectivity or inaction
based on political considerations.
For Palestine, today’s debate is especially timely.
For the nineteenth day now, Israel, the occupying
Power, has continued with impunity to unleash its
military wrath on the defenceless population of the
Gaza Strip, killing nearly 1,000 Palestinians, including

8

more than 400 children and women, and injuring nearly
5,000. Those who were killed not only were trapped,
traumatized and terrorized along with the 1.5 million
other inhabitants there, but also were denied the
protection accorded to civilian persons under
international law. In the light of that, the Palestinian
people and their leadership — especially our people in
Gaza — continue to call upon the international
community to provide much-needed and long overdue
protection for the civilian population and for measures
to be swiftly taken in that regard to prevent the loss of
more innocent lives.
As the Palestinian civilian population continues
to be subjected to Israel’s indiscriminate, excessive and
disproportionate use of force by means of tanks, F-16s,
helicopters and other heavy weapons, including white
phosphorous shells and dense inert metal explosive
bombs, the profound human suffering continues to
mount, as the people of Gaza have nowhere to run and
nowhere to seek refuge. Moreover, among countless
other violations, the occupying Power has attacked
medical workers and clearly marked ambulances,
wantonly destroyed public and civilian infrastructure
and institutions, targeted United Nations schools and
buildings, denied access to medical treatment for the
sick or wounded, and used Palestinian civilians as
human shields, all the while continuously denying an
entire population their most basic rights, including the
right to food and water.
Clearly, international law forbids such brutality.
Humanitarian and human rights law prohibits, inter
alia, the killing and bodily injury of civilians, reprisals
against civilians and civilian objects, the wanton
destruction of homes and other civilian property, and
the collective punishment of civilians. Such actions,
wilfully perpetrated, constitute war crimes.
The belief that the occupying Power has in fact
committed war crimes is also being reported by several
human rights organizations now working on the ground
in Gaza. In that regard, the appeal by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and by
the Human Rights Council, in its resolution dated
12 January 2009, for an independent investigation of
crimes committed by Israel, the occupying Power, in
Gaza is important and should be acted upon. We would
also like to recall the suggestion made by SecretaryGeneral in his latest report on civilians in armed
conflict (S/2007/643), in which he stated that, in
situations where parties to a conflict commit systematic

09-20856

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

and widespread breaches of international humanitarian
and human rights law and thereby create the threat of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, the
Council should be willing to intervene under Chapter
VII of the Charter.

population and children — who constitute nearly 56
per cent of the population — exacerbating the
humanitarian crisis to catastrophic proportions.

Here, we would like to recall resolution 1860
(2009), adopted less than a week ago, which, among
many other important provisions, calls urgently for an
immediate, durable and fully respected ceasefire and
for the unimpeded provision and distribution
throughout Gaza of humanitarian assistance, including
food, fuel and medical treatment. Of course, the
ceasefire that the Security Council called for was
intended to lead to a total withdrawal of Israeli forces
from Gaza.

Protecting civilians in situations of foreign
occupation must be a priority mission of the United
Nations, and the Security Council has clear
responsibilities in that regard. Regrettably, the
international community’s failure to hold Israel
accountable for its violations and crimes over the past
four decades has reinforced Israel’s lawlessness,
permitting it to continue using military force and
collective punishment against the defenceless
Palestinian people under its occupation and, in essence,
absolving it of its legal obligations as an occupying
Power.

Unfortunately, Israel continues to ignore the
resolution adopted by the Council, pressing on with its
military aggression against the Gaza Strip and even
intensifying it over the past couple of days. We call on
the Council to compel Israel to heed the calls of the
Council, in accordance with its obligations as an
occupying Power under the Fourth Geneva Convention
and its obligations under the United Nations Charter as
a State Member of the United Nations.

As Israel continues to breach its legal obligations
towards the Palestinian civilian population, the Security
Council, if it cannot compel Israel to abide by the law,
has a duty to determine and undertake appropriate
measures to protect the civilian population. Respect
must be demanded for the instruments of international
law that are supposed to provide the Palestinian civilian
population with protection from human rights
violations and crimes committed under occupation.

Moreover, we call on the Security Council and all
concerned parties to make the necessary efforts and
work to ensure the effective implementation of the
resolution in order to bring an end to all military
activities and violence; to address the serious
humanitarian and economic needs of the Palestinian
civilian population in the Gaza Strip, who for too long
have been under Israel’s inhumane siege; and to help
the parties return from the precipice to which this crisis
has brought us and back to the path of peace.

It should be recalled that the basis and guiding
principles for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict are embodied in the rules of international law,
particularly humanitarian law and human rights law.
The need to protect civilians, promote their welfare and
safeguard their human dignity is at the core of the
spirit and purpose of these laws. Protection provisions
can be found in many instruments of law, including the
Geneva Conventions — particularly the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which comprises provisions explicitly
aimed at ensuring the safety of civilians in armed
conflict, including specific provisions for civilians
under foreign occupation — the Additional Protocols,
the Human Rights Covenants, the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and United Nations
resolutions.

In addition to the massive carnage against the
Palestinian people in Gaza, the civilian population
there continues to suffer from unlawful measures of
collective punishment being imposed on them by the
occupying Power. The situation before the Israeli
assault in Gaza was already dire owing to Israel’s
inhumane 19-month siege, by which it deliberately
obstructed humanitarian access and the movement of
persons — including sick persons needing treatment
unavailable in Gaza — and of all goods, including the
most essential, such as food and medical and fuel
supplies. All aspects of life were severely impacted,
with poverty, hunger, disease and instability rising to
alarming levels, particularly among the refugee

09-20856

We have the legal instruments and tools that are
required, and we know what actions need to be taken to
ensure the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
are convinced that the international community has no
choice but to make progress and create a different and
safer situation than that faced today by civilians not
only in Palestine but everywhere else affected by
armed conflict.

9

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

Before closing, we would like to commend the
work of many United Nations bodies, including the
Office of the High Commissioner of Human Rights, the
Human Rights Council, the High Commissioner for
Refugees, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
UNICEF and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), as well as the work of many international
humanitarian organizations that have worked tirelessly
to launch initiatives and programmes to ensure the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We continue
to support and encourage their work in this field.
Mr. Sorcar (Bangladesh): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting.
My delegation commends the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. John Holmes, for his comprehensive briefing this
morning.
Civilians continue to suffer the brunt of violence
during armed conflicts. Civilians have become the
primary target of attacks that are often motivated by
ethnic or religious hatred, political confrontation or
simply the ruthless desire of the perpetrators to attack a
member of an opposing group. These civilians are
displaced from their homes and are often denied access
to life-saving food, medicine and shelter. It is against
this backdrop that the States Members of the
Organization pledged in the Millennium Declaration
“to expand and strengthen the protection of civilians in
complex emergencies”.
The Council has been discussing this important
issue for nearly a decade and has adopted many
resolutions and heard strong and relevant statements by
delegates. However, ironically, a large number of
civilians continue to be exposed to the atrocities of
conflict. My delegation urges all parties to conflicts to
ensure protection of the lives and property of civilians.
The Council should also strengthen its efforts to
prevent, resolve and reduce armed conflicts, pursuant
to its primary responsibility to maintain international
peace and security.
My delegation condemns all violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law and
stresses the need to combat impunity, safeguard access
for humanitarian assistance and protect the safety of
humanitarian aid workers.

10

We are appalled by the scale and intensity of the
devastation and the deaths of innocent Palestinians,
including women and children, caused by the
indiscriminate and excessive use of force in the Israeli
military operations in the Gaza Strip. It is
disconcerting to see that even humanitarian workers
are being killed by the Israeli attackers. The ongoing
attacks, in continued defiance of the Council’s call for
a complete ceasefire, are contributing to continued
civilian casualties.
My delegation wishes to draw the international
community’s attention to the fact that Israel, as a
signatory to the relevant provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention, which stipulates the responsibilities
of an occupying Power, cannot legally or morally
absolve itself of its responsibilities for guaranteeing the
basic human rights of the people under its occupation.
In this regard, my delegation would like to
re-emphasize the importance of the principle of the
responsibility to protect, as endorsed in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome, in preventing harm to civilians in
armed conflict.
The vulnerable situation of civilians in postconflict societies needs special attention. Long after
guns have fallen silent, such people remain traumatized
and permanently scarred by the brutalities of war. For
peace to be sustained, they must be rehabilitated and
reintegrated into their communities more effectively,
and the perpetrators must bear the resultant cost. The
Peacebuilding Commission should also include this
issue in its agenda whenever it takes up a countryspecific configuration.
Finally, we would like to mention what my
delegation considers two overarching themes for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. The first
relates to prevention and the building of a culture of
peace. Prevention is at the heart of protection. The
preventive capacity of the Organization must be
enhanced. At the same time, Member States need to
take steps to inculcate the values of peace, tolerance
and harmony that contribute to long-term prevention.
The second theme is that of coordination among
all stakeholders. We believe that the protection of
civilians Is the primary justification for a United
Nations presence in the field. However, various
political, humanitarian, military and development
components of United Nations missions in the field
lack an integrated focus on the protection of civilians.

09-20856

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

Indeed, protection should be one of the main mandates
of any United Nations mission in the field, whether it
be a peacekeeping, political or peacebuilding mission.
Work should begin on crafting clear guidelines for
effective coordination, particularly among the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO), and the Department of Political Affairs (DPA).
In conclusion, my delegation once again
expresses its grave concern over the deteriorating
humanitarian situation caused by the ongoing Israeli
attacks in and around the Gaza Strip. Israel must
comply with resolution 1860 (2009). My delegation
strongly
urges
the
international
community,
particularly the Council, to take effective steps to
ensure implementation of that resolution and thereby
bring about a complete ceasefire in the Gaza Strip
forthwith.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Mr. President, allow
me to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this first month
of the new year. In addition, Sir, I thank you for
convening this debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, an issue which should never be far
from our attention. Here, at the beginning of a new
year, let us renew our conviction that no civilian
anywhere should bear the costs of war.
As we speak, our thoughts are with the thousands
of men, women and children who have been killed and
who have suffered in Gaza in the last 19 days.
Civilians have been largely affected by this conflict,
and the brutality continues. We call for an immediate
ceasefire, as requested in resolution 1860 (2009). This
conflict must end now.
In Afghanistan as well, a new wave of violence is
destroying the lives of innocent civilians. More than
2,100 civilians died in 2008 alone. Women, men,
students, teachers, aid workers, farmers, tribal leaders
and clergy are all victims. The issue of civilian
casualties strikes at the heart of Afghanistan.
In the past few years, the Taliban, Al-Qaida and
other terrorist elements have embraced tactics that
target civilians with increasing deadliness. In 2008,
terrorists accounted for the majority of civilian
casualties. The numbers of victims of the terrorists are
sobering. In 2008 alone, at least 250 civilians were
executed, and an additional 725, or more, were killed

09-20856

by suicide attacks or by improvised explosive devices
(IEDs). This targeting of civilians by the Taliban has
accomplished several terrible objectives.
First, the terrorists have demonstrated their
complete disregard for the sanctity of human life.
Suicide bombs kill more civilians than military
personnel. The Taliban regularly abduct, torture and
execute civilians, particularly targeting Afghans and
foreigners who are perceived to be cooperating with, or
receiving services from, the Government or the
international community. They behead doctors,
teachers, clergy and tribal leaders, recruit children as
suicide bombers and spray acid in the face of
schoolgirls. Taliban harm to civilians and the creation
of an environment of distrust and fear impede the
ability of the Afghan Government and the international
community to deliver services to the people who need
them most.
Secondly, the Taliban are using civilians as
human shields, hiding in towns and villages and using
men, women and children as cover for attacks on
Government and international forces. As a result, over
60 per cent of civilian casualties have occurred in the
south and east of the country, where the Taliban and
Al-Qaida are most active.
Unfortunately, many civilians have also suffered
and lost their lives during counter-terrorist operations.
This is a matter of grave concern for the Government
of Afghanistan. His Excellency President Karzai has
recently and repeatedly raised concerns and has asked
the international forces to find ways to prevent civilian
deaths. Our Government believes that we need to work
together with the international community in a spirit of
open dialogue and cooperation to find a workable
framework in which to address this problem, and we
are discussing the issue with our partners. NATO and
American-led forces have already introduced new
strategies aimed at minimizing civilian casualties, and
we have seen some positive results. However, any life
is precious, and as a Government we have a particular
responsibility to safeguard the lives of our citizens and
not rest until every Afghan is safe.
To decrease the harm to the Afghan people, there
are three measures for us to consider. The first is to
avoid tactics that cause significant unintentional
civilian deaths. Air strikes in particular result in
enormous casualties among innocent people. We must
minimize reliance on those methods of warfare. The

11

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

second measure is to work more in cooperation with
the Government of Afghanistan and with law
enforcement on the ground. Home searches and
detention practices should operate within the
guidelines set out in the Afghan Constitution. The
Afghan national army and police should assume
responsibility for home searches. Thirdly, we
encourage the international forces to operate with
greater cultural sensitivity. In conducting searches and
arrests, they should avoid heavy-handed tactics and
operate with respect and minimal force. And where
civilian casualties do occur, there should be apologies
and accountability.
With the increasing violence of the Taliban, it has
become even more imperative that the Afghan
Government and the international community work
together to effectively eliminate terrorism. The
terrorists are responsible for the large majority of
civilian casualties, but the Government of Afghanistan
and the international forces bear a heavier burden: we
must provide security and protection to the people who
need it. Our energies must be channelled collectively to
prove to the Afghan people that we consider their
welfare to be central to the endeavour for peace and
stability in the country.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Bu Dhhair (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to begin by expressing our gratitude and
appreciation to the presidency for convening this
important meeting to discuss the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts. This is taking place while many
civilians are continuing to suffer in several armed areas
and conflicts.
Our world today endeavours to establish the
values and principles of human rights. Any violations
of those rights, regardless of the colour, race, religion
or political affiliation of those who commit them, have
become absolutely unacceptable, particular during
armed conflict. The United Nations Charter, global
humanitarian laws and human rights laws, as well as
divine law, hold all Member States — particular States
members of the Security Council — responsible and
accountable to seek all possible means, and to seek
them in a permanent way, to grant the United Nations a
vital, important and tangible role on the ground in
protecting human beings, especially civilians.

12

The tragic circumstances faced by the unarmed
population of the occupied Gaza Strip, due to the
savage onslaught in which civilians are subjected to all
kinds of killings, horrors and expulsions, call for
urgent action and a firm stand to stop the aggression
immediately, with no delay, to protect the lives of
civilians. One and a half million people live in the
Gaza Strip, the majority of them civilians. A helpless
minority militia faces a professional military institution
that is using bombs that sow fear in the hearts of
children and kill them indiscriminately. That can only
lead to the creation of a generation that is more violent,
more extreme, and will engender more hatred and
resentment as the days go by. The same applies to
those who live under siege, who are denied food and
medicine, as we hear from the testimony of
international organizations working on the ground in
Gaza. It is as if the Israelis had not learned any lessons
from history.
The practice of the Israeli occupation army is a
clear violation of international laws and conventions,
and that must oblige us to take a very clear stand vis-àvis such inhumane practices and practices that do not
guarantee the safety of civilians. We must take a stand
against such practices. When arrogant countries allow
the voices of arms and bombs to prevail and think that
by killing, terrorizing and starving innocent civilians
they achieve their political goals or that that will bring
them peace, they are totally mistaken. That is a deadend road and will only bring more instability and
counter-violence, more pain and suffering, and will
transform those who are defenceless — civilians who
are seeking a better life for themselves — into
extremists who know only the language of violence,
blood-letting and extremism in all its forms.
Any life lost means that we have lost a human
being who could have made a positive contribution to a
better society. That is why we call on the Council to
take into consideration the Secretary-General’s
proposal of 27 November 2007. His vision, which we
share, is a practical solution to ensure the commitment
of the Security Council to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. The Security Council has established a
working group on the protection of civilians that will
assist it in moving effectively towards providing
genuine and appropriate protection for unarmed
civilians in armed conflict similar to the working group
established pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005) on
children and armed conflict.

09-20856

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

The armed conflicts currently raging and their
psychological and physical harm to civilians in various
corners of the world — including Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Somalia,
Chad, the Philippines, Nepal and elsewhere — should
compel Member States to draw on all proposals on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict made by the
United Nations, and the Secretary-General and his
representatives in particular, in order to draft effective
resolutions establishing investigative committees or
similar entities to protect civilians in a practical and
concrete manner.
My delegation invites all peace-loving Member
States to create a new and effective system or
methodology for taking serious action against any
country that undertakes the kind of military aggression
that Israel has unleashed on the Palestinians,
threatening the lives of civilians. No human logic or
conscience can accept a country that preaches
democracy, respect for human rights, especially those
of women and children, and love of peace using tanks
and bombs to kill, maim and terrorize civilians.
If the proposals presented by the United Nations
through its Secretary-General and his representatives
are not given due consideration, the Organization and
its main bodies, the Security Council in particular, will
lose all credibility in the eyes of unarmed civilians,
who call on us to assume our responsibility for
protecting them in armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Finland.
Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
deliver the following statement on behalf of all five
Nordic countries: Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Sweden
and Finland.
The Nordic countries welcome this six-monthly
open debate and wish to thank the presidency of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General for
organizing it, as well as Under-Secretary-General John
Holmes for his topical briefing. Timely briefings to the
Security Council by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Emergency Relief Coordinator, the
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and
other relevant actors will help the Council to act
sufficiently early on in conflict situations to effectively
protect civilians at risk.

09-20856

The protection of civilians in armed conflicts is a
cornerstone of international humanitarian law.
Regrettably, and in spite of the established status of the
fundamental rule of distinction — identified by the
International Court of Justice as an intransgressible
principle of international customary law — civilians
often fall victim to the disregard of States and armed
groups of their obligations. Even State signatories to
the relevant instruments fail to abide by the relevant
provisions. The Nordic countries wish to emphasize
that unarmed men, women and children must not be
targeted. All necessary measures must be taken by
parties to a conflict to avoid civilian casualties.
The Nordic countries are deeply concerned by the
escalation of violence in Gaza and the killing and
injuries inflicted upon large numbers of noncombatants. The ceasefire called for by the Security
Council must be given effect. Life-saving ambulances
must be given unrestricted access to the wounded;
medical personnel, hospitals and other medical units
must be respected and protected. It is also worth
recalling that disrespect of the rules by one party to a
conflict can never serve as a justification for the
deliberate targeting of civilians or civilian objects.
It is essential to strengthen local capacities to
protect civilians at risk of grave human rights
violations.
Through
the
Nordic
Coordinated
Arrangement for Military Peace Support, the Nordic
countries have offered training support for peace
support operations to partners, inter alia, in the western
Balkans and Ukraine. Our additional focus is now on
Africa, where we are examining potential Nordic
projects to support the development of the African
peace and security architecture.
In order to build sustainable peace and security,
there is a need for increased attention to women’s equal
and active participation in conflict prevention, peace
negotiations, reconstruction and political participation.
As women and children are vulnerable in conflicts,
their situation should be addressed accordingly. The
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) is crucial. The Nordic countries are committed
to doing their share in the implementation process. A
concrete case in point is that all five Nordic countries
have drawn up national action plans on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The scope and brutality of sexual violence against
women in the eastern parts of the Democratic Republic

13

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

of Congo are particularly worrying. Hundreds of
thousands of women in the region have been raped, and
they continue to lack protection from further sexual
violence, despite the efforts of humanitarian actors, the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and others. Much
more needs to be done in order to address these
horrible crimes. In this context, it is crucial to
implement resolution 1820 (2008) on sexual violence
in armed conflict.
We recognize the need to enhance the
complementarity and coordination of national policies
and strategies related to security, development, human
rights
and
humanitarian
issues.
International
humanitarian law grants children special protection and
sets a minimum age for participating in hostilities. The
short-, medium- and long-term impacts of armed
conflict on children, adolescents and young persons
must be addressed in an effective, sustainable and
comprehensive manner. The Convention on the Rights
of the Child clearly states that children have the right
to express their opinion in matters that affect them. We
have to expand opportunities for children’s voices to be
heard and given due weight in peacebuilding and
reconciliation efforts. More attention needs to be paid
to this aspect of the implementation of resolution 1612
(2005) on children and armed conflict. The Nordic
countries wish to emphasize the need to mainstream
the rights of the child into all activities in conflict and
post-conflict situations.
The engagement of the Security Council has
greatly elevated the relevance of child protection
concerns within its international peace and security
agenda and has allowed for opportunities to improve
efforts and actions for the protection of children. While
there has been progress in some field, there is an urgent
need to address all grave violations; in particular,
sexual violence against children is a heinous
consequence of war. We wish to join the call by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict for strong action also to
be taken against those who sexually violate children.
On a more positive note, the Nordic countries
recall the establishment of the International Criminal
Court as an achievement of historical significance.
Now that the Statute is in force for 108 States and the
system laid down for it is fully operational and
functioning, there is much reason to be confident in the
Court’s future. The ideas of justice and accountability

14

have been institutionally anchored at the international
level and more broadly embraced than ever before. The
first proceedings of the International Criminal Court
highlight the duty to protect civilians in armed
conflicts. The Nordic countries urge all States to ratify
the Rome Statute and to fully implement its provisions
in their national legislation.
We are also encouraged by the unequivocal
statement issued at the 2005 World Summit on the
responsibility to protect civilian populations from
genocide, crimes against humanity, ethnic cleansing
and war crimes. We look forward to the report of the
Secretary-General on this notion and believe that it will
provide a basis for further deepening the international
consensus on the necessary steps to be taken by both
States and international organizations to prevent
humanitarian catastrophes.
Let me conclude by affirming that the Nordic
countries will continue to be firmly committed with
respect to this issue of great importance.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Ms. Shalev (Israel): This month has proven to be
a complicated one. Allow me to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate. I further wish to thank UnderSecretary-General John Holmes for his informative
briefing and to thank him and his team for their
important and ongoing humanitarian work, in
particular in our region at the present difficult time.
This debate is, to be sure, considering a wide
range of issues related to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. All of them are important. Yet there
exists one major threat, one distinct danger to civilians,
that the Security Council must not and cannot ignore:
terrorism. Terrorism causes enormous harm to civilians
in armed conflict. Terrorism turns civilians into targets,
shields and weapons. “Acts, methods and practices of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations ... are
activities aimed at the destruction of human rights”
(A/CONF.157/23, attachment, part I, para. 17): so
stated the United Nations in clear and unambiguous
terms.
Nowhere is this more apparent than in Hamas’s
terrorist war against Israeli civilians and the Palestinian
people.
It is on Israeli civilians that Hamas rockets rained
down for eight long years. For more than one million

09-20856

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

Israelis, daily life included rocket and mortar attacks
against houses, schools, kindergartens, markets and all
forms of civilian life.
These are not indiscriminate attacks as some like
to classify them. Hamas’s attacks are very
discriminate: directed deliberately at civilians — men,
women and children. These attacks kill and maim
Israelis, creating a living nightmare, a nightmare that
forced Israel to act in self-defence.
As Hamas launches those attacks, they cower
behind Palestinian civilians, knowing full well the
danger they invite. Civilian casualties in Gaza, as a
result, are the heartbreaking consequence and sole
responsibility of Hamas’s terrorist actions. Hamas
hides weapons and explosives in mosques and uses
minarets to launch attacks. What kind of person, we
must ask, uses a house of prayer as a weapons depot?
The answer is Hamas terrorists.
Evidence against Hamas abounds. Hamas
terrorists launched rockets from school yards and
rigged Palestinian schools with explosives as booby traps.
What kind of person, we must ask, uses schools — places
where children gather — as a battlefield? The answer
is Hamas terrorists.
Hamas commanders and leaders set up shop in
the basement of Gaza’s largest hospital, the Shifa
hospital. Hamas fighters and members have entered
hospitals and donned doctors’ coats in an effort to
blend into the civilians of Gaza. What kind of person,
we must ask, uses hospitals to cower behind injured
civilians? The answer is the same: Hamas terrorists.
As Israel has facilitated the movement of
humanitarian aid into the Gaza Strip — more than 800
trucks totalling over 25,000 tons of aid — there are
repeated and horrifying reports that Hamas terrorists
have seized aid, distributing it to its own members and
supporters and selling what is left to the impoverished
civilians. What kind of person, we must ask,
confiscates humanitarian supplies from civilians in a
conflict zone? The answer is the same again: Hamas
terrorists.
It is Hamas and terrorists like it that view
civilians not as a population to be avoided in an armed
conflict but as a population to be exploited in an armed
conflict.
We must use today’s debate to ensure that we
denounce the harm that terrorism inflicts on civilians.

09-20856

In recent years, more civilians were killed, maimed and
injured by terrorists than by legitimate armed forces.
And we must act against terrorists and their inhumane
methods. Failure to act simply because terrorists are
using civilians as cover would broadcast an invitation
to every terrorist group in the world to set up shop
inside a hospital or a kindergarten.
Hamas’s despicable and cynical use of targeting
civilians is an appalling example of the toll that
terrorism takes on all civilians. When civilized people
look at children, they see the future. When terrorists
look at children, they see targets and human shields.
The Security Council must offer no refuge to those
who drag civilians into armed conflicts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for convening
this meeting and to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs for his briefing on this matter.
As the most recent report of the Secretary-General on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict stresses,
“the protection of civilians is, and must remain, an
absolute priority ... for the United Nations, for the
Security Council and, above all, for the Members
States, with which the primary responsibility for
protecting civilians lies” (S/2007/643, para. 3).
Civilians are entitled, in all circumstances, to respect
for their persons, their honour, their family rights, their
religious convictions and practices and their manners
and customs. They are to be humanely treated and
protected at all times, especially against all acts of
violence or threats of such acts.
Against this background, we are following with
profound apprehension the escalation of violence in the
Gaza Strip and express our deep concern over the loss
of the lives of hundreds of innocent civilians. There
must be an immediate ceasefire and an end to military
hostilities to create the conditions necessary to
normalize the situation. We advocate urgent active
engagement of the international community, including
through practical measures in the conflict zone, to
prevent violence and other undesirable actions.
Azerbaijan calls for immediate and unconditional
implementation of Security Council resolution 1860
(2009) of 8 January. The protection of civilians,
especially women and children, who are bearing the
brunt of the deteriorating humanitarian crisis, should

15

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

be ensured. All measures must be taken to avoid
civilian casualties and to help people in need.
The international community, acting chiefly
through the United Nations, has proclaimed and set
down in international instruments a compendium of
fundamental values, such as peace and respect for
human rights. The consensus on those values was
reflected in the adoption in 1948 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, according to whose
preamble “recognition of the inherent dignity and of
the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the
human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and
peace in the world”.
Regrettably, even more than 60 years after the
adoption of the Universal Declaration, the conspicuous
silence in certain instances serves to accentuate a
deficiency that is characteristic of the international
community today: the gap between the theoretical
values of law and harsh reality. This impedes the
application in practice of the rich potential of the
standards of international law.
The ongoing armed conflict in and around the
Nagorny-Karabakh region of the Republic of
Azerbaijan has resulted in the occupation of almost one
fifth of the territory of Azerbaijan and made
approximately one out of every eight people in the
country a refugee or internally displaced person. Most
serious international offences, such as war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide, have been
committed in the course of the conflict.
The Security Council, in its resolutions adopted
in 1993 following the seizure by Armenia of the
territories of Azerbaijan, condemned, inter alia, attacks
on civilians and the bombardment of inhabited areas
and expressed grave concern at the displacement of
large numbers of civilians in my country.
Concern about the extent to which the rules of
international humanitarian law were being observed in
the occupied territories of Azerbaijan was heightened
when the General Assembly, highly alarmed by the farreaching implications of continuing illegal settlement
practices in those territories accompanied by serious
and systematic interference with property rights, as
well as environmental and economic damage, decided
to address the matter and adopted two resolutions at its
sixtieth and sixty-second sessions.

16

As the Secretary-General made clear in his
aforementioned report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict,
“ensuring the right to return constitutes a
categorical rejection of the gains of ethnic
cleansing ... and offers some measure of justice to
those displaced from their homes and land,
thereby removing a source of possible future
tension and conflict” (S/2007/643, para. 55).
It is important that the recognition of the right to
return, along with increased attention to its practical
implementation and concrete measures aimed at
overcoming obstacles preventing the return, be applied
by the Security Council, the General Assembly and
other relevant United Nations bodies with more
systematic regularity.
Particular consideration must be given to the
implications for the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts aggravated by population displacements,
foreign military occupation, attempts to change the
demographic balance in occupied territories and the
illicit exploitation of natural resources therein. The
impact of conflict on housing, land and property in
such situations requires a more consistent approach in
order to ensure the safe and dignified return of those
forced to leave their homes.
It is clear that there can be no long-term and
sustainable peace without justice. This requires
consistent commitment by States to meeting their
obligations to prosecute those responsible for breaches
of international humanitarian law or international
human rights law. In cases when such breaches
constitute war crimes, crimes against humanity or even
genocide, for which universal jurisdiction is provided
with regard to alleged offenders, it is important that the
pursuit of individuals be undertaken through the
domestic legal system of involved or third-party States,
while State responsibility be enforced through relevant
inter-State mechanisms.
Ending impunity is essential not only for the
purposes
of
determining
individual
criminal
responsibility for serious crimes, but also in the
interests of peace, truth, reconciliation and recognition
of the rights of the victims. To proceed otherwise
would be tantamount to accepting the consequences of
breaches of the rule of law and human rights and thus
legitimizing the results of aggression and ethnic

09-20856

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

cleansing or, in other words, would be the illustration
of the prevalence of force over justice.

peacekeeping remains a dynamic and effective
instrument of international peace and security.

The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Australia.

As a contribution to addressing this challenge,
Australia, in partnership with Uruguay, will host a oneday workshop on 27 January focused on the
implementation of protection of civilian tasks in
peacekeeping missions. The workshop is intended to
provide a forum for dialogue among Member States,
the
United
Nations
and
non-governmental
organizations with a view to promoting a common
understanding of the challenges faced in the
implementation of such mandates. In so doing, we
hope to work towards closing the gap between mandate
and implementation. We invite all Member States to
participate in the workshop and to contribute to
addressing this important challenge.

Mr. Hill (Australia): Thank you, Sir, for
convening this important debate. We welcome the
opportunity to engage on this issue in the Council. This
thematic debate is a valuable opportunity for the
Council and the broader membership to take a step
back from the task of implementation in countryspecific situations and to consider the issue in a more
strategic fashion.
In this regard, we commend the efforts of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the Council in updating the aide-memoire on the
protection of civilians. We also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Holmes for his comprehensive briefing in this
regard earlier today.
Given the constraints of time, I will focus my
remarks on three areas of importance for Australia.
First, I would like to turn to the mandated task of
protecting civilians, which has increasingly become a
central feature of United Nations peacekeeping. Recent
events in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo have highlighted the critical importance
of this mandated task. These events demonstrated the
expectations of host populations and the international
community associated with a protection mandate and
they also starkly illustrated the constraints and
challenges faced by United Nations peacekeepers. The
Council is to be commended for its clarity in renewing
the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo and the
authorization of additional capacity.
The
challenge
remains,
however,
in
implementation. Too often we have witnessed a
disconnect between the political understanding reached
in the Council and the practical reality on the ground.
At times, this disconnect is due to capacity constraints.
At other times, it is due to different interpretations of
the mandate and the absence of a common
understanding regarding the types of tasks permitted
and required by the mandate. This disconnect between
the strategic and operational levels needs to be
reconciled in order to ensure that reasonable
expectations are being set and that United Nations

09-20856

Secondly, I would like to emphasize the need to
end impunity for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law. As the
Secretary-General noted in his 2007 report
(S/2007/643), where we are unable to prevent such
abuses, we must at the very least ensure that the
perpetrators and those who bear political responsibility
for violence against civilians are held accountable for
their actions. This is particularly the case in relation to
sexual and gender-based violence. We must renew our
commitment to ending impunity for such crimes.
Finally, I would like to touch briefly on the
principle of the responsibility to protect. We look
forward to receiving the Secretary-General’s report on
the responsibility to protect in the coming days. We
expect the report to contribute to a shared conceptual
understanding of the principle that was agreed by our
leaders at the 2005 World Summit and to a shared
appreciation of what is required on the part of Member
States and the United Nations to implement the
principle.
While implementation of the responsibility to
protect requires action by a wide range of actors, the
World Summit Outcome and the Charter of the United
Nations give the Security Council a specific role to
play in its implementation. To prevent mass atrocity
crimes, the Council must ensure it uses the means at its
disposal in timely and innovative ways. To take
forward the Council’s role, there is a need for it to be
more receptive to early warning information from a
wide range of sources, more willing to put country
situations in which people are at risk on its agenda, and

17

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

more prepared to take early action designed to address
the situation at hand. And Member States, of course,
need to support such Council action.
We trust that all Member States can agree on the
central premise that underlies this debate, namely, that
civilians deserve our protection. Australia remains
committed to working with partners in the international
community to ensure that this premise is realized.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to express our gratitude to the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John
Holmes, for the important briefing that he has
presented this morning. We would also like to note that
we share his concerns about the safety and security of
civilians in several conflict zones.
My country’s delegation would also like to
express its thanks and gratitude to you, Mr. President,
for holding this important meeting to address the issue
of the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. This
meeting is aimed at entrenching the basic tenets of
international humanitarian law, the Fourth Geneva
Convention and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. It is also aimed at reaffirming the political,
legal and moral responsibilities of parties to conflicts
towards civilians, civilian institutions and the
protection of civilians in conflict situations. Moreover,
the role of the international community lies not just in
guaranteeing complete adherence to these laws, but
also in guaranteeing that there will be no impunity in
cases of violations.
This meeting comes at a difficult time, as the
world watches, live and in astonishment, the situation
in Gaza. The situation has been ongoing for three
weeks now. All international rules and standards
regulating armed conflict have been violated. The
Israeli aggression has targeted unarmed and innocent
civilians and destroyed infrastructure in Gaza. Here,
Jordan joins the international call issued by the
Secretary-General for an end to the suffering of
civilians in Gaza and for their protection.
We are faced with an unprecedented example of
inhumane aggression against the security, safety, rights
and basic freedoms of human beings, the most
important of which is the right to life and freedom
from fear and terror, and against the right to the basic

18

requirements of normal life. We are witnessing a
flagrant violation — an attack against the identity of
the Palestinian people and their character, future and
basic rights. We are also witnessing an unjustified
siege that has cut the lifeline of the 1.5 million
Palestinians living in Gaza. These are civilians who are
being subjected to a disproportionate use of force and
to collective punishment. They deserve immediate
protection by this Council.
I will not list all the figures, which are known to
us all, but I would like to point out that 280 children
have been killed, 1,200 have been wounded, and many
more are living in fear and terror. This terror will haunt
them for generations and decades to come. UNICEF
has clearly expressed its deep concern over the
destructive impact that the Israeli aggression has had
on children in Gaza.
Israel must protect civilians, especially children,
who constitute 56 per cent of Gaza’s residents. Israel
must abide by the provisions of international
humanitarian law, especially the principles of
distinction between targets and proportionality. These
figures are not simply collateral damage; rather, they
represent primary damage caused by targeted military
operations in a disproportionate and exaggerated use of
force. This arbitrary use of force does not distinguish
between a military target and the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East school, in which a group of women, children and
elderly people had sought refuge from Israel’s military
operations.
The evacuation of the injured and the provision
of safe passage for ambulances and medical personnel
are among the most important tenets of international
humanitarian law. On that basis, Israel must guarantee
and facilitate access by medical staff and ambulances,
which are now unable to do their duty in the light of
the dangerous circumstances prevailing in Gaza. Israel
must abide by the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War and the Protocols
Additional I and II to the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 1949, which pertain to the protection of the
victims of international and non-international armed
conflict. It must also abide by all relevant international
instruments, the Declaration on the Protection of
Women and Children in Emergency and Armed
Conflict and all relevant General Assembly resolutions.

09-20856

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

Jordan calls on the international community to
uphold its responsibilities and obligations in protecting
civilians in armed conflict, including by calling upon
Israel to immediately implement resolution 1860
(2009), which calls for an immediate ceasefire that
would lead to a full withdrawal of Israeli forces from
Gaza and guarantee the full protection of the
international community for the people of Gaza against
the Israeli military aggression.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate
on a matter that my delegation believes to be of particular
importance, given its topical and sensitive nature. We are
also grateful for the report by Mr. Holmes this morning.
The Security Council has provided the legal
framework for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict through its resolutions 1265 (1999), 1296
(2000) and 1674 (2006). This legal framework should
be used to protect victims. The Security Council, in its
resolution 1674 (2006), established that attacks
deliberately targeting civilians or other protected
individuals in situations of armed conflict represented
a flagrant breach of international humanitarian law and
condemned such practices most energetically.
This Council has also repeatedly required
compliance with obligations under international law, in
particular the provisions of the Hague Conventions, the
Geneva Conventions and their Protocols, and the
decisions of this Council. The Council has repeatedly
condemned, in the most energetic terms, all acts of
violence or abuse committed against civilians in
situations of armed conflict in breach of the applicable
international obligations, be it in Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, Darfur or
the Middle East.
The recent political history of my country and its
commitment to international law, international
humanitarian law and respect for human rights prompt
us to speak up on matters that occur in other places. We
are particularly sensitive to the suffering of civilian
populations, and we are of the view that the State
apparatus is responsible for protecting citizens living in
territories under its control.
In this context, the Republic of Argentina
expresses its profound concern with regard to the

09-20856

deterioration of the situation in the Middle East. We
condemn the excessive use of force by Israel in Gaza
and the launching of rockets towards Israel from the
Gaza Strip.
Full respect should be ensured for obligations in
the context of international humanitarian law and all
measures should be taken to protect the civilian
population. The United Nations reports are eloquent:
the number of civilians who have died as a result of
bombings and land operations is horrific. This must
stop.
Humanitarian conditions in the occupied
Palestinian territories are also cause for special concern
for our countries. The international community should
take urgent steps to alleviate the suffering of the
Palestinian population. Israel must also contribute to
that end by allowing humanitarian personnel
immediate and secure access.
The humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip is
alarming. In the current circumstances, international
assistance cannot reach the affected population. If we
do not act urgently, a major humanitarian crisis could
ensue, potentially affecting more than 1.5 million
Palestinians. We know that various coordination efforts
are being considered to provide assistance in the area.
Argentina is preparing a significant package of
humanitarian assistance for Gaza. We are prepared to
join our efforts with those of the international
community. Our country is also prepared to contribute
to official assistance, in particular by providing
personnel from our White Helmets initiative and
placing specialized teams of trained volunteers able to
act as reserves at the disposal of the United Nations
humanitarian system.
The
Government
of Argentina
strongly
emphasizes that this is the time for diplomacy. The
inclination towards bellicose action should be
abandoned. A negotiated way out of the crisis should
be supported, including the urgent establishment of an
unconditional ceasefire that allows the international
community to immediately set up a humanitarian truce
to make it possible to help people at risk.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Graham (New Zealand): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for calling this open debate.
We welcome the latest revised aide-memoire on the

19

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

protection of civilians in armed conflict. We also thank
Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his compelling
briefing earlier today. The plight of civilians caught in
current conflicts underscores the importance and
immediacy of this subject for the Council and the
international community. As the issue of the protection
of civilians is wide-ranging, in the interests of time I
will focus my comments on areas of importance to
New Zealand.
First and foremost, as the aide-memoire affirms,
it is the responsibility of parties to armed conflict to
ensure the protection of civilians in conflict areas. It is
a distressing reality that steps necessary to protect
civilian populations are not being taken by parties to
conflicts. Even more deplorable is the fact that
civilians are not simply being caught in the crossfire
but that, in many cases, are actually the targets of
attacks.
New Zealand continues to be appalled at human
rights violations and abuses directed against civilian
populations. The crises in Darfur, Somalia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zimbabwe are
of particular concern, with human rights abuses
occurring widely and often with apparent impunity. In
many cases, targeted attacks against civilian
populations, sexual violence, the recruitment of child
soldiers, summary executions and the forced removal
of civilian populations are causing extreme
humanitarian distress. New Zealand stands with the
international community in expressing its deep concern
at those situations. We fully support United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions and actors in
their efforts to protect civilians in zones of armed
conflict in Africa.
The ongoing crisis in Gaza throws into sharp
relief the plight of civilian populations caught in
fighting by protagonists who show little regard for
their safety. The indiscriminate firing of rockets into
towns and the full-scale military campaigns being
conducted in heavily populated cities inevitably mean
that the civilian population pays the heaviest price. The
protection of civilians begins with the need for an
immediate, durable and fully respected ceasefire, as
called for by the Council in resolution 1860 (2009).
Full access must be allowed to relief agencies to assist
the people of Gaza, who have borne the brunt of the
suffering. Those are practical and immediately possible
actions that simply require political will on the part of
both protagonists.

20

The security situation in Afghanistan remains of
concern, with ongoing insurgent attacks against the
Government of Afghanistan and the forces of NATO
and the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF).
NATO and ISAF have stated clearly the importance of
avoiding civilian casualties to the maximum extent
possible. New Zealand is playing an active role in the
protection of civilians through its Provincial
Reconstruction Team in Bamyan province. The Team
provides daily security to the people of Bamyan and
facilitates development assistance programmes.
New Zealand is also deeply concerned at the
increasing trend of attacks deliberately targeted at
humanitarian workers in conflict zones. Many of those
attacks involve humanitarian workers in United
Nations-mandated assistance missions. We must do
more to ensure the safety and security of those
unarmed civilian workers. New Zealand urges all
parties to armed conflict to respect international
humanitarian law, and recalls in particular the duty to
respect and protect humanitarian assistance personnel.
We welcome the inclusion in the aide-memoire of the
section on humanitarian access and the safety and
security of humanitarian workers.
Finally, New Zealand is proud to be among the
first countries to have signed the Convention on Cluster
Munitions. The Convention places at its centre the people
who are most affected by cluster munitions — the
victims and communities trying to rebuild after armed
conflict has disrupted their lives.
In conclusion, New Zealand strongly supports
practical and concrete action to enhance the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We urge the Council to
keep those issues at the forefront of its work.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tanzania.
Mrs. Kafanabo (United Republic of Tanzania): At
the outset, let me thank your delegation, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate. We also thank Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his
informative briefing. This debate comes at an
opportune time, as it is taking place 60 years after the
adoption of the Geneva Conventions, which provide
for the protection of civilians in time of conflict.
It is distressing that there are still many conflict
situations in many parts of the world where civilians are

09-20856

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

in dire need of protection and where their human rights
and dignity are grossly violated. On 10 December 2008,
we commemorated in the General Assembly 60 years of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In doing
so, we reaffirmed the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and stated, inter alia, that we have a duty to step
up our efforts to promote and protect all human rights
and to prevent, stop and redress all human rights
violations. That is a duty we have to fulfil as we
deliberate the protection of civilians in conflict.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
not an option for warring parties — it is mandatory.
While parties to a conflict are duty-bound to protect
civilians, in particular the most vulnerable groups, such
as women and children, what we are witnessing on the
ground is very different. Civilians, and in particular
women and children, have become direct targets in
wars. Women and children are subject to atrocities such
as rape, sexual and gender-based violence, forced
labour and all forms of violence. We condemn all
parties that perpetuate all forms of violence and
violations of human rights against civilian populations.
Indeed, the protection of civilians is a matter of human
rights obligations in all its manifestations, for victims
are robbed of their dignity irrespective of who they are
or who they support in a conflict.
It is unacceptable that civilians should be left to
suffer as conflicts rage on. We must act to end
impunity, in our national capacities and collectively.
National and international legal systems need to be
strengthened to ensure that justice takes its course for
those who abuse and violate human rights and that
victims are adequately compensated. We therefore urge
warring parties to respect international law, in
particular international humanitarian and refugee law,
and allow free access for humanitarian aid and workers
and ensure their protection.
The responsibility to guarantee international
peace and security is a matter for all Members of the
United Nations, individually and in our regional and
subregional organizations. In that endeavour, we are all
responsible, not only for our acts for or against peace
and security, but also for acts of those in areas of our
jurisdiction. The United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations all have a role to play.
I will illustrate this using the African region as an
example. We have the Peer Review Mechanism in
tandem with the New Partnership for Africa’s

09-20856

Development; we have various pacts and protocols at
the level of African subregions, such as the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development, under which a
protocol on the protection of refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and their property rights was
elaborated. Similarly, a protocol on the prevention and
punishment of the crime of genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and all forms of
discrimination has been elaborated. I believe that
subregional organizations elsewhere have similar
instruments. The United Nations needs to collaborate
with regional institutions in order to strengthen these
instruments.
It is of great importance to support all efforts
geared towards protecting civilians in armed conflict.
The best protection for civilians is to end conflicts. It is
thus of greater importance to address the causes of
conflict in the first place. As the Secretary-General
once said, without peace there cannot be development,
and without development there cannot be peace. In that
regard, we call upon the international community to
work with the United Nations to cause development to
prevail at sustainable levels.
Safety for civilians in camps for refugees and
IDPs would go a long way towards dissuading civilians
and children from following the path of war. Besides
bad governance and lack of democracy, ignorance,
disease and poverty are also factors driving of civilians
and children to joining armed parties, be they militias
or disputed Governments. Further, we call upon the
States Members of the United Nations to elaborate
further on the concept of the responsibility to protect,
as well as on human security as additional response
mechanisms in the protection of civilians and in ending
conflicts.
I wish to conclude by reiterating the commitment
of the Government of Tanzania to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and its willingness to work
with the international community in this regard.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I am
speaking on behalf of the Arab Group, which would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative to
convene this open debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. I would also like to thank UnderSecretary-General John Holmes for the valuable and
comprehensive briefing he gave during this debate.

21

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

Today’s six-monthly debate coincides with a
painful event that highlights its importance and places
it in a special light of practicality and everyday life. At
a time when the Council is meeting to discuss the
content, mechanisms and goals of the concept of
protection of civilians, we are witnessing the tragedy
of the Palestinian people in Gaza, which is of direct
relevance to the issue at hand today.
For the past 19 days, Israel has invaded Gaza
using the full potential of its war machine, spreading
terror and destruction, assassinating innocent children,
annihilating entire families and destroying homes,
schools and places of worship. The toll of this
aggression has exceeded 1,000 dead and 4,500 injured,
not to mention the tens of thousands of Palestinian
civilians who have been forced to flee their homes.
Where are we in terms of protecting civilians in times
of war?
Israel has not stopped at this point. Rather, it has
tightened its siege on Gaza and its residents. It has
deprived them of the most basic requirements of life. It
has prevented them from seeking their daily living and
has obstructed the fuel and electricity needed to power
public facilities, including hospitals. It has also
prevented humanitarian aid from reaching those in dire
need of its assistance. What precisely are we doing in
terms of protecting civilians in times of conflict?
Moreover, Israel has attacked a school run by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, in which families had
sought refuge from the Israeli war machine. Instead,
they were met with death. Medical teams and
international staff have also been targeted by the Israeli
military machine. In addition, the occupying forces, in
their vindictive military campaign, have used white
phosphorous bombs, as well as weapons that have been
banned internationally. What, then, are we doing to
uphold our duty to protect civilians in times of
conflict?
The catastrophic situation of civilians in Gaza is a
painful reminder of what the Palestinian people are
suffering every day throughout the occupied
Palestinian territories as a result of Israel’s illegitimate
occupation, its illegal settlement policies, its inhuman
siege and its efforts to annihilate the Palestinian
identity and punish Palestinian civilians. The
occupying Power has become more oppressive and
tyrannical as it flouts the principles of international

22

humanitarian law and the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949, which includes clear provisions pertaining to
the protection of civilians in times of war, clearly
stipulates the responsibilities that Israel as an
occupying Power must uphold and obliges it to
implement and respect those provisions. This was
reaffirmed strongly by the Human Rights Council in
the resolution adopted at its special session of
9 January 2009. The Council called “for immediate
international protection of the Palestinian people in the
occupied Palestinian territory in compliance with
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law”. (A/HRC/S-9/L.1/Rev.2, para. 9)
The Secretary-General has repeatedly condemned
the Israeli aggression and has called for its immediate
cessation. Moreover, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees has described the
Palestinians’ plight as the only conflict in the world in
which people are not even allowed to flee. Recently,
the Council adopted resolution 1860 (2009) calling for
an immediate ceasefire in order to put an end to the
bloodbath, whose price the unarmed Palestinians are
paying more dearly than anyone else. However, instead
of responding to or heeding the call of the Council,
Israel has pursued its aggressive policies and even
escalated its aggression, claiming the lives of dozens
every day with no concern for international appeals,
regardless of their source. What, then, are we doing to
uphold our duty to protect civilians in times of war?
What awaits the Palestinian people, the rest of the
Arab countries and the international community as a
whole? They expect the Council to work to ensure
Israel’s implementation of resolution 1860 (2009)
immediately and its immediate declaration of a
ceasefire. Every hour that passes jeopardizes the lives
of hundreds upon hundreds of innocents and increases
the desperate humanitarian situation of the rest of
Gaza’s residents. Is this not one of the duties of
protecting civilians of times of war?
The aide-memoire prepared for this meeting
indicates the need for the Security Council to take into
consideration the situation of most civilians, as well as
the responsibilities of parties to a conflict to protect
civilians and to respond to their basic needs. It also
condemned all the aggressor’s actions and called for an
immediate end to those and any others that would harm
civilians in situations of armed conflict, in accordance
with international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law and the relevant conventions.

09-20856

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

Therefore, if there is a way to translate those
good intentions into concrete implementation by
matching the Council’s words with actual deeds, and to
gauge their feasibility by their impact on the ground,
then civilians in Gaza and the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territories must be protected. That would
end the bloodshed and the aggression that has targeted
them, thus preserving the credibility of the Security
Council and enhancing the effectiveness of its efforts.
In conclusion, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, despite its importance, is part of a larger
challenge related to the need to peacefully resolve
conflicts and to positively and effectively address their
underlying causes. That challenge lies at the heart of
the responsibilities of the Security Council, which,
under the Charter of the United Nations, is the
principal organ responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate and the
Emergency Relief Coordinator for his briefing at the
beginning of this meeting.
This debate is taking place against the backdrop
of the armed conflict in Gaza, which is causing very
high numbers of civilian casualties, in particular
among children. We support resolution 1860 (2009),
which is legally binding on the parties to the conflict,
and call for its implementation, first and foremost in
the interest of the civilian population, whose rights are
not being respected, who are bearing the brunt of the
ongoing violence and who are being deprived of the
necessary humanitarian assistance. The parties to the
conflict have the responsibility under international
humanitarian law to facilitate humanitarian operations.
Civilian populations have always suffered the
consequences of armed conflicts, but modern warfare
and the changed nature of armed conflict have
massively exacerbated their situation. The Security
Council has routinely discussed the plight of civilians
in conflict situations and achieved some remarkable
results. Most recently, resolutions 1674 (2006) and
1738 (2006) constituted important steps in enhancing
the normative and operational framework for the
protection of civilians.

09-20856

Nevertheless, the disproportionate burden that
armed conflicts continue to place on civilians requires
more consistent and more permanent engagement. The
establishment of an expert-level group of the Council
and the consistent application and updating of the aidememoire with a view to the consideration of issues
pertaining to the protection of civilians would facilitate
more systematic consideration of protection issues.
A positive development outside the Council was
the adoption of the Convention on Cluster Munitions,
which we have signed, together with nearly 100 other
States. While that was only a first step, we hope that it
will rapidly lead to the total elimination of such
weapons, which are by nature indiscriminate and
causing enormous suffering among civilian populations
around the globe.
This year, we are celebrating the sixtieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Geneva
Conventions, one of the outstanding achievements in
the history of international law and the centrepiece of
international humanitarian law. Only the full
implementation of the Geneva Conventions and of
other provisions of international humanitarian law can
ensure the effective protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Sadly, in the recent past, we have witnessed
an erosion in the observance of international
humanitarian law, and we must urgently reverse that
trend.
We are also supportive of the principle of the
responsibility to protect, endorsed at the summit level
more than three years ago, and call for its consistent
application both at the international level and by the
relevant intergovernmental bodies.
If the observance of the relevant standards of
international law is at the core of the protection
agenda, the effective fight against impunity is its
necessary complement. When national judiciaries fail
in their duty to prosecute the most serious crimes under
international law, the International Criminal Court can
step in to fill the gap. While more than 100 States have
become parties to the Rome Statute, the Security
Council also has a special obligation by virtue of the
referral powers given to it under the Statute.
One type of crime warrants the particular
attention of the Council. Owing to its large-scale,
systematic and targeted use, sexual violence is no
longer simply a by-product of armed conflict; it has
become a method of warfare aimed at destroying the

23

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

social fabric of communities in order to achieve
political and military ends. In that regard, we reaffirm
our support for resolution 1820 (2008). The protection
of civilians from acts of sexual violence must be a task
inherent to all peacekeeping missions, and the
Council’s mandates must offer clear guidance on how
to provide such protection. Furthermore, the full
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) requires
more resources for the collection of data on sexual
violence in conflict situations.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Nicaragua.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this important debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We also wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Holmes for the information
he provided today.
International humanitarian law is implemented in
times of war to protect persons who are not
participating or no longer participate in hostilities
because they have been wounded or taken prisoner. In
addition, it imposes restrictions on the methods and
means of combat. The main instruments of such law
are the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and its
Protocols Additional, which are nearly universally
accepted. I say “nearly” because this debate is
occurring in the face of a concrete case of the violation
and non-application of those international instruments.
This is the case in Israel’s terrible aggression carried
out by land, sea and air against the civilian inhabitants
of the Gaza Strip. We are witnesses to the fact that in
Gaza, the very bases of society — houses, civilian
infrastructure, public health facilities, universities and
schools — are being destroyed.

implementing on the ground the provision, set out in
the first paragraph of Article 1 of the Charter of the
United Nations, for the suppression of acts of
aggression or other breaches of the peace? How many
more children will have to die in Gaza before the
United Nations takes action?
In accordance with the instruments of
international humanitarian law that I mentioned
previously, in the event of hostilities every possible
precaution must be taken to avoid causing the
collateral death or injury of civilians, or damaging
civilian property. The distinction must be made
between property of a civilian nature, such as homes
and places of worship, and military targets.
However, Israel seems to have a contrary
understanding of these provisions and has taken every
possible measure, such as the use of the most
technologically advanced weapons — including
weapons of which the use is prohibited in international
humanitarian law — to cause the largest possible
number of civilian victims and the destruction of
civilian property. The banned weapons that are being
used, as borne out by independent experts in Gaza,
include white phosphorus and cluster munitions, which
are strictly banned in densely populated areas, such as
those we are talking about here.
Given this tragic situation, I would like to express
the profound disappointment of the people and the
Government of Nicaragua that the Security Council has
not been able to date to take real and concrete
measures on the ground or to comply with its
responsibility to immediately halt the Israeli aggression
against the Palestinian people. This concern is all the
greater given the possibility that the conflict could
spread through the region.

On Tuesday, the United Nations Committee on
the Rights of the Child denounced the devastating
effects of the Gaza conflict on children. The
Committee’s 18 experts recalled that the international
instruments to which Israel has acceded prohibit the
targeting of children in situations of armed conflict and
direct attacks on objects protected under international
law, including places that generally have a significant
presence of children, such as schools and hospitals.

The number of civilian victims in the Gaza Strip
has doubled since the adoption of resolution 1860
(2009), as have the derision and disdain of Israel of the
adopted resolution, of the body that adopted it, and of
the members of that body, particularly the permanent
members, and of the international community in
general. And this disdain does not end there, since the
Israeli slaughter and barbarity continues against the
Palestinian civilian population.

My delegation wonders: Who is stopping the
violation of the most fundamental rights of these
thousands of civilians, children and women who are
being massacred? What body of our Organization is

As a State Member of the United Nations, we
urge this body to comply with its responsibilities, take
the measures necessary to implement resolution 1860
(2009), and establish a ceasefire leading to a

24

09-20856

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

withdrawal of the Israeli occupying forces, thus halting
the genocide that is being practiced against the civilian
population of the Gaza Strip and ensuring the
unfettered delivery of humanitarian assistance. The
resolutions of the principal body of the United Nations
for the maintenance of international peace and security
must be complied with on the ground, all the more so
when human lives are at stake. We must act to protect
the civilians in the armed conflict in Gaza from the
Israeli armed aggression.
Given this situation of inertia, my Government
supports the call by the President of the General
Assembly, who at the request of the countries of the
Non-Aligned Movement has decided to reconvene the
tenth emergency special session of the Assembly. We
support the Secretary-General in all his initiatives on
the Middle East and any other international initiative
that will bring an end to the slaughter once and for all.
We have the unshirkable responsibility to protect
civilian populations in armed conflict.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): It is indeed appropriate that we should meet
on the issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict at this particular time. Despite the legal
developments and international agreements on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict that have
emerged since the establishment of the United Nations,
starting with the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and the
numerous resolutions subsequently adopted by the
Security Council, civilians are still paying the heaviest
price in armed conflicts.
It is indeed ironic that the gap between text and
implementation — between what the law dictates, on
the one hand, and what is practiced on the ground, on
the other — is gradually growing wider. We are
referring, of course, to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
Although some theorists like to commend what
they call the great developments in and evolution of
international law, civilians in armed conflict and those
living under foreign occupation and settlement are still
suffering from all forms of violence and forced
displacement; as well as the intentional deprivation of
humanitarian aid, not to mention the confiscation of
land. In short, those civilians are still being subjected
to everything that is contrary to the law, their only fault
being that they reside in so-called areas of armed

09-20856

conflict or that their lands have been occupied by
others and have been managed and administered in
their absence — or even in their presence. These lands
are being manipulated in a way that is very close to
genocide and ethnic cleansing.
In a statement I made to this Council on 27 May
2008, I referred to Mr. Holmes’ statement to the
Council in November 2007 on the deteriorating
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories,
especially Gaza, which he described at the time as
reaching the limits of what is bearable for any
community. I would now like to recall what Mr.
Holmes said in his statement of 27 May 2008. “In
Gaza, Israeli air attacks and ground incursions continue
to result in unacceptable Palestinian civilian
casualties” (S/PV.5898, p. 3).
At that time, seven months ago — which happens
to be the duration of the truce with Israel — I
described the inhuman situation of civilians in Gaza as
a result of collective punishment policies that are
legally actionable and that are embodied in the siege
and in the deprivation, oppression and tyranny that
Israel has practiced against civilians under the
umbrella of a so-called truce. This so-called truce has
in fact led to the transformation of the Gaza Strip into
the biggest collective detention camp in the world,
while its residents have been deprived of the most
basic requirements of life. The situation I described
was the tragic situation during the truce of the past
seven months, as Mr. Holmes, who is sitting to my left,
can attest.
According to the science of philosophy, rational
thought would presume that repeated calls upon Israel
to put an end to these practices should logically lead to
its immediate cessation of these illegitimate policies
and practices. That is what the rational thought of
philosophy would assume. Unfortunately, Israel did not
just ignore these calls and the demands issued several
months ago, during the truce. Rather, it escalated its
aggressive practices and launched a cowardly military
operation targeting the unarmed civilians that it is
holding prisoner in this detention camp called the Gaza
Strip. It has killed and wounded thousands and is
continuing to do so at this very moment, thus
completely undermining the concepts of international
legitimacy, international law and international
humanitarian law.

25

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

Incidentally, we would like to remind the Council
that this collective prison called Gaza occupies an area
of only approximately 363 square kilometres. It is a
strip of land that is 35 kilometres long and about 6 to
12 kilometres wide. It is equivalent to the area of one
of the Nazi detention camps that humanity mistakenly
thought were a painful experience never to be repeated
in the future. However, Israel has insisted on such a
repetition.
Let us review together what was stated in the
Security Council’s statement on the protection of
civilians, of 27 May 2008 (S/PRST/2008/18). The
Council reaffirmed that parties to armed conflict are
responsible to take all feasible steps to ensure the
protection of affected civilians, in particular giving
attention to the specific needs of women and children.
What was Israel’s response to these words? Its
response was to kill more than 400 children and
approximately 200 women, not to mention the
elimination of entire families.
Moreover, the Security Council statement
stipulated the need to grant safe and unhindered access
of humanitarian personnel to provide aid to civilians in
armed conflict in accordance with international law.
What was Israel’s response to this statement? Its
response was to deny medical and food aid completely
despite international calls to the contrary, the most
recent of which was resolution 1860 (2009). And what
were its aims through this? To kill those it could not
kill directly by depriving them of food, medicine,
water and electricity.
The Israeli forces also rounded up several
families and led them to an empty house, then bombed
them from aircraft in a flagrant breach of the Third
Geneva Convention relative to the treatment of
prisoners. Moreover it has used internationally banned
weapons such as white phosphorus in bombing its
enemies, who are women and children.
The criminal acts that Israel is perpetrating
constitute a unique case of wholesale violation of all
the principles and tenets of international law and
international humanitarian law, the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols, as
well as international conventions on the protection of
children. These crimes are war crimes and genocide
that must be prosecuted.

26

Let us admit here that Israel’s aggressive
behaviour has a unique trait — let us call it a
shortcoming — that no usurper in history has yet
achieved: it violates humanity’s entire legal tradition in
one go, with no exception. Here we ask this Council to
tell us which legal obligations Israel has upheld since
the Security Council placed the item of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict on its agenda in the late
1990s. We also ask the Council to inform us where and
when has it held Israel accountable for its violation of
international criteria and laws pertaining to the
protection of civilians.
The important question, whose answer would be
much appreciated by us and by many others, is why are
there two standards in the implementation of
international law, and why is Israel exempt from the
implementation of these standards? Is this so-called
international law designed on the basis of criteria that
have nothing to do with the criteria of our Member
States but much to do with the narrow interests of some
influential States in the Security Council, with the aim
of protecting Israel and holding it above international
law? Is this the reason? Or is there a problem in
understanding the terminology so that some do not
consider the Palestinians unarmed civilians like all
others in the free world?
We note here that the Charter of the United
Nations does not give a State the right to violate
civilians’ rights, including the rights of civilians under
occupation, using the excuse of self-defence. Rather,
the Charter obliges the occupying Power to meet clear
requirements. It is not permissible for some, even with
good intentions, to repeat in this Chamber Israel’s lie
that its aggression against the Palestinians is in selfdefence, in application of Article 51 of the Charter,
because that Article does not apply to invading forces
that forcibly occupy others’ lands and have done so for
decades. Quite to the contrary, Article 51 of the Charter
applies by default to the Palestinians’ resistance against
Israeli occupation, in self-defence. In other words, the
right to self-defence must not be manipulated by some
to justify their silence over Israel’s crimes. There is an
Arabic proverb that says “Those who do not speak out
against wrong are but a silent Satan”.
The situation of Syrian residents in the occupied
Golan is not much different from that of the
Palestinians. The Israeli occupation forces continue to
confiscate land and to expand illegal settlements. The
so-called regional settlement council in the Golan, with

09-20856

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

the support of the occupation Government, has
endorsed plans to build a new settlement tourism
village that would occupy 40 dunams near the Israeli
settlement of Ani’am, which was built over the ruins of
the Syrian town of Nakhila Taibeh. Moreover, that
council, in cooperation with the religious Yonatan
settlement administration, which is an extremist
organization, has set up a plan to attract thousands of
settlers so that their numbers would increase to over
50,000 in the near future. Also, representatives of
Israeli parties in the settlement of Ketzarin, which was
also built on the rubble of a Syrian town, Qazrin, have
signed a coalition agreement within the framework of
the regional settlement council that aims to establish
cooperation and coordination among them in order to
oppose any Israeli withdrawal from the Golan in light
of the resumption of indirect negotiations to that end.
Israel continues to impose a policy of oppressing
civilian Syrian citizens in the occupied Syrian Golan. It
continues to imprison them with no due cause and to
subject them to situations that could jeopardize their
lives. We would like to call attention here to the case of
prisoner Bashir Al Moqt. My Government has called
on the Secretary-General, the Red Cross and others to
intervene to save his life.
Israel also continues with its policy of cutting off
all forms of communication and contact between Syrian
family members who have been separated as a result of
the occupation. Moreover, the Israeli forces have
confiscated Syrian identity cards given to students from
the occupied Golan attending Damascus University
when they returned to their towns in the occupied
Golan. Here, Syria calls upon this Council to pressure
Israel to allow Syrian citizens to visit their Syrian
motherland, through the Quneitra crossing immediately
and without delay, in order to give credibility to this
particular debate,. My country has dispatched messages
in this regard to the Secretary-General, the Presidents
of the Security Council and General Assembly and
governmental and non-governmental organizations
requesting them to intervene to help in resolving this
issue.
We hope that all of these parties would translate
the positions that they have taken today into real
actions, especially since international law stipulates
that Israel’s occupation of the Golan is actually several
occupations, thus requiring that the Council issue
several incriminations. Israel has not been occupying
the Syrian Golan since 1967, but also adopted a

09-20856

provocative and unjust resolution claiming to annex the
occupied Golan, which was unanimously rejected by
this Council in its resolution 497 (1981). The Council
considered the decision to annex as void and demanded
that Israel immediately rescind it.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Montoya (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, for your
work as President of the Security Council and for your
initiative to convene this debate on an issue to which
my Government ascribes particular importance. We
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General John
Holmes for his informative briefing. We welcome the
support that the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and other bodies of the United
Nations system have provided to Colombia in the tasks
of attending to the civilian population and protecting
their rights.
The Government of Colombia has prioritized,
through our democratic security policy, the objective of
promoting conditions that guarantee the protection and
full enjoyment of the rights of all persons living in our
country. This has allowed for significant progress in
terms of citizens’ security, such as the reduction in the
rate of extortive kidnappings to its lowest point in the
past 20 years, the reduction to zero of the number of
towns taken by groups outside the law and the
consolidation of the State presence and security forces
throughout the country. The task of protecting the
population has been carried out through policies and
continuous actions that involve various State entities.
In terms of dealing with displaced persons,
Colombia has continued to strengthen its national
assistance policy. In 2008, 260,000 displaced families
were registered in the Families in Action programme,
which allows resources to be allocated for social
welfare. In addition, 86,000 displaced families were
registered during the same period in income-generating
programmes. The management of the assets earmarked
for the Fund for the Reparation of Victims of Violence
has also begun. The Fund will benefit victims
identified by the judicial authorities through a process
being carried out within the framework of the Peace
and Justice Law.
The Government of Colombia reaffirms its
condemnation of any action aimed against the civilian
population. The protection of the civilian population

27

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

and strict compliance with international humanitarian
law and other relevant international norms are matters
of absolute priority.
Ten years after the Security Council first began
holding thematic debates on the protection of civilians
in conflict, there is still no clear conceptual
understanding of this issue. In this regard, the aidememoire for the consideration of matters relating to the
protection of civilians, soon to be adopted, is a useful
instrument to guide the work of this body in
formulating and following up on this issue in
peacekeeping operations. We believe that it is
appropriate that the Security Council has adopted an
approach focusing the scope of the aide-memoire on
such operations, looking at one case at a time and
bearing in mind the specific circumstances of each
situation.
From this perspective, it is essential to underline
that the primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians rests with each State and that, in turn, States
can request international support when they deem
necessary. In this context, the United Nations and the
international community in general have a supporting
role to play in national protection efforts. Humanitarian
assistance, in order to be reliable and predictable, must
be carried out in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and in conformity with humane
principles and the principles of neutrality, impartiality
and independence.
Colombia supports the operational work of the
United Nations for the protection of civilians. To this
end, adequate cooperation between the Security
Council and other relevant United Nations bodies must
be maintained. In particular, the role of the General
Assembly as the appropriate body for adopting policy
guidelines in the humanitarian field must be
strengthened.
Furthermore, my delegation would like to
highlight the urgent need to establish effective controls
for the illicit traffic of small arms and light weapons as
indispensable to better protection for civilian
populations. For my country, that illicit trade, which is
of an international nature, represents a serious
problem, as it threatens civilian security, increases
crime rates and results in the death or permanent
disability of thousands of persons.
Likewise, the Government of Colombia
highlights the importance of the Convention on Cluster

28

Munitions, which was mentioned today by the UnderSecretary-General. Colombia is one of the countries
that signed the Convention at the conference held to
that end in Oslo in December 2008. With this decision,
the Government of Colombia reiterated its commitment
to respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law and its willingness to face the
problem of weapons that have a humanitarian impact.
Colombia supports efforts aimed at providing
protection to civilian population and guaranteeing their
rights, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the norms of international law, including
international humanitarian law. We will shortly
celebrate the sixtieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Geneva Conventions. In the lead-up to that
commemoration, the Government of Colombia
reaffirms its unwavering commitment to the norms
established in those important instruments.
My delegation will maintain an active
participation in future discussions on this issue and its
ongoing willingness to promote the treatment of this
issue by the various bodies and institutions of the
United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Than Swe (Myanmar): At the outset, I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate.
I also wish to extend my thanks to Under-SecretaryGeneral John Holmes for his valuable and
comprehensive briefing this morning.
Over the past several decades, we have witnessed
a decline in the number of armed conflicts around the
world. However, armed conflict, with all its
complexity, continues to rage in some parts of the
world. The grim reality we face today is that the
protection of civilians in armed conflict remains a
daunting challenge for the international community.
The easy availability of illicit small arms and light
weapons exacerbates the situation. Modern warfare and
armaments, even with their deadly precision, result in
collateral damage and massive destruction.
Myanmar believes that the most effective way to
protect civilians in armed conflict is to address the root
causes and put an effective end to it. In order to
establish durable peace and stability, reconciliation
between the parties to a conflict needs to be reinforced,
along with the promotion of sustainable development,

09-20856

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

the eradication of poverty, good governance and the
protection of human rights.

order to find a peaceful solution to the escalating
conflict.

With that in mind, the Myanmar Government has
embarked upon a national reconciliation process by
engaging in peace negotiations with armed insurgent
groups. As a result, 95 per cent of armed insurgents,
numbering some 100,000, have returned to the legal
fold. The former insurgents have also joined the
national convention process, participated in the
drafting of a new constitution, taken part in the
national referendum and endorsed the new constitution.
Peace and stability therefore prevail in almost all parts
of Myanmar.

The United Nations and the international
community have a legal and moral obligation to work
for durable peace. The principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, the relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 1860
(2009), and the relevant international humanitarian and
human rights law must be upheld in a balanced, nondiscriminatory and transparent manner if we genuinely
wish to protect civilian populations from armed
conflict and promote peace and stability.

Myanmar also believes that the easy availability
of illicit small arms and light weapons adds complexity
to the nature of armed conflicts. It not only prolongs
and deepens a conflict, but it also has severe
implications for the social fabric. It breeds terrorism
and transnational crime such as trafficking in human
beings, drugs and illegal contraband. Myanmar
therefore believes that a legally binding international
instrument that prohibits the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons with non-State actors will go a long
way to protect civilians in armed conflict.
Over the past nine years, the United Nations has
made significant progress in strengthening its role in
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The four
thematic resolutions of the Security Council on the
protection of civilians form an effective comprehensive
framework for action in that area. It must be stressed
that the implementation of the resolutions should be
implemented in faithful conformity with the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and while
upholding and respecting the principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence. National
sovereignty and territorial integrity should also be
respected, in order to foster a spirit of cooperation and
confidence-building for the promotion of durable peace
and stability.
My delegation is fully committed to a peaceful
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. We are convinced
that there is no military solution to it. We strongly call
for the protection of civilians. In that connection, my
delegation wishes to express its profound concern
about the destruction and loss of innocent life as a
result of the ongoing military attacks in the Gaza.
Myanmar joins the international community in urging
the cessation of all military activities and violence in

09-20856

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Muita (Kenya): I have the honour to
participate in today’s debate. At the outset, let me
express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important gathering. I also wish to
thank Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator, for his comprehensive briefing this
morning.
The Security Council’s continued consideration
of this agenda item is an indication of its commitment
to protect civilians in conflict situations. It is civilians
who are always severely and negatively impacted by
war and other conflicts. That has become a constant
problem — for instance, in the Horn of Africa and the
Great Lakes region, where hundreds of thousands of
civilians have been uprooted from their normal daily
lives by the effects of conflict. I believe that we must
continue to make concrete and specific efforts to
ensure the dignity of those distressed by war. That need
is echoed in the words of former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan, who said:
“As human beings we cannot be neutral, or at
least have no right to be, when other human
beings are suffering. Each of us . . . must do what
he or she can to help those in need, even though it
would be much safer and comfortable to do
nothing”.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
humanitarian as well as a human rights issue and is in
conformity with international humanitarian law. There
have been some achievements in that area during the
past decade. Those include increased engagement by
the Council through the adoption of resolutions,

29

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

especially resolutions 1738 (2006) and 1674 (2006),
combating impunity at the national and international
levels and prioritizing the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping mandates. However, there still remain
considerable challenges ahead. I wish to highlight just
two of them, first humanitarian access.
Humanitarian access during conflict is lifesaving, and thus the importance of providing a secure
environment for humanitarian workers to access
civilians in need, including displaced persons. We
support current efforts to enhance the capacity of
peacekeeping missions to provide protection to
humanitarian providers, but there are still significant
challenges at the operational level, where peacekeepers
lack capacity to reach the entirety of a threatened
population. There is therefore an urgent need to
address and streamline that aspect to avert large-scale
population displacements and widespread human rights
violations in future conflicts.
Secondly, gender-based violence has been used as
a calculated tactic of war, apparently to dehumanize
and instil fear in civilian populations. The adoption of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), which
concern civilians in conflict zones, was a step in the
right direction, but much is required to enhance their
implementation. We need to move from words to deeds
to ensure the protection of the sexually vulnerable in
armed conflict, as those acts destroy individuals,
families and communities.
As the Council may recall, early last year was a
particularly difficult period for my country, with the
violence following the December 2007 election.
Civilians were the primary target of attack. Many were
displaced from their homes and denied access to lifesaving nourishment, medicine and shelter. As the State
has the primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians in conflict, the Government of Kenya, with
strong support from international and regional partners,
stepped in to avert a further worsening of the crisis and
provided protection to its civilians. The displaced were
provided with accommodation in camps for the
internally displaced in the affected areas. Government
security forces were used to open up supply routes and
highways to enable the continued flow of humanitarian
support to affected areas. That ensured that civilians in
conflict areas were afforded basic human dignity
throughout the crisis.

30

In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms my
country’s commitment to the protection of civilians in
situations of armed conflict. Together, we need to
address the root causes of conflicts in order to reduce
their occurrence.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express the appreciation of the
Egyptian delegation for your initiative, Mr. President,
to convene this general debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts.
This debate takes place at a very perilous time.
The Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip are
confronting genocide under the very nose of the
Security Council, and the Israeli occupying Power is
clearly and flagrantly violating its obligations under
international law and international humanitarian law.
Moreover, its actions constitute a blatant defiance of
the authority of the Security Council, which has made
continuous calls — inter alia, in its press statement of
15 December and its resolution 1860 (2009), adopted
on 8 January 2009 — for an immediate ceasefire
between Palestinians and Israelis.
The recent Israeli aggression against the Gaza
Strip has demonstrated unequivocally the inability of
the Security Council to enforce its decisions. It has
also demonstrated the Council’s inability to adopt
critical decisions in a timely manner, as expected by
the international community. Furthermore, the Council
has demonstrated its inability to prevent the escalation
of Israel’s brutal air and ground military operations and
its use of internationally banned weapons. The Council
is also unable to impose the will of the United Nations
as the sole representative of the international
community, even when such representation takes the
form of a unanimously adopted statement or a
resolution adopted by 14 votes in favour and the
abstention of one member that endorsed the main thrust
of the text.
The issue, then, is that the Security Council
discusses the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
but turns a blind eye to the ongoing massacre, which
has killed approximately 1,000 Palestinians and injured
nearly 5,000, at the hands of a brutal force occupying
their land. The Council procrastinates on any
significant negotiations aimed at peace and claims,
with support from forces within and outside its

09-20856

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

membership, that Israel is exercising its legitimate
right to self-defence and reacting to the deaths of
Israelis, who number no more than the fingers of one
hand, from rockets launched from the Gaza Strip. Israel
uses not only excessive and disproportionate force, but
also internationally prohibited weapons, in its so-called
self-defence, while flouting all its legal and ethical
obligations.
Protecting civilians in armed conflict from death
and injury and providing humanitarian and economic
assistance to the brotherly Palestinian people were the
main goals of the Egyptian initiative launched by
President Mubarak on 8 January, in conjunction with
the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009). The initiative
calls first for an immediate ceasefire for a
predetermined period, during which humanitarian
assistance can be delivered. It provides for an
appropriate timeframe for negotiations on the
arrangements and guarantees stipulated by the
resolution in order to make the temporary ceasefire
permanent, thereafter promoting the resumption of
peace negotiations.
However, both parties have so far chosen not to
implement this initiative; each believes that it will
emerge victorious from this military confrontation,
ignoring the fact that there are no winners in such a
war. There will be clear losers, however: the civilians
of Palestine and Israel alike. Those civilians have lost
their lives so that some might achieve their electoral
aspirations or claim a bogus victory at the expense of
the deceased victims. Victory cannot be achieved
except through a genuine peace process based not on
the ambitions and aspirations of individuals, but on the
benefits of peoples living in peace and stability.
Egypt’s efforts to establish an immediate
ceasefire between both sides continue, but it also
believes that the Security Council has a great
responsibility to impose the international will
represented in its resolutions and statements; adopt all
the necessary measures to protect civilians on both
sides by pushing forcefully to implements its decisions;
enforce all human rights protection mechanisms,
especially through the convening of a special session
of the high contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention; implement the resolution adopted by the
Human Rights Council on 11 January; and provide
international protection through a protection force for
the Palestinian people, in implementation of the
principle of the responsibility to protect. Some seek to

09-20856

apply that principle to specific countries, while
bypassing others toiling under brutal occupation and
confronting ferocious aggression without any
international force to protect them.
Furthermore, the Security Council is primarily
and the General Assembly secondarily responsible for
investigating war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide, and for handing over those who are
responsible for committing such crimes to international
prosecutors. This should take place in conjunction with
Arab and international efforts to end the occupation,
since without an end to the occupation and without a
right for the Palestinian people to establish their
independent State with Jerusalem as its capital, the
Middle East will never enjoy stability and civilians in
Palestine and Israel will not enjoy lives of peace and
security.
In order to achieve those ends and to create an
opportunity for the peace process to succeed, the siege
imposed on the Palestinian people in Gaza must be
lifted, access to basic humanitarian and economic
needs must be ensured, and Palestinian national
reconciliation should be achieved so that clear political
prospects that will contribute to the success of regional
and international efforts to stop the violence and ensure
the success of the peace process, can be established. In
this regard, Egypt will continue to do its utmost to
achieve those two goals by supporting all efforts to
restore full security and stability to the occupied
Palestinian territories until the occupation has ended
and the independent Palestinian State is established.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): This meeting to
consider the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is very timely, in view of the tragic
events that have plunged the Palestinian people in
Gaza and the international community into mourning
and threaten to engulf the United Nations once again in
a cloud of desperation, impotence and frustration.
Civilians trapped in armed conflicts and those who
suffer because their neighbours are suffering hope that
the purposes and principles enshrined in the preamble
of the Charter of the United Nations will be applied to
safeguard current and future generations from the
scourge of war.

31

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

The nature of armed conflicts is changing,
involving a whole series of factors that must be
examined as a whole. The parties involved, the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the Human Rights Council and
other bodies of the system, each within their respective
competencies, need to examine strategies of prevention
to safeguard peace and protect civilians, looking to the
underlying causes of armed conflict.

engaging in the necessary discussion. Our country fully
agrees with those States that have expressed the view
that the Security Council is not in a position to
interpret or utilize that concept before a consensus has
been reached in the General Assembly. Our
Government highlights the importance of the work
accomplished in this area by Mr. Edward Luck, the
Secretary-General’s
Special
Adviser
on
the
responsibility to protect.

In the Gaza Strip, we are facing one of the worst
types of war in the modern world: punishing the
civilian population to break their morale, destroy their
spirit of resistance, crush their will to fight and lead
them to believe that slavery can be benign. However,
the dignity of peoples has prevailed throughout history.
Resistance in search of freedom and self-determination
is preferable to submission to genocidal Powers.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict and
the prevention of humanitarian crises and the
commission of grave crimes against humanity can be
guaranteed only in an atmosphere of cooperation, good
faith and strict compliance with international law.

Resolution 1674 (2006) contains valuable
elements. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
wishes to emphasize that the framework established by
that resolution is not exhaustive in terms of the
possible actions that the international community
should or could take. This is shown most clearly in the
deplorable cases of inaction or excessive delay in
responding on the part of the Security Council when it
needs to safeguard the lives, physical integrity and
basic needs of civilians in situations of armed conflict.
The recent experiences in the Gaza Strip and
southern Lebanon are clear examples of how an
outdated institution tied to the specific interests of
certain States can affect civilians. It enables the parties
to a conflict — or some of them — to flagrantly violate
international humanitarian law and human rights.
Venezuela
reiterates
that
the
primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict rests with States. Here, the international
community can play a constructive role by supporting
national efforts, always respecting the framework set
out in the Charter of the United Nations, and working
to preserve the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
countries.
The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela notes with concern the attempts of certain
States to obstruct the debate on the concept of the
responsibility to protect, set out in paragraph 139 of
the 2005 World Summit Outcome. In that connection,
those countries have baselessly tried to maintain that
that concept is a standard that can be applied without

32

Without the appropriate and timely provision of
humanitarian assistance, civilian populations in
situations of armed conflict are condemned to
prolonged suffering that may even lead to their death.
For that reason, Venezuela condemns deliberate attacks
against any personnel who do humanitarian work. We
deplore the fact that the occupying Power, Israel, has
not provided the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) with the security conditions necessary for
its humanitarian activities in Gaza. The attacks on
United Nations convoys and facilities constitute crimes
against human rights, and those responsible must be
brought to justice under the relevant international laws.
The Israeli authorities must be required to provide
conditions of security so that UNRWA and the other
United Nations entities acting in situ can continue to
assist the victims of the mad violence unleashed as a
result of the military aggression perpetrated since
27 December 2008.
Finally, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
reaffirms its commitment to the cause of peace and its
willingness to debate, within the forum of the General
Assembly, all measures aimed at the effective
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We are
convinced that it is within that framework that we can
achieve genuine political commitment on the part of
States to the development and application of the norms
of international humanitarian and human rights law on
behalf of civilian populations affected by armed
conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Iran.

09-20856

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open debate at this critical juncture. I
would also like to thank Mr. John Holmes, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his comprehensive
briefing today.
The issue under consideration is of paramount
importance, and this meeting is all the more important
because it is being held at a time when the Palestinian
people in the Gaza Strip are being subjected to one of
the most heinous brutalities ever committed against
civilians in the history of humankind.
Rather than making generalities about today’s
important topic, I, like many previous speakers, would
prefer to address one of the most serious examples in
that regard: the untold losses and suffering that the
Zionist regime has inflicted on the defenceless civilian
population in Gaza. We also hope that the current
tragedy in Gaza will be duly reflected in the outcome
of today’s Council meeting.
Over the past 19 days, Palestinian civilians have
been deliberately targeted and brutally mass-murdered
by the ruthless Israeli war machine, which is callously
shattering lives and livelihoods in the Gaza Strip. The
abhorrent Israeli carnage and Israel’s war crimes in the
Gaza Strip are continuing unabated. The 1.5 million
people of Gaza have been under a crippling siege and a
brutal blockade for more than 18 months now and
continue to be deprived of the most needed medical
supplies and the most basic necessities — including
even bread and drinking water — and are, at the same
time, being massacred in the most horrendous and
brutal ways, with nowhere to run, nowhere to hide and
nothing to eat. Whole families are being eliminated in
cold blood by the Zionist forces, and women and
children, along with other civilians, are being
deliberately targeted and massacred.
The humanitarian aid sent to the people of Gaza
is being turned away by the Israeli regime and
prevented from reaching its destinations, as in the case
of an Iranian relief ship carrying 2,000 tons of basic
medical and food supplies destined for Gaza, which
was intercepted and prevented from continuing on its
way to Gaza by the Israeli regime yesterday. We
condemn that unjustifiable move and hope that the
Security Council will exert pressure on the regime to
cease and desist from such unlawful actions.

09-20856

Even United Nations workers and the United
Nations premises where innocent civilians take shelter
are not immune from Israeli attacks, as we witnessed in
the recent attack on schools of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, which claimed the lives of more than 40
people and wounded many more civilians, most of
them children. Savage acts, such as forcing women,
small children and other civilians out of their homes
and then massing them all into a small place and
machine-gunning or shelling them, are examples of the
rampant atrocities being repeatedly committed by the
Israeli forces in Gaza. Those revealed so far are really
just the tip of the iceberg, and many other such
atrocities are simply never reported because the
international media are facing an Israeli ban and cannot
cover the heartbreaking tragedies in Gaza.
The international community has no doubt that
the Zionist regime is violating the basic principles of
international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights law and defying the most fundamental
values for which the civilized world stands. Israeli
forces are blowing away women and children in Gaza
without a moment of remorse. As a result of those
atrocities, many innocent civilians, including little
children, have died horrible deaths, and the bodies of
many others have not been recovered from the rubble
because the Israeli military is shooting at anyone who
attempts a rescue.
This carnage must be stopped immediately, and
the Israeli war criminals should be brought to justice
for the crimes that they have perpetrated and continue
to perpetrate and for the outrageous and brutal pain and
torment that they have inflicted and continue to inflict
on the innocent people in Gaza.
Despite its commitment to the full and effective
implementation of its resolutions on the protection of
civilians in such circumstances, the Security Council
has thus far taken no effective action to stop this
genocide against Palestinians. The Security Council
was first prevented by some permanent members from
taking any action, and when it took action belatedly,
the resolution it adopted, resolution 1860 (2009), did
not address the expectations of the international
community in, inter alia, forcing the Israeli regime to
stop its atrocities against the Palestinians and withdraw
from Gaza, or even in strongly condemning the Israeli
regime’s crimes against humanity and devising a
mechanism for holding Israeli officials accountable for

33

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

the war crimes and genocide that they have committed
and continue to perpetrate against the Palestinian
people in general and in the Gaza Strip in particular.
Even that resolution, as imperfect and belated as it is,
is being totally ignored by the Israeli regime, as are
many other previous United Nations resolutions, to
which its response had been contempt and defiance.
We strongly condemn all of these Israeli
violations of international law and urge the Security
Council to force the Israeli regime to put an end to
such practices and to its aggression. The international
community should act swiftly to end impunity and to
bring the Israelis responsible for war crimes, genocide,
crimes against humanity and numerous other serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law to justice. The Council has a vital and urgent
responsibility to discharge in this regard in order to end
these Israeli atrocities and crimes against humanity
immediately.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month and express our great appreciation to you for
having devoted today’s discussion to the theme of
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Ten years
have passed since the submission to the Council of the
first report of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (S/1999/957), and two
years have passed since the adoption of resolution
1674 (2006); we would like to commend Mr. Holmes
for his statement on this subject. We hope that today’s
debate will lead to an objective vision on ways and
means to protect civilians and, above all, to eliminate
the causes of conflict, because, as they say, it is better
to prevent than to treat.
We note with concern that civilians are not only
victims of violence, flight and displacement, but are
also victims of the latest technologies of death,
including cluster bombs and phosphorus bombs, which
has shocked the international community. This is
particularly true in Gaza, where children, the elderly
and women, and even fruit trees, are victims of death
and destruction. The aggression against civilians in
Gaza leads us to raise questions in the Council about
the credibility of debates on the protection of civilians,

34

and about the crocodile tears and double standards that
we see.
In a number of reports, the Secretary-General has
emphasized the importance of activating and enhancing
the civilian protection capacity of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. At the same time, experience
and practice have shown that when there is no peace to
be keep on the ground, peacekeeping operations,
whatever their protection capacity, are restricted to
looking out for their own protection, because what
protects civilians, above all, is peace, which is
something that everyone needs, as are disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, and
quick-impact development projects that can guarantee
progress and ensure that civilians are able to leave
displacement camps and return to their towns and
villages, so that they can resume their normal lives.
For this, peacebuilding needs to be a priority for
the United Nations so that the Organization is not be
bogged down in dealing with the symptoms of conflict.
We would also underscore that regional organizations
have shown an increased capacity in this area because
they understand the nature of conflicts and their causes
and can thus add value. Here, we need to mention the
decisions of the West Africa Conference on the
Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict held by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) in Dakar in April 2007, which addressed the
role of regional organizations in protecting civilians,
beyond their peacekeeping role.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict is a noble
goal and a major priority. But we are concerned about
attempts to use this principle for political purposes,
including the broad debate on what is being called the
responsibility to protect. We stress that the principle of
the responsibility to protect, despite the fact that it was
incorporated in the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document (General Assembly resolution 60/1), is still
the subject of differing interpretations by Member
States, taking into account the Charter principles
concerning State sovereignty and the full and unlimited
responsibility of States with respect to the protection of
their citizens.
We also recall that the duty to protect civilians in
armed conflict is also one element in a comprehensive
and interdependent set of rights and responsibilities set
out in the 2005 Millennium Declaration (General
Assembly resolution 55/2). Key among these are the

09-20856

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

right to development, the prevention of conflicts, the
eradication of the root causes of conflict, the fight
against poverty, the right of refugees to return, and the
meeting by donors of their commitments in the area of
development.

provisions and mechanisms for the pacific settlement
of disputes.

That is why the protection of civilians needs to be
part of a comprehensive approach based essentially on
addressing the causes of conflict through an active
United Nations role in support of initiatives towards
political settlements and reconciliation, complemented
by a parallel role for the Organization and its agencies
in the humanitarian area and the spheres of sustainable
economic development and reconstruction.

We believe that just, peaceful and durable
settlements of conflicts require above all addressing
their root causes. Where conflicts have erupted,
Pakistan has also contributed in tangible terms to the
international community’s efforts to contain and
resolve those conflicts. As the leading contributor of
military and police personnel to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, Pakistan has played its role
in restoring peace and stability and creating the overall
conditions in which civilian lives can best be protected.
We shall continue our contribution in that regard.

The protection of civilians is ultimately the
responsibility of States, which is why we need to
enhance the capacities of the States involved so that
they can properly shoulder their responsibilities. We
must not weaken the capacities of these States through
sanctions or adventurist actions aimed at undermining
peace and through other kinds of interference in their
internal affairs.

There exist internationally agreed mechanisms,
including international laws, rules and regulations, as
well as responsibilities and obligations with regard to
the question of protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The issue at hand is not the lack of clarity or
understanding, but the inability to implement these
agreed mechanisms. This is the main focus of our
intervention today.

The manner in which the United Nations
addresses the disaster facing civilians in Gaza should
provide an example of the expected role of the United
Nations in the area of the protection of civilians.

As we take the floor one after another, restating
or rehashing known positions or offering new ideas on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, I am sure
we all realize that the world is watching us. As Gaza
burns, the world is watching us. The world is watching
this Council in particular with disappointment. For
while this Council spends a day debating highsounding moral principles and respect for international
law, it has failed to carry out its own primary
responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

We need to hear from those who talk at length of
the need to fight impunity and genocide. We want to
hear them speak of the events in Gaza.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Amil (Pakistan): First, we would like to
thank Ambassador Ripert, Ambassador Lacroix and the
French delegation for convening this debate during
France’s presidency of the Council. We would also like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his
briefing.
It has been almost a decade since the United
Nations began to systematically approach the issue of
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Pakistan has
been an avid supporter of these efforts. We have always
espoused the calls for a comprehensive approach and
system-wide coherence in effectively addressing the
challenges related to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. This approach starts with prevention,
and in that regard we have always emphasized the need
to fully utilize and put into practice the Charter’s

09-20856

For a debate of the Council on this issue, these
are no ordinary circumstances. The 1.5 million
Palestinians imprisoned in Gaza, collectively punished,
callously persecuted, strangulated and blockaded for
years by Israel, the occupying Power, have been
subjected to a new deliberate campaign of terror, death
and destruction, which continues for the nineteenth day
as the entire world watches in horror and disbelief. The
besieged people of Gaza, we must not forget, are
mostly the Palestinians who were originally
dispossessed and driven from their homes by the Israeli
occupation. Under the blockade in Gaza, the choice
given to them has been either to starve or to submit.
Over the years, stark and disturbing evidence has
made it clear that civilians, particularly vulnerable
groups such as women and children, continue to bear

35

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

the brunt of armed conflict and remain the prime
victims in such situations. This is also the case in Gaza.
Less than a month ago, we celebrated the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
international community reaffirmed its pledge to
uphold the value of the Declaration. Yet one month
after reiterating that “we will not shy away” from the
magnitude of the challenges of promoting and
protecting human rights, the Security Council appears
unable to enforce compliance with resolution 1860
(2009) or to protect the innocent people caught in the
ongoing conflict in Gaza.
Resolution 1860 (2009) also condemns all
violence and hostilities directed against civilians and
all acts of terrorism. Since the adoption of the
resolution, the number of Palestinians killed in the
Israeli aggression has increased to around 1,000;
almost 40 per cent of the killed and the nearly 5,000
wounded Palestinians are women and children.
Empirical evidence throughout history shows that
systematic and consistent violations of the rights of
civilians are most frequent and pervasive in situations
of foreign occupation and suppression of the
inalienable right of peoples to self-determination. This
holds particularly true for the people of Palestine and
of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir.
The challenges of addressing gross violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law are
exacerbated by the problem of inequity in the
international response. While in some situations there
is a quick and even a robust response, in others, such
as Gaza, the perpetrators enjoy virtual impunity. The
record of the Security Council itself in this context is
not without blemish. In these circumstances, effective
and swift application of the concept of protection of
civilians in Gaza is a litmus test for this Council’s
future actions on this agenda item.
The Fourth Geneva Convention prohibits
collective penalties and collective punishment of the
civilian population. The responsibility of Israel, as the
occupying Power, is clear in that regard. In the context
of protecting civilians in Gaza, the international
community must live up to its responsibilities, and in
particular the Security Council should lead the efforts
to implement its own resolution 1860 (2009). We
strongly feel that deliberate violence against
humanitarian and United Nations personnel helping to
protect civilians is unacceptable in any situation.

36

We call for renewed determination to provide
protection to all innocent civilians caught in armed
conflicts and under foreign occupation, including those
we see dying by the minute in Gaza as we speak.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the Permanent Observer of the Holy See.
Archbishop Migliore (Holy See): My delegation
welcomes the convening of this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. The Security
Council has been dealing with this topic for more than
10 years, yet civilian security during conflict is
becoming more and more critical, if not at times
dramatic, as we have witnessed in these past months,
weeks and days in the Gaza Strip, Iraq, Darfur and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to name just a few.
The year 2009 marks the sixtieth anniversary of
the Geneva Conventions. Inasmuch as the protection of
civilians stems from the norms set out in these
Conventions and subsequent Protocols, my delegation
trusts that this new year will also provide the occasion
for an assessment of the parties’ commitment to
ensuring protection of civilians through greater respect
for the rules of international humanitarian law.
The 2003 update of the aide-memoire to the
10-point platform on the protection of civilians is an
important tool for clarifying responsibilities, enhancing
cooperation, facilitating implementation and further
strengthening coordination within the United Nations
system, and remains today more than ever an
indispensable road map for bringing protection to
civilians entrapped in armed conflicts.
The overwhelming mistreatment of civilians in
too many parts of the world does not seem to be just a
side effect of war. We continue to see civilians
deliberately targeted as a means for achieving political
or military gains. In the past few days, we have
witnessed a practical failure on every side to respect
the distinction between civilians and military targets. It
is sadly clear that political and military designs
supersede basic respect for the dignity and rights of
persons and communities when methods or armaments
are used without taking all reasonable measures to
avoid civilians, when women and children are used as
shields for combatants, when humanitarian access is
denied in the Gaza Strip, when people are displaced
and villages destroyed in Darfur, and when we see
sexual violence devastating the lives of women and
children in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

09-20856

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

In such a context, the protection of civilians not
only requires a renewed commitment to humanitarian
law, but also demands first and foremost good political
will and action.
The protection of civilians must be based on the
widespread, responsible exercise of leadership. That
requires leaders to exercise the right to defend their
own citizens or the right to self-determination by
resorting only to legitimate means, and it requires them
to fully recognize their responsibility to the
international community and to respect the right of
other States and communities to exist and coexist in
peace.
The broad spectrum of mechanisms that the
United Nations is putting in place to ensure the
protection of civilians will be successful if, at the very
least, it is able to foster a culture of responsible
exercise of leadership among its Members and if it
holds them, and every party to a conflict, accountable
with respect to that sense of responsibility towards
individuals and communities.
The increasing burden of war-related casualties
and consequences imposed on civilians results also
from the massive production and increasing
sophistication of armaments and from continued
innovation in that area. The ever-higher quality and
ever-greater availability of small arms and light
weapons, as well as anti-personnel mines and cluster
munitions, tragically make the killing of human beings
that much easier and more efficient. In that context, my
delegation fully supports and encourages the objectives
of the recent General Assembly resolution 63/240,
entitled “Towards an arms trade treaty: establishing
common international standards for the import, export
and transfer of conventional arms”, which defines the
first important step towards a legally binding
instrument on the arms trade and arms transfers.
Likewise, my delegation welcomes the adoption of the
Convention on Cluster Munitions and encourages
countries to ratify that treaty as a matter of priority and
as a sign of their commitment to addressing the issue
of civilian casualties.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Holmes to respond to questions and
comments raised during the discussion.
Mr. Holmes: The hour is late, and I will be brief.
I will not try to respond to all the detailed points that
have been made but will just make a few comments.

09-20856

Obviously, I have listened very carefully to
today’s debate and to all the comments that have been
made. I welcome the continued clear commitment to
the protection of civilians agenda as being at the heart
of the Council’s work and the recognition by most, if not
all, speakers of the need to do more to ensure that our
words have more impact where they matter most — on
the ground — to overcome what more than one speaker
described as a disconnect what we may say in this and
other chambers and the reality on the ground. I also
endorse the point made by so many: that we need to do
more to prevent conflicts and tackle their root causes,
and not just talk about the effect on civilians.
Understandably, many, if not most, speakers
emphasized deep concern at the situation in and around
Gaza. Earlier, I gave some casualty figures for Gaza
from 13 January. The reason I was not able to give
fully up-to-date figures was that the Palestinian
Ministry of Health had no power at the time. They have
now released the latest casualty figures, as from, I
think, 4 o’clock local time today, according to which
the figure of Palestinians killed is now 1,013, of whom
322 are children and 76 are women. And the number of
injured now stands a 4,560, of whom 1,600 are
children and 678 are women. This means that one in
every 270 people in Gaza has now been killed or
seriously injured in the almost three weeks of
hostilities.
These really are shocking figures. Although such
comparisons obviously have their limitations, if we
translated these figures to the population of New York
City, the equivalent proportion would lead us to the
number of more than 30,000 dead or injured; and if we
compared it to the population of the whole United
States, we would reach a figure of over 1 million
people.
All this, again, underlines the sentiment
expressed by so many in the Chamber today: that we
need to do much more to ensure respect for the rules of
international humanitarian law governing the conduct
of hostilities and to spare the civilian population. But,
as I think virtually all speakers emphasized, only a full
and fully respected ceasefire will spare the civilian
population, on both sides, from the unrelenting danger
and fear that they currently face.
A number of speakers referred to the challenge of
the implementation of protection of civilians mandates
on the ground by peacekeeping missions, as I did in my

37

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

own presentation. Although we have been using such
mandates as a means through which to enhance
protection on the ground, I think we have all
acknowledged that their actual impact has to date been
mixed. So I welcome the acknowledgement by so many
speakers of the need to provide peacekeeping missions
with better guidance on how to translate these
mandates into action. As I said, the joint study by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, which is looking at these issues, will of
course be brought to the Council’s attention later in the
year, and we look forward to working with members to
take the issues forward.
I am also encouraged by the support expressed in
the debate for the expert group of the Council on the
protection of civilians, which will meet this week for
the first time. Let me assure those who remain
concerned at the possible bureaucracy, cost or
perceived duplication involved in this group that the
expert group is very modest in nature. It is an informal
forum for systematic consultation on protection of
civilians concerns between the Council and OCHA. It
has no cost implications but is simply a means of
systematically and transparently relaying information,
analysis and possible language on protection issues to
all Council members. Its creation is certainly not an
attempt to isolate protection of civilians issues from
their wider context of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding.
The expert group will also be able to play a role
in ensuring more consistent application of the aidememoire. I very much welcome the support which has
been expressed for the aide-memoire and for OCHA’s
work in revising it. Let me thank, in turn, all Council
members for their very constructive engagement in this
revision process. I look forward to the aide-memoire’s
use in the future by the Council, and indeed by other
actors. We certainly agree with those Member States
that have said that it should be reviewed and updated
regularly.
In that context, I also welcome the comments
from those States that referred to the important role of
regional organizations in the protection of civilians. We
are working with a number of such organizations,
including for example the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
European Union and NATO. And I would very much
agree with the sentiment expressed by the

38

representative of Uganda, that the aide-memoire should
prove to be a useful vehicle through which to share the
Council’s experience on the protection of civilians with
the African Union.
Let me make just two final brief points. First of
all, at least two speakers — I think the representatives
of Burkina Faso and Finland — referred to the
importance of women’s participation in all stages of
conflict prevention and peace process: that is, having
women at the table in all these areas. Let me take the
opportunity to wholeheartedly endorse that thought and
to express the wish that it will be respected more in
peace negotiations and other forums as they go
forward.
Secondly, and finally, a number of delegations
welcomed the conclusion of the Convention on Cluster
Munitions. Some also referred to the continuing work
in Geneva in the framework of the Convention on
Certain Conventional Weapons to try to reach an
agreement in that forum as well. Let me simply express
the hope that any agreement there will not mark any
regression from what has been achieved in the Oslo
Convention on Cluster Munitions.
I thank you very much, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to address the Council. I also thank all
speakers for their contributions and their support.
The President (spoke in French): I thank UnderSecretary-General
Holmes
for
his
additional
comments. I thank him for his presence before the
Security Council today.
Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the full and effective
implementation of its resolutions on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and
recalls previous statements on the issue made by
its President.
“The Security Council remains committed
to addressing the impact of armed conflict on
civilians. The Council expresses its deepest
concern that civilians continue to account for the
majority of victims of acts of violence committed
by parties to armed conflicts, including as a result
of deliberate targeting, indiscriminate and
excessive use of force, use of civilians as human

09-20856

S/PV.6066 (Resumption 1)

shields and of sexual and gender-based violence,
as well as all other acts that violate applicable
international law. The Security Council condemns
all violations of international law, including
international humanitarian law, human rights law
and refugee law, committed against civilians in
situations of armed conflict. The Council
demands that all relevant parties immediately put
an end to such practices. The Council reaffirms in
this regard that parties to armed conflict bear the
primary responsibility to take all feasible steps to
ensure the protection of affected civilians and to
meet their basic needs, including by giving
attention to the specific needs of women and
children.
“The
Security
Council
recalls
the
obligations of all States to ensure respect for
international humanitarian law, including the four
Geneva conventions, and once again emphasizes
the responsibility of States to comply with their
obligations to end impunity and to prosecute
those responsible for war crimes, genocide,
crimes against humanity or other serious
violations of international humanitarian law.
“The Security Council recognizes the needs
of civilians under foreign occupation and stresses
further, in this regard, the responsibilities of the
occupying Power.
“The Security Council condemns terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, however and
by whomever committed.
“The Security Council underlines the
importance of safe and unhindered access of
humanitarian personnel, and of the timely, safe
and unhindered passage of essential relief goods,
to provide assistance to civilians in armed
conflict
in
accordance
with
applicable

09-20856

international law. The Council stresses the
importance of upholding and respecting the
humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence.
“Recalling that on 15 March 2002 the
Security Council first adopted the aide-memoire
annexed in the statement by its President
(S/PRST/2002/6) as a means to facilitate its
consideration of issues pertaining to protection of
civilians and recalling further that in the
statements by its President of 20 December 2002
(S/PRST/2002/41) and 15 December 2003
(S/PRST/2003/27),
the
Security
Council
expressed its willingness to update the aidememoire regularly in order to reflect emerging
trends in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, the Security Council adopts the updated
aide-memoire contained in the annex to this
presidential statement.
“The Security Council reiterates the
importance of the aide-memoire as a practical
tool that provides a basis for improved analysis
and diagnosis of key protection issues,
particularly during deliberations on peacekeeping
mandates, and stresses the need to implement the
approaches set out therein on a more regular and
consistent basis, taking into account the particular
circumstances of each conflict situation, and
undertakes to remain actively seized of the
matter.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/1.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.05 p.m.

39
