S/PV.8825

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8825th meeting

Tuesday, 27 July 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Lipand
Mr. Kakanur
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ladeb
Ms. Farrey
Mr. Mills
Mrs. Tra Phuong Nguyen

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-02248 (E)
*2102248*

S/PV.8825

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Atul Khare,
Under-Secretary-General for Operational Support, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Khare.
Mr. Khare: I thank you, Madam President, for the
opportunity to again provide an update on the progress
on the closure of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) following the
termination of its mandate on 31 December 2020.
I am pleased to report that, recently, the Secretariat
achieved the initial milestone set by the Council to
withdraw all uniformed personnel formerly deployed
to the Mission and staff not involved in its liquidation,
except for those that have constituted a uniformed guard
unit, as authorized by the Council, by the deadline of
30 June 2021.
This task involved the repatriation of almost
6,000 troops and police, as well as the separation of
almost 1,200 staff. It also involved consultation with
all relevant stakeholders to ensure that uniformed
members who expressed a desire not to return for
reasons related to international protection needs were
processed by the refugee authorities of the Government
of the Sudan. I am grateful to the countries concerned
in acknowledging that the status of these individuals
in seeking asylum is a humanitarian act, not based on
political considerations.
The drawdown also involved the parallel closure
and handover of the former Mission headquarters and
13 team sites to local authorities for civilian use in
Central, South and North Darfur states, as UNAMID
equipment was recovered, environmental remediation
2/14

27/07/2021

was completed and former Mission personnel were
withdrawn. All remaining personnel and assets are
now consolidated within the El Fasher logistics facility,
other than small components based in Khartoum and
Port Sudan, to support the transport of assets and
interaction with the authorities during the liquidation
of UNAMID.
To ensure that progress remains on track, earlier
this month I concluded my second official visit to
the Sudan since the conclusion of the mandate on
30 December 2020. Between 6 and 15 July, I met again
with Lieutenant General Abdel Fattah Al-Burhan,
Chair of the Sovereign Council, as well as with the
Deputy Chair, Lieutenant General Mohamed Hamdan
Dagalo — otherwise known as General Hemeti — and
the Minister of Interior, Lieutenant General Ezzeldin
El Sheikh. In addition, I interacted with the newly
appointed Governor of Darfur, Minni Minawi, as well
as the new Wali of North Darfur state, Nimir AbdelRahman. All leaders shared their satisfaction at the
successful achievement of the expedited timelines and
discussed ways to resolve outstanding issues related to
the liquidation and wider transition implications.
I wish to stress that following this visit to the Sudan,
I also met with the Deputy Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Ms. Monique Nsanzabaganwa,
and the Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and
Security, Bankole Adeoye, on 19 July in Addis Ababa,
to, inter alia, report on progress in closing the former
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur.
Members will be cognizant of my notes to the
Council on 25 June and 2 July, highlighting key issues
and the completion of UNAMID’s drawdown, including
the withdrawal of 22 military and police contingents. I
can report that contingent-owned equipment belonging
to Bangladesh, Burkina Faso, China, Jordan, Kenya,
Senegal, Tanzania and Togo has now either returned
to its home country or been deployed to another
peacekeeping operation. Further, the equipment of
Djibouti, Ethiopia and the Gambia is in Port Sudan
awaiting vessels for transport, and equipment belonging
to Egypt, Pakistan and Rwanda, as well as that of a
Chinese engineering unit, is en route from Darfur to
Port Sudan.
A guard unit authorized by the Security Council,
comprising 360 police from former formed police
units from Indonesia, Nepal and Pakistan, remains in
21-02248

27/07/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8825

El Fasher to provide internal security to remaining
United Nations personnel and assets. I should note that
the primary responsibility to provide security for these
United Nations assets and personnel rests with the
Government of the Sudan, and I am pleased to report
that it is prepared to take necessary actions and do so in
coordination with the guard unit.

storage, purification equipment and distribution
lines, a power-generation and -distribution network,
waste-water treatment facilities, a major fuel-storage
depot, recreational facilities, maintenance and vehicles
workshops, incineration facilities, communication
towers, and large warehousing capacities, including a
refrigerated warehouse used for food supplies.

Since I last briefed the Security Council (see
S/2021/246), the General Assembly has approved
funding amounting to $79 million to support the final
liquidation of UNAMID no later than 30 June 2022.
While morale within the liquidation team remains high,
liquidation will still involve a sustained effort across
a number of complex tasks. Among the more urgent
tasks is the destruction of ammunition. Members
have before them hard copies of photographs of the
ammunition before and after, to which I draw their
attention. Much of this ammunition was found to have
reached its expiration date and was therefore volatile.
After increasing incineration capacity, this effort is
now almost complete.

In addition to the fixed facilities, a wide variety
of moveable equipment and inventories have been
consolidated at the El Fasher base, including hundreds
of vehicles, generators, furniture, information and
communications technology equipment, and supplies
for the maintenance of facilities and equipment.
As the Council will observe, it is critical that the
Government of the Sudan makes every effort to ensure
that this enormous reserve of facilities and equipment
is sustainably applied to national imperatives for
civilian use.

The facilities and equipment handed over to local
authorities to date, outside of El Fasher, had a residual
value exceeding $41 million. Nevertheless, as I reported
to the Council in my note of 25 June, confirmed and
unconfirmed reports suggest varying degrees of
destruction and theft at 10 of the 14 sites handed over to
local authorities. While the associated assets no longer
belonged to the United Nations, these are major losses
for the communities involved. I note that although
authorities have made commitments to investigating
these incidents, various Sudanese interlocutors have
nevertheless suggested that these events resulted from
underlying tensions among groups locally, along with
concerns, whether real or perceived, surrounding
equitable access to the facilities and equipment that
was handed over.
In moving forward with the disposal of the
remaining property of UNAMID, I draw the Council’s
attention to the map of the El Fasher logistics base
distributed to members in hard copy to illustrate
the complexity of the task at hand and the future
value of such a facility for the people of Darfur. The
premises in El Fasher are not just a base, but have
the capacity to form a substantial community in
its own right, with extensive office infrastructure,
more than a thousand self-contained living units, a
significant number of facilities for collective working
and learning arrangements, a hospital facility, water

It is my intention to support the team that remains
in UNAMID through disposal of remaining assets
across two distinct liquidation phases: 1 July to
30 September 2021 — a final three-month period for
the withdrawal of retained United Nations assets, sales
to other United Nations entities and non-government
organizations at market value, destruction of equipment
subject to end-user restrictions, and commercial sales
of equipment that mostly has been scrapped because
it is beyond economical repair or use; then, from
1 October 2021 forward — donation and associated
distribution of remaining fixed and moveable assets to
Government institutions and related non-government
organizations in the Sudan based on the General
Assembly’s consideration of a holistic, Sudanese-owned
donation plan.
The first phase of this process is well under
way. Since the UNAMID mandate came to an end,
UNAMID equipment currently valued at $8.1 million
has been transferred to other operations, including
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei and the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. This process will
continue. In addition, so far this month, two convoys
have departed El Fasher with valuable equipment
that will be restored as needed and held within the
peacekeeping reserve at Brindisi for future deployment
to other field missions. Nevertheless, the vast bulk of
UNAMID assets will remain in the Sudan for donation
to the Sudanese authorities for civilian use. In pausing

21-022483/14

S/PV.8825

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to better illustrate the potential benefits to the people of
Darfur, just as an example, the mission currently holds
170 tons of sodium hypochlorite salt, which can be used
to purify 6.8 billion litres of water, which is enough
to meet the clean-water drinking and cooking needs of
more than a million people for a year.
To this end, during my recent visit to the Sudan, I
implored all Government interlocutors to emphasize the
immediate development of a single, holistic donation
plan, with input and agreement from Government
interlocutors at the national and local levels. The United
Nations country team and UNITAMS have committed
to supporting the Government in identifying sustainable
imperatives that would best benefit local communities.
This plan could form the foundation for the SecretaryGeneral to present a proposal to the General Assembly,
as required by the United Nations regulations and
rules, to guide the donation of equipment and facilities
in support of such identified national priorities as the
national plan for the protection of civilians. Successful
completion and approval of such a plan can hasten the
full departure of the remaining remnants of UNAMID
prior to June 2022.
Building on the success of the experience of the
hand-over of the substantial Zalingei headquarters site,
which was gradually turned over to local authorities
for use and occupation by the local university, I
further expressed to Sudanese officials our intention
to proceed with a phased hand-over of the El Fasher
site in segments, beginning in November. If hand-over
can progress in this fashion, it will equally allow for
the phased reduction of the guard unit, the only United
Nations uniformed personnel remaining currently
in Darfur.
For all the foregoing to occur in an orderly and
speedy fashion, I must raise the issue of the armed
movements that have stationed forces around the El
Fasher compound since the beginning of June, which
I reported on in my note of 25 June 2021. Units from
at least five different groups, as well as the Sudanese
Armed Forces, have been identified by colleagues
based in El Fasher. I have provided two photographs
in hard copy to Council members so that they can see
where these armed groups are located. After an initial
period of confusion among these groups, which led to
the disruption of UNAMID movements and, in some
cases, harassment of United Nations personnel and
vendors, movements have for the most part proceeded
as needed in recent weeks. Nevertheless, coordination
4/14

27/07/2021

and leadership among these units are critical if the
remaining liquidation process is to proceed smoothly
for the long-term sustainable benefit of the Sudan and
its people. I therefore intend to continue to closely
monitor the liquidation of UNAMID based on my recent
discussions with the President, the Vice-President and
the new Governor and Wali of Darfur and North Darfur,
respectively.
In conclusion, allow me to thank the Government
of the Sudan for its support thus far in achieving the
timely and successful drawdown of UNAMID, and I
look forward to continued cooperation to achieve our
shared objectives.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Khare
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Farrey (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by thanking Under-Secretary-General Khare for
his briefing.
I will focus my remarks on three areas: the
contribution of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to Darfur, the
mission’s drawdown and liquidation, and the future
of Darfur.
Almost 14 years ago to this day, the Security
Council authorized the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the
first and only hybrid African Union-United Nations
peacekeeping mission, in response to the conflict in
Darfur (resolution 1769 (2007)). The United Kingdom
expresses its deep appreciation to all personnel who
served in UNAMID’s deployment. In particular, we
pay tribute to UNAMID personnel who gave their lives
to bring stability to Darfur, We also acknowledge the
unique partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union throughout the deployment, which we
hope will continue as both organizations continue to
support the Sudan.
Throughout its deployment and during its
drawdown, UNAMID has operated in challenging
conditions and has had to navigate new numerous
obstacles in order to implement the resolutions of
the Security Council. While there are many lessons
to be learned, it is undeniable that the Darfur that
we see today is more peaceful and stable because of
UNAMID’s contribution. It is our hope that the lessons
21-02248

27/07/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

learned from UNAMID’s deployment and drawdown
will help to inform future peacekeeping operations
and transitions, consolidate peacekeeping gains and
support lasting, sustainable peace wherever the United
Nations is deployed.
The United Kingdom welcomes the Government of
the Sudan’s cooperation during UNAMID’s drawdown
and urges its full cooperation with the remaining
liquidation phase, in line with resolution 2559 (2020).
In particular, we stress the need for federal- and
state-level cooperation, including the safety and
freedom of movement of personnel and assets. The close
coordination of all stakeholders is essential to ensuring
that the liquidation of UNAMID’s assets is responsible
and transparent, in line with United Nations regulations
and best practices.
The destruction of many former UNAMID sites
following their handover to local authorities is deeply
regrettable. We therefore reiterate the expectation for
remaining sites to be used for civilian purposes so
that they can continue to benefit local communities in
new ways.
Darfur, and the Sudan more widely, have seen
a significant period of change in recent years, and
we welcome the commitments made to peace and
the transition to democracy. Now that peacekeeping
forces have drawn down, it is crucial to continue
to build upon and consolidate peacekeeping gains.
For that reason, the United Kingdom repeats its
call for the full and sustained implementation of
the Juba Peace Agreement. We welcome the recent
decrees establishing the Darfur ceasefire monitoring
mechanisms and urge the swift deployment of the field
teams, as well as the operationalization of the Peace
Commission, the swift deployment of joint security
forces and the full implementation of the national plan
for civilian protection.
While peacekeeping may have come to an end
in Darfur, the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) and its
integrated country team will continue to play a crucial
role in supporting the Government of the Sudan’s
efforts to achieve lasting peace and stability in Darfur.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom reiterates the
need for continued cooperation among all stakeholders
across the United Nations system and beyond during the
remaining liquidation phase of UNAMID and through
the deployment of UNITAMS in order to consolidate

S/PV. 8825

the progress in peace and security that has been made
in Darfur.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Khare for his comprehensive briefing today.
First, let me highlight the positive political
developments in the Sudan over the past months.
The key message to draw from them is that, although
many challenges remain, the transition in the Sudan
is irreversible and represents a unique opportunity
to create the conditions necessary for sustainable
economic growth. In that regard, we thank the
transitional Government and the Darfur state capitals,
for their role in ensuring the responsible drawdown of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).
That brings me to my second point, which is that the
fragile security situation in Darfur and the confusion
regarding the end-use of team sites and assets are
creating challenging conditions for the Blue Helmets.
It is therefore crucial that the drawdown of UNAMID
be done in a sustainable and orderly way. Protecting
civilians must remain at the core of all efforts, even
during UNAMID’s drawdown and thereafter.
We are happy to note that UNAMID remains on
schedule for the closure of team sites and that the mission
has accelerated the process to allow for contingencies.
Norway hopes that the recent advances will prevent any
unnecessary delays during the coming rainy season.
We were also pleased to learn about the conclusion
of the framework agreement on the civilian end-use
of team sites and assets. That is particularly relevant
against the backdrop of the significant looting that was
seen at former UNAMID camps in both Nyala and in El
Geneina. We therefore urge the Sudanese Government
to protect the assets handed over from UNAMID, as
they will be of direct benefit to the civilian population
in Darfur. Such steps will provide a solid basis for
liquidating the mission within the next 12 months.
That brings me to my final point. With the
drawdown of UNAMID, greater responsibility now
lies with the Sudanese authorities and the Sudanese
security forces in particular. The United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) and the remaining parts of the United
Nations system must ensure support for the Sudanese
authorities in protecting civilians and preventing
human rights violations and abuses.

21-022485/14

S/PV.8825

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We must also secure the completion or handover to
the Sudanese authorities of residual activities done by
UNAMID. That includes activities in the areas of the
rule of law, community policing, preventing genderbased violence and community stabilization.
Let me conclude by extending our sincere gratitude
to UNAMID civilian and uniformed personnel,
particularly those who gave their lives while serving
to promote peace and stability. We would also like to
thank the troop- and police-contributing countries,
the United Nations country team, UNITAMS and the
humanitarian community for their invaluable support
for peace in Darfur. Norway stands ready to support the
people of the Sudan at this defining moment.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the A3+1, namely, Kenya, the
Niger, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
At the outset, we would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Atul Khare for his comprehensive
briefing on the ongoing drawdown and closure process
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), and I welcome the representative
of the Sudan.
UNAMID, which was established in July 2007
pursuant to resolution 1769 (2007), as the first hybrid
operation between the United Nations and the African
Union, was an important experience in terms of
cooperation with regional organizations, as enshrined
in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Following the termination of its mandate through
resolution 2559 (2020), today we are witnessing the
closure of one of the largest peacekeeping operations
in the history of the United Nations, which, during its
13-year mandate, involved more than 100,000 military
and police peacekeepers from dozens of Member States
from around the world.
The exemplary cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union will leave a historical
record of important achievements in Darfur, as
UNAMID played a crucial role in supporting the
protection of civilians, particularly internally displaced
persons, community stabilization, support for the rule
of law and the provision of humanitarian aid, as well as
the implementation of the peace process and mediation
between the Government of the Sudan and the armed
groups. The mission also worked to empower women,
addressed sexual and gender-based violence, protected
6/14

27/07/2021

and promoted human rights and helped in the fight
against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
UNAMID was at the forefront of efforts to lay
the critical foundation for peace in Darfur. The A3+1
express their sincere gratitude and appreciation to all
UNAMID civilian and uniformed personnel for their
invaluable support for peace in Darfur. Our heartfelt
thoughts are with the peacekeepers who lost their
lives in the service of peace and their families. We
believe that the assessment of UNAMID’s mission
and achievements should be a strong basis for further
consolidating cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations. The lessons learned from
the mission’s experience should also guide the next
steps and pave the way for future exit strategies.
Kenya, the Niger, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines commend the efforts made by the
transitional Government of the Sudan and the Darfur
state capital, and the role they are playing to ensure an
orderly and safe withdrawal of troops, personnel and
equipment. In that regard, we welcome the signature of
the framework agreement on the handover of 14 sites
and assets for civilian end use and the commitment
announced by the Sudanese Government to ensuring
that those facilities and assets will be used for social
and community services. We believe that those
developments will anchor a positive UNAMID legacy
in the Sudan and help preserve those sites from looting.
Regarding the next steps and the liquidation
phase, the A3+1 group emphasizes the key role of the
Sudanese authorities and commends their commitment
to swift cooperation in order to enable the full and
effective deployment of the guard unit for the El
Fasher logistics hub, and to ensure the protection and
safety of assets and contingent-owned equipment to
be repatriated. We also underline the importance for
UNAMID to carry out and complete environmental
clean-up and restoration, as well as the disposal of
hazardous materials, including expired ammunition, in
accordance with established standards.
The A3+1 group emphasizes the progress made by
the Government of the Sudan in sustaining its political
transition process and in implementing its national plan
for the protection of civilians. We remain convinced
that the support of the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan, as a
special political mission and in line with its mandate, is
crucial to helping the Sudan take forward key elements
21-02248

27/07/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of its transition process, which is critical to advancing
an inclusive political transition and addressing longstanding challenges, leading to lasting peace in Darfur
and across the region.
Among those challenges, intercommunal clashes
continue to be a major source of insecurity, especially
in the Darfur region. In that regard, we encourage the
Sudanese authorities to accelerate the implementation
of the national plan for the protection of civilians,
with the objective of creating a gender-responsive and
protective environment for all Sudanese.
In moving forward, sustainable development will
be essential to building resilience. While commending
the clearance of the country’s arrears held by the World
Bank and other key partners, as well as the commitments
made at the 17 May Paris investors conference, the A3+1
calls on all stakeholders to fulfil their commitments
and enhance efforts towards unlocking the muchneeded financial support that would enable the Sudan
to implement difficult economic and institutional
reforms, while providing support to the population and
addressing its growing socioeconomic needs.
We also encourage the international community
to continue scaling up support for the Sudan’s 2021
national humanitarian response plan, in order for the
transitional Government to appropriately address
humanitarian challenges compounded by the adverse
effects of climate change, the COVID-19 pandemic, as
well as locust infestation and other disease outbreaks.
In conclusion, the A3+1 believes that peace in
the Sudan will remain incomplete and security will
remain volatile until all conflicts come to an end. That
requires armed movements that remain outside the
peace process to commit to negotiations that will lead
to fully inclusive and sustainable peace in the Sudan. It
also requires the international community to continue
its crucial support to the transition in the Sudan.
Finally, we urge the Government of the Sudan to
strengthen its regional collaboration and coordination
so as to ensure continued peace and security. The
Sudan should be both a recipient of exported peace and
an exporter of peace. We strongly recommend that the
Government work with neighbouring countries and
make use of mechanisms in the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the African Union to
do so.

S/PV. 8825

Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I join others in thanking
Under-Secretary-General Atul Khare for his
comprehensive briefing.
At the outset, allow me to commend everyone
involved who made it possible to wrap up the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) at a historic speed. That was no easy
endeavour, and we appreciate the effort it took. Estonia
also welcomes the Sudan’s cooperation with both the
United Nations and the African Union during the
UNAMID drawdown. Now it is important to ensure
that the liquidation process goes according to plan. We
call on the Government of the Sudan and other relevant
stakeholders, including the Juba Peace Agreement
signatories and other armed opposition movements, to
cooperate fully with the United Nations and the African
Union during UNAMID’s liquidation.
The pursuit of peace, justice and civilian protection
in Darfur will remain relevant after the closure
of UNAMID. That is why the importance of the
implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement cannot
be overemphasized. We also urge the Government
of the Sudan to take extra measures to ensure that
the protection of civilians is provided for all people
in Darfur, especially for populations who are more
vulnerable, including women, children and the
internally displaced. We call on the Sudan to cooperate
closely with the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan to help build up the
necessary capacities for civilian protection and to
consolidate peacebuilding in Darfur more broadly.
Peace in Darfur is also critical to the Sudan’s
historic transition. On that note, allow me to emphasize
that Estonia remains firmly committed to supporting
the Sudan’s democratic transition to a fully legitimate
and inclusive civilian Government, which would ensure
peace, freedom and justice for all Sudanese people.
Finally, I would like to thank all personnel of
UNAMID for their sacrifice and efforts in helping
to leave Darfur in a better condition than they found
it in. UNAMID will certainly be remembered for its
invaluable contributions to peace efforts in Darfur.
Mr. Kakanur (India): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Atul Khare for his comprehensive
briefing on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) drawdown.

21-022487/14

S/PV.8825

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I also welcome the representative of the Sudan to
our meeting.
The drawdown of UNAMID has formally ended a
very successful peacekeeping operation. It has been a
successful example of African Union-United Nations
cooperation. UNAMID has several commendable
achievements to its credit, including supporting the
implementation of the peace process, the protection of
civilians and community stabilization.
During UNAMID’s 13-year mandate, more
than 100,000 military and police peacekeepers were
contributed by dozens of countries around the world,
including India. At its peak deployment in 2011, it had
nearly 23,000 troops and police personnel. I express our
gratitude to each one of the peacekeepers who served
in UNAMID and pay tribute to their exemplary efforts.
Furthermore, it is noteworthy that the drawdown
exercise has been completed within the tight timeline
and benchmarks set by the Security Council.
Since February, when the Council was last briefed
on the issue, UNAMID has handed over 14 team sites
to the Government of the Sudan, which has committed
to using them for civilian purposes, in line with the
framework agreement signed on 4 March. We are
happy to know that those facilities will now be utilized
for capacity- and nation-building activities related
to health care, education and other social services,
including vocational training and community centres,
as identified by the people of the Sudan themselves. We
also note with appreciation that 6,000 military, police
and civilian personnel, out of 7,000 who remained with
the mission in January, have been repatriated to their
respective countries.
UNAMID has also provided various communities
of the Darfur region with vehicles, including water
and sewage trucks and generators. The mission has
donated its clinic, as well as medical facilities, for use
by the local communities. These are all initiatives that
mark a transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding
that is Sudan-led and Sudan-owned. In that regard,
we commend the efforts of Under-Secretary-General
Khare and his team for their deft handling of the various
challenges during the drawdown period.
We would also like to commend the various
initiatives undertaken by the Government of the Sudan
to handle the drawdown, as well as the transition
to United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in Sudan, in a smooth and seamless manner.
8/14

27/07/2021

The Government of the Sudan established unity of
command and purpose by appointing a unified joint task
force and the State handover committee as UNAMID’s
key interlocutors during the drawdown. It was through
that engagement that the mission was able to listen to the
specific needs of each community and identify ways to
meet those needs through the provision of assets, such
as water and sewage trucks, water treatment equipment,
generators and vehicles, among others.
Going forward, it will be important for the
Government to ensure the protection of the logistics base
and the repatriation of the remaining staff to facilitate a
seamless liquidation phase, which commenced on 1 July.
We are confident that all pending tasks of significance,
including the handing over of the El Fasher camp to the
authorities in Darfur, will be completed.
To conclude, as UNAMID is now in a full-fledged
liquidation phase, let us reaffirm our commitment and
support to the efforts of the Sudanese authorities. For
our part, India’s support to the Sudan and its people
has remained steadfast. Over the years, India has
implemented several projects and assisted Sudanese
officials and students in capacity-building. We have
also extended humanitarian assistance. India will
continue to extend all possible assistance to the Sudan
and its people as they move ahead to consolidate the
gains made over the past three years.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I think
Under-Secretary-General Khare for his briefing.
All uniformed and civilian personnel of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) have withdrawn, as required
under the Security Council resolution. I wish to take
this opportunity to pay tribute to all UNAMID troopand police-contributing countries for their efforts
and sacrifices.
Since its establishment in 2007, UNAMID has
played an important role in maintaining security and
stability in Darfur, the Sudan. As the first innovative
United Nations-African Union joint peacekeeping
operation, UNAMID is a success story in the United
Nations exploration of agile and diverse ways of
supporting regional organizations in maintaining peace
and security.
China hopes that the United Nations will take
stock, and we look forward to the Secretary-General’s
assessment report, to be submitted by the end of October.
21-02248

27/07/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

It is hoped that UNAMID will complete its liquidation
process, including asset liquidation, in a methodical
way, in accordance with the financial regulations and
rules of the United Nations, and avoid asset loss and
improper disposal.
The Sudan’s Darfur region is at a critical stage of
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. The
Sovereign Council and transitional Government of
the Sudan are actively implementing the Juba Peace
Agreement and have taken a series of pragmatic
steps to maintain security and stability in Darfur.
Intercommunal violence in Darfur needs to be addressed
through a holistic approach involving mediation and
reconciliation. The international community and the
United Nations country team in the Sudan can assist and
support displaced persons affected by the violence and
conflict. The Sudanese government bears the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians in Darfur.
Following the withdrawal of UNAMID, through
its mandate, the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan can help the Sudanese
Government to improve its ability to protect civilians
and provide the necessary support to the Government in
implementing its National Plan for Civilian Protection
and in strengthening its security capacity-building.
The Security Council should take the impact of
the arms embargo on the Government’s protection of
civilians into account and should develop and take
concrete steps to contain that impact. To achieve
security and stability in Darfur, it is essential to
emphasize both the symptoms and the root causes of
violent conflict by growing the economy and improving
people’s livelihoods.
Due to the impact of the coronavirus disease and
natural disasters the security situation in Darfur remains
precarious. The international community should scale
up its support and investment in the peacebuilding
efforts in Darfur, help to improve the Sudan’s countryowned development capabilities, properly deal with the
major factors leading to violent conflict, such as land
distribution, and effectively improve local livelihoods.
Since 2007, China has been engaged in UNAMID
as one of the first countries to contribute peacekeepers
to the mission. Over the past 13 years, approximately
5,000 Chinese peacekeepers have actively performed
their duties and two peacekeepers paid the ultimate price
for peace and stability in Darfur. China stands ready to
work with the rest of the international community in

S/PV. 8825

the ongoing effort to play a positive role in building
peace in the Sudan.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico appreciates the information shared by UnderSecretary-General Atul Khare on the process of
downsizing and closure of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), in
compliance with resolution 2559 (2020). We welcome
the representative of the Sudan, present here in
the Chamber.
At the outset, we would like to acknowledge the
crucial role played by the UNAMID mission and its
contribution to the maintenance of peace and security
in Darfur. Today we honour and remember those
who lost their lives while carrying out their duties in
the mission.
While the situation in Darfur today is very different
to that in 2007, threats to stability in the area continue,
especially in terms of the protection of civilians. In the
evolution from peacekeeping to peacebuilding in Darfur,
we underline the importance of a smooth transition
between the closure of UNAMID and the consolidation
of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS).
We welcome the fact that, as Under-SecretaryGeneral Khare pointed out, as of 30 June, most
personnel had been repatriated, thereby completing
the withdrawal of uniformed personnel. We note that
the personnel of the guard unit, authorized by the
Council, remain in place in order to protect UNAMID’s
personnel, property and assets during its liquidation
phase. We also note with satisfaction the fact that the
majority of the mission’s assets will remain in the
Sudan for civilian purposes and the benefit of the
Sudanese people.
We acknowledge the Government of the Sudan’s
action in early June to ensure that armed groups
around the El Fasher base ceased to interfere with the
movement of the UNAMID convoys. The establishment
of a joint security force, coordinated by the Sudanese
Armed Forces, has been critical to meeting withdrawal
and closure timelines, particularly in El Fasher.
Over the next 12 months and with a view to
concluding the closure of UNAMID in a responsible
and transparent manner, the Sudan must continue to
ensure respect for all provisions of the status-of-forces
agreement, in particular those relating to the security of

21-022489/14

S/PV.8825

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

UNAMID and the coordination of all armed elements
around El Fasher. Equally important will be respect for
the agreement guaranteeing civilian end-use and the
security and physical protection of UNAMID’s team
sites and assets.
I conclude by reiterating our recognition of
UNAMID’s achievements and Mexico’s full support
for the work of UNITAMS in this new phase. We
also recall the importance of the full and effective
implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement and the
National plan of the Sudan for protecting civilians
after the exit of UNAMID of the Government of the
Sudan, as well as the need to build the confidence of
local communities and the capacity of institutions to
deliver justice, ensure accountability and provide legal
protection to vulnerable communities.
We hope that the international community and
the Security Council will wholeheartedly support the
democratic transition process in this new chapter of
the Sudan’s history and that the promise of peace and
stability in this African country will be fulfilled.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Atul Khare, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Operational Support, for his briefing on the
drawdown and withdrawal of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
We note the work of the Secretariat and the personal
contribution of Mr. Khare to that complex task.
We cannot fail to recognize the courage and
dedication of the peacekeepers, who made it possible to
overcome a difficult period in the history of Sudanese
Darfur and stabilize the region. In that regard, we
express our sincere gratitude to the contributing
countries of the peacekeeping and police contingents
of the mission.
The Sudan now faces many challenges. This is
having a negative impact on events in neighbouring
Libya. It has led to an increase and the number of
refugees from African States and also to the spread of
the coronavirus disease.
A number of socioeconomic difficulties still
need to be resolved. Under these circumstances,
we believe that it is very important to maintain fairhanded contacts with the Sudanese authorities and to
assist their efforts to implement the Constitutional
Declaration of 17 August 2019, whose aim is to bring
internal stabilization.
10/14

27/07/2021

We welcomed the signing in October 2020 in
Juba of the peace agreement between the transitional
Government of the Sudan and the Sudanese
Revolutionary Front. Implementing the peace
agreement will be an important step towards achieving
national reconciliation and would also help to resolve
existing urgent social economic problems. We hope
that the agreement will also be signed by those armed
Sudanese armed groups that are not yet signatories.
We are pleased to note that the dynamic in Darfur
has not been significantly negatively impacted. There
were isolated outbreaks of intercommunal clashes in
several States at the beginning of the year, but they
did not change the overall picture. The swift and
coordinated response of the authorities to the incidents
as well as the implementation of the National Plan for
the Protection of Civilians demonstrate that Khartoum
is taking a comprehensive approach to stabilizing
the situation.
It is our view that UNAMID has coped well with
the tasks entrusted to it. The time has come to prioritize
the region’s recovery and economic development. With
that in mind, we facilitated the adoption in June 2020
of resolution 2524 (2020), on setting up the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in
the Sudan (UNITAMS). We also supported the renewal
of UNITAMS’ mandate for one year, in line with
resolution 2579 (2021), of 3 June 2021. We trust that
the work of that United Nations presence will bolster
Khartoum’s capacity in a range of key areas, including
the peacekeeping track; the long-term stabilization of
the situation in various regions of the country, including
Darfur; and the conduct of economic reforms, and that
it will also include fostering internal peace and law
and order.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Khare for his briefing and also
welcome the participation today of the representative
of the Sudan.
This kind of follow-up reporting to the Council
is a vital element of protecting the gains made by the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) towards achieving sustainable
peace. Before I begin, like others, I would like to take
this opportunity to commend all those peacekeepers
and staff who served in UNAMID over the years and to
remember particularly those who lost their lives doing
21-02248

27/07/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

so. As others have said, UNAMID achieved a lot in its
years of operation.
Moving from the UNAMID peacekeeping
mission to the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) special
political mission has been among the most complex
and challenging transitions that the Organization
has undertaken. It has highlighted the need to plan
and execute the drawdown, reconfiguration and exit
of United Nations peacekeeping missions in a way
that helps maintain progress towards sustainable
peace. Transitions should take place in a responsible,
coordinated and graduated manner responsive to the
needs on the ground.
Transitions must engage with host State
Governments to reinforce national ownership, so the
engagement by the Sudanese authorities with UnderSecretary-General Khare is very positive. It is vital
to have not only high-level political engagement but
also support from a representative range of national
stakeholders. Engagement with civil society, including
women and youth, reinforces local ownership and
supports peacebuilding objectives.
We note that UNAMID is currently on track to
complete its closure by 30 June 2022. Until that time,
all stakeholders must comply with the provisions of
the status-of-forces agreement; that is essential for
the safety of all remaining personnel as well as for the
continued protection of civilians.
Regrettably, the drawdown has not been without
incident. We condemn the looting of former team sites
on multiple occasions this year. All armed elements
positioned around the El Fasher site must be withdrawn
and steps taken to prevent further looting. As the
Under-Secretary-General said, UNAMID assets must
not be used to fuel insecurity.
Despite the significant progress made in the Sudan’s
political transition toward democracy, the security
situation remains deeply concerning, particularly in
Darfur. In the past six months, the vacuum created
by the withdrawal and delays in implementing the
Juba Peace Agreement have fuelled new struggles
for power and resources. Armed clashes have caused
large-scale casualties and displacement as well as
worrying reports of rising sexual violence. This again
underlines the necessity of a comprehensive transition
process that incorporates appropriate risk assessment
and mitigation.

S/PV. 8825

As part of the drawdown of UNAMID, responsibility
for the protection of civilians now rests solely with
the Government. We call for the full and immediate
implementation of the National Plan for the Protection
of Civilians and the security pillar of the Juba Peace
Agreement. The work of the joint protection force is
important, but it must be accompanied by communitynegotiated deployment agreements, civilian oversight
and effective mechanisms to ensure accountability for
crimes against civilians. That is vital to breaking the
cycle of impunity. Particular attention must be given
to the protection of women in Darfur from sexual
violence. Services for vulnerable women must be
available at the local level, and women’s organizations
should be actively involved in the implementation of
any protection initiatives in the context of the rollout
of UNITAMS.
The transition from UNAMID to UNITAMS
illustrates the fact that the key to creating sustainable
peace rests on finding long-term and nationally owned
political solutions. I encourage all Council members to
consider the lessons learned from this transition and
to continue to engage with and help the Sudan to find
political solutions.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): At the outset, I should like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Atul Khare for his
comprehensive briefing. I should like also to welcome
the representative of the Sudan to today’s meeting.
Fourteen years ago, the establishment of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) marked a new milestone in the
history of United Nations peacekeeping operations and
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. UNAMID was the first joint United
Nations-African Union peacekeeping mission and also
the largest at the time.
Allow me to salute the tireless efforts of all the
peacekeepers and personnel of the mission as well as
the troop- and police-contributing countries and other
partners that contributed to the work of UNAMID
throughout the years. The mission has played a critical
role in the protection of civilians in the Darfur region as
well as the facilitation of the Darfur Peace Agreement,
thereby contributing to peace and stability in the whole
of the Sudan.
UNAMID has truly become the prime example of
successful cooperation between the United Nations and

21-0224811/14

S/PV.8825

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the African Union in the maintenance of international
peace and stability.
We note with appreciation that UNAMID has met
the Council’s request to complete the withdrawal of all
uniformed and civilian personnel by 30 June 2021, in line
with resolution 2559 (2020). Despite some challenges,
that process has taken place in a timely, orderly and
safe manner, thanks to the close cooperation between
the mission and the Government of the Sudan and other
relevant stakeholders. We understand that the process
of the liquidation of the mission’s assets will continue
to take place in the next 12 months. It is therefore
crucial to carry on with such close cooperation and
ensure the safety and security of UNAMID’s remaining
personnel, in line with resolution 2559 (2020) and the
status-of-forces agreement.
Furthermore, it is important to fully respect the
framework agreements, which ensure the principle of
civilian end use and the security and physical integrity
of the handover of UNAMID team sites and assets.
We would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the ongoing political and security developments
in the Sudan, as the country has achieved tremendous
progress on the political and security fronts in recent
days. It is now transitioning from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding. At the same time, we note the challenges
that the country is still facing, particularly in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement and addressing
the coronavirus disease pandemic, food insecurity,
natural disasters and intercommunal violence. In this
regard, it is imperative that the Sudanese parties continue
to resolve their differences in order to implement the
remaining provisions of the Peace Agreement in full.
Furthermore, UNAMID’s mandate has ended.
We call on the Government of the Sudan to continue
strengthening its primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians. It is crucial to ensure the
full implementation of the national plan for civilian
protection and to find more comprehensive solutions
to address the root causes of intercommunal violence
in Darfur, including through confidence-building
measures and opportunities for dialogue.
To further assist the Sudanese Government at this
critical juncture, the collaboration of and support from
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), the AU and
neighbouring countries will remain essential. In this
regard, it is our hope that the United Nations Secretariat
12/14

27/07/2021

and UNAMID will continue to pass on their rich
experience and lessons learned to UNITAMS so that
the Mission can better fulfil its mandate in supporting
the transition in the Sudan and address current
challenges in the country. We look forward to receiving
the Secretary-General’s report in October this year on
the lessons learned from UNAMID’s experience.
In conclusion, Vietnam re-emphasizes its firm
commitment to supporting the Sudan in this transitional
chapter towards long-term peace and stability.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for his comprehensive brief.
More importantly, I thank him for his leadership in
ensuring that the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) drew down in an
exceptionally short period of time, given the extreme
logistical constraints that the drawdown presented.
The United States joins others in thanking all
UNAMID personnel for their strong commitment to
advancing peace and security, from 2007 until 2020.
We recognize the leadership of the United Nations and
the African Union, as well as the service of the troopand the police-contributing countries that protected
civilians and advanced peace in Darfur.
While UNAMID experienced many challenges,
the mission played a critical role in protecting civilians
and stabilizing the region. Nonetheless, as many have
noted, the root causes of violence in Darfur remain,
and many areas continue to experience intercommunal
violence, human rights violations and large-scale
displacements. We therefore welcome the Government
of the Sudan’s national plan to protect civilians, and
we urge Sudanese authorities to fully implement this
plan, particularly in developing community-policing
initiatives for displaced persons in Darfur.
Sudanese leaders must also enable full vetting of
Darfur’s new joint security force so that all stakeholders
can have confidence in it. We emphasize that the
primary responsibility for protecting civilians remains
with the Government of the Sudan. We support the full
utilization by the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) of its
mandated authority to assist the Sudan in protecting
civilians and building trust between Darfuris and the
new joint force. We urge the Government of the Sudan
to take full advantage of this assistance and actively
cooperate with the Mission.
21-02248

27/07/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8825

Now that UNAMID has entered its liquidation
phase, the United States is especially concerned about
the potential security risk to United Nations personnel
and assets at UNAMID’s former logistics base at Al
Fasher. The United States strongly encourages the
United Nations to use its good offices with leaders in
Darfur to ensure that United Nations staff can continue
the liquidation and that Sudanese authorities protect
those now-handed-over team sites so that, as we heard,
they can be used as health clinics, training centres and
other community facilities. Our shared goal is to avoid
any further violence or insecurity over these sites and
to ensure civilian use of former UNAMID assets.

beginning of the year show that this is not enough. I am
thinking first of all of the intercommunal clashes that
took place in January and April. I am also thinking of
the looting of several sites that had been handed over to
the Sudanese authorities by UNAMID.

Let me close by saying the United States remains
committed to the people of the Sudan and to working
closely with the transitional Government, with
our fellow members of the Security Council, with
UNITAMS and with all stakeholders to support the
Sudan’s political transition to democratic rule.

Finally, for my last point, France will remain
particularly attentive to the transition from UNAMID
to UNITAMS. This process is essential for the success
of the democratic transition in the Sudan, which is a
priority for France. However, it also holds lessons
for current and future transitions of peacekeeping
operations. In particular, implementation of the
necessary human and financial resources must receive
our full attention. We will have the opportunity to
examine these issues in greater depth under the Irish
presidency of the Security Council in September.

The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I would first like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Atul Khare for his briefing and welcome the
presence of the representative of Sudan with us in the
Council Chamber.
For my part, I would like to stress three points,
first of all, to commend the efforts of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and the Department of Operational Support
aimed at implementing the UNAMID withdrawal
within the deadlines that had been set. This was an
extremely major logistical challenge, which the United
Nations was able to meet.

We encourage the Sudanese authorities to speed
up the implementation of the Juba agreements, with
the support of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), and to
deploy the joint force provided for in these agreements
as soon as possible. We also call on all armed groups
that have signed the agreements to return to the Sudan
and on non-signatory groups to join the peace process.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Sudan.
Mr. Mohammed (Sudan): I would like to begin
by thanking Under-Secretary-General Atul Khare for
his briefing.

The cooperation of the Sudanese authorities helped
to overcome the obstacles at the local level. That
cooperation must continue, of course, throughout the
UNAMID liquidation period, which is not over, so as
to ensure the security and freedom of movement of
United Nations personnel, as well as the protection of
equipment and other holdings, as has been mentioned.

Following the termination of the mandate of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) by the Security Council in
accordance with resolution 2559 (2020), Sudanese
authorities at the federal and local levels fully
cooperated with the mission to ensure an orderly and
safe withdrawal of troops, personnel and equipment.
In this regard, a framework agreement was signed
last March between the Sudan and the Secretariat,
represented by Mr. Khare, to govern this process.

My second point concerns the withdrawal of
UNAMID, which is the result of the Sudan’s political
will to assume full responsibility for the security of the
population in Darfur. Naturally, this political will is to
be welcomed. It is a necessary condition for a lasting
peace. However, incidents on the ground since the

As the withdrawal phase has come to completion,
the Sudan is committed to positively engaging with the
Secretariat during the liquidation period. We would
like to emphasize that during liquidation the UNAMID
base in El Fasher will be protected by Sudanese guard
units to enhance safety within the perimeter of the base

21-0224813/14

S/PV.8825

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and ensure that assets and contingent-owned equipment
can be safely repatriated.
We would like to note that the former UNAMID
team sites in Darfur, which have been handed over to the
local authorities, will be protected and used for civilian
purposes, in line with the framework agreement. These
facilities will be assigned and used for health care,
education and other social services as identified by the
local communities.
As the mission enters its liquidation phase, we
would like to emphasize that it is critically important for
the Secretariat to carry out and complete environmental
clean-up and restoration and dispose of hazardous
materials, including expired ammunition, in accordance
with the established practices in this regard. This task
must be completed as soon as possible and prior to the
end of the liquidation period.
I would like to stress that the transitional
Government of the Sudan is committed to carrying out
its responsibility to protect its people in Darfur after
UNAMID’s exit, in line with the national plan for
civilian protection. With the Juba Peace Agreement,
the protective environment in Darfur has been greatly
strengthened and special emphasis is now being
placed on displaced persons, children, women and
other vulnerable groups. The Juba Peace Agreement-

14/14

27/07/2021

mandated joint force, comprised of the Sudanese Armed
Forces and former combatants of armed groups, is
currently being deployed to improve civilian protection.
While shouldering its responsibility to protect, the
Sudan will ensure adherence to and compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights best
practices. Let me take this opportunity to praise the
contributions and sacrifices of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and its troop- and
police-contributing countries throughout its 13-year
existence in Darfur. The people of Darfur will remain
thankful for their sacrifices and contributions to peace
and security.
We are aware of some remaining challenges in
Darfur. My Government assures the Council that it
will work closely with the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS)
and other bilateral, regional and international partners
to effectively address them. We call on the Security
Council to continue to support the work of UNITAMS
as the Mission carries out its mandate. For its part,
the Sudan shall support UNITAMS in order to
implement its strategic objectives, as mandated by the
Security Council.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

21-02248
