UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1999/7
18 February 1999
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND FRENCH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3979th meeting of the Security Council, held on 18 February 1999 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in the Central African Republic", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council, noting the letter of 9 February 1999 from the
President of the Central African Republic to the President of the Council
(S/1999/132), takes note with satisfaction of the commitment expressed by
the President of the Central African Republic to maintain peace in the
Central African Republic through dialogue and consultation. In this
context, it strongly reaffirms that the complete implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (S/1997/561, appendices III-VI) and of the National
Reconciliation Pact (S/1998/219) is essential to peace and national
reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
"The Security Council calls upon the Government of the Central African
Republic to continue to take concrete steps to implement political,
economic, social and security reforms as referred to in the report of the
Secretary-General of 23 February 1998 (S/1998/148) and to fulfil the
commitments expressed in the letters of 8 January 1998 (S/1998/61, annex)
and of 23 January 1999 (S/1999/98, annex) to the Secretary-General by the
President of the Central African Republic. It recalls that the success,
the future mandate and the ongoing presence of the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic are closely linked to the fulfilment of
these commitments, in particular the immediate resumption of a constructive
political dialogue.
"The Security Council expresses its concern about the consequences
that the current political tensions have for the stability and the
functioning of the institutions of the Central African Republic. It
reaffirms that the Government, the political leaders and the people of the
Central African Republic bear the primary responsibility for national
reconciliation, the maintenance of a stable and secure environment and the
reconstruction of their country. It emphasizes the importance of
continuing efforts in the Central African Republic to settle outstanding
contentious issues peacefully and democratically in accordance with the
Bangui Agreements. It stresses the need for both the “mouvance
99-04270 (E)

180299

/...

S/PRST/1999/7
English
Page 2

présidentielle” and the opposition parties to cooperate closely and work
actively with the aim of achieving the political consensus indispensable to
stability in the Central African Republic.
"The Security Council considers that a smooth preparation of free and
fair presidential elections, for which proper steps should be taken as soon
as possible, requires a certain level of political consensus and the
opening of a genuine dialogue between all the constituent parties of the
National Assembly. It also considers that consensual preparation for the
presidential elections can only reinforce the legitimacy of the next
President of the Republic and also secure a sustainable civil peace. It
fully supports the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in his
call to the Central African political leaders and authorities to resolve
the political impasse so the country can move forward, and welcomes the
current efforts undertaken to this end.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
