THIRTY-SECOND

1
NEW

YEAR

MEETING: 21 MARCH 1977
YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1988) . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . ,
Statement by the President . , . . . , . . . . . . . , , . , . . . . , I . , . . . . . . . . . I .
Adoption of the agenda . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . , .
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the
United Nations addressedto the President of the Security Council (S/ 12295) .

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the OfJ"icialRecords of the Security Council, The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security CounciZ. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

1988TN MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 21 March 1977, at 4 p.m.
Mr. AlItll~~

Ihsidcllt:

YOUNG (United Statesof America).

possiblefor me to be present in person during that month,
when he took over the onerousduties that would otherwise
have fallen to my friend, Ambassador Ivor Richard.
Nevertheless,my colleagueshave assuredme that Ambassador Murray presided with great distinction at both the
formal meetings of the Council and at the informal
consultations which the Council held during the month,
and I wish to thank him on behalf of all of us for his efforts
andhis patience.

/?csc!~~: The represcntntivesof the following States:
Benin, ~~lll~ld:l, C’hina,
France, Gernlany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Republic, Mauritius, Pakistan,
~II;IIII~~,
~~onl~llli~l,
Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Statesof Americaand Venezuela.
Provisionalogend?(S/Agenda/i 988)

Adoption of the agenda

1. /\doptiun of tile agenda

The agendawasadopted.

2. The questionof South Africa:
Lcttcr dated 11March 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations
addressedto the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2295)

The question of South Africa
Letter dated 9 March I977 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations addressedto the
Presidentof the Security Council (S/l 2295)
5. The PRESIDENT: Letters have been addressedto the
Presidentof the Security Council by the representativesof
Egypt, Indonesia, Liberia, Nigeria, Sri Lanka, the Syrian
Arab RepubIic and Yugoslavia, in which they requestto be
invited to participate in the discussionof the question on
the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite the
representativesof the States I have just mentioned to
participate in the discussionwithout the right to vote, in
conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rulesof procedure.

Statementby the President
1. The I’IZ1:.SII~liNT: Before proceedingwith the business
beforethe Security Council at this first meetingduring the
month of March, I shouldlike to take this opportunity to
thank my collcagucsfor the many words of friendship and
apprccintion they have expressedwith regard to 111~
predcccssor,AnibassadorWilliam Scranton, and to assure
you
ali that I look forward to fruitful and comradely
relationships3s we work together in the comingmonths to
pursuethe goalsconl:tinocl in the Charter for the niainte1l:IllCC 01’ illtcrlli~ti0lld
p:lCC alld security.
2.

I wish, 2s I’residcnt

of

to

/‘\llll1ilSS~ldllr

of

6. In view of the limited number of placesavailableat the
Council table, I invite these representatives to take the
placesreservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the usual understandingthat they will be invited to take
a place at the Council table when they wish to addressthe

the Security Council, to express
Romaniaand to his Government
the syn~p;~thy WC all feel bccausc of the devastating
C:lrtll~]Uilk~!
t]Iilt
recently occurredin his country and that
resulted in 311cIlornious antI regrettable loss of life and
causct~

cxtensivc:

Ihtcu

thmngc.

tllilt
ofl’crs 01
counlries.

;lSSiSlUllCC

3.

lil;c

1 sl1011j1.l ;llso

II

is

indeed

hcilrte~lil~g

IIllVC

1XCll

IllildC

to cx~xws

ti) AmbassildC~r

by

to

know

SO

lll~~llY

Jilipal,

aI)d

council.

At the invitation of the President, n/i?.A. E Abdel
Meguid (Eapt), Mr. A. Marpaamg (Indonesia), Mrs. A.
Brooks-Randolph (Liberia), Mr. L. 0. Ilarrimalz (Nigeria),
Mr. I. B, Fonscka (Sri Lanka), Mr. M. Allaf‘ (Syrian Arab
Republic) arzd Mr. J. Petrii (Yugoslavia) took the places
reservedfor them at the sideof the Council chamber.

through hill1 10 tllc (‘;ovcrmnent ol India, our condolences
oil Lllc rcccllt [lciltll (I[ tlie Presidentof thllt great nation,
Mr. I’ilklllIllldill
Ali /\lllllCll.

7. The PRESIDENT: I should also like to inform the
membersof the Council that I have received a letter dated
21 March 1977 from the President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia,which readsasfollows:
“The Security Council is about to considerthe question
of South Africa, which will include, inter alin, the racial
1

-

and repressive policies of that regime and the threat to
international peace and security created by those Policies.
Those same -policies affect ,Namibia, where. they are
applied by the illegal South African adminifiratlon*
“I wish therefore to convey to you the desire of the
Council for Namibia to participate in this debate, without
the right to vote, and to be represented by a delegation
headed by myself as President of the Council for Namibia
and including the representatives of Burundi, Indonesia,
Mexico and Poland.”
8. On previous occasions, the Security Council has extended invitations to representatives of other appropriate
United Nations bodies in connexion with the consideration
of matters on its agenda.It seems appropriate, accordingly,
for me to proceed, if there is no objection, to extend an
invitation, pursuant to rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure, to the President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia and his delegation.
9. In view of the limited number of places availableat the
Council table, I invite the President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia and his delegation to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber, on
the usual understanding that they wiIl be invited to take
places at the Council table whenever they wish to address
the Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. D. W.Kamana
(Zambia), President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, and the other members of the delegation took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
10. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform members of the
Security Council that I have received two letters of today’s
date from the representatives of Benin, the Libyan Arab
Republic and Mauritius. The first reads as follows:
“We, the undersigned members of the the Security
Council, have the honour to request that during its
current meetings devoted to consideration of ‘The Question of South Africa’, the Council extend an invitation,
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure, to
Mr. Mfanafuthi Johnstone Makatini of the African National Congress and to Mr. Potlako Leballo of the Pan
Africanist Congress.” [S/12299]
The second reads as follows:
“We, the undersigned members of the Security Couwil,
have the honour to request that during its current
meetings devoted to consideration of ‘The Question of
South Africa’, the Council extend an invitation, under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure, to Mr. Olaf
Palme and Mr. Abdul S. Minty.” [S/12300]
1 I. Since there are no objections, I shall take it that the
COunCfi agrees t0 meet these requests that it extend
invitations, under rule 39, to Mr. Makatini, Mr. Lcballo,
Mr. Palme and Mr. Minty. I shall therefore ~ivite them to
make their statements at the appropriate moment.

12. The Security Council has inscribed on its agenda for
this meeting the item entitled “The question of South
Africa”, That decisionwastaken ill response
t0 the request
madeon behalfof the African Group at the United Nations
in a letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent
Representativeof Nigeria to the United Nations, actingin
his capacity as Chairmanof the African Group for the
month of March [S/12295]. Reference is made in that
letter to the relevant resolutionsadopted by the General
Assembly and the Security Council, in particular to
Assemblyresolution 31/6, adopted on 26 October and
9 November
1976
in co1lnexioll
With
the
iten1
entitled
“Policiesof apartheidof the Government of South Africa”,
and to Councilresolution 392(1976), adopted on 19 June
1976,in conneion with the diSCUSSiOn
Of the itenl entitled
“Situation in South Africa: killings and violence by the
apartheidrCgirne in Soweto
and other Drcas”.
13. On 16 November1976, the Secretary-Generaladdressed to the President of the Security Council a letter
[S/12232] transmitting the text of resolutions31/6 A to K
and drawing
the Coun~il’s
attention
to paragraphs
1 and 2
of resolution31/6 D and to the operative part of resolution
31/6 K.
14. The Security Councilwill now commenceits consideration of the questionof South Africa. The first speakeris
the representative
of Mauritius,
representative
of the
Chairmanof the Organizationof African Unity.
15. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): Mr. President,my delegation joins you in your expressionof sympathy to the
delegations
of Romaniaand India.
16. I feel compelledtoday to draw the attention of the
to the imminent danger of a general war in
southern Africa. We are no longer confronted with an
abstractpossibilityof a threat to the peacein that region.It
is no longer a question of a war which might develop al
sometime in the future. Southern Africa is already at wat,
and this fact demandsof usthat we take rapid and effective
action to dealwith the real causesof a conflict which has
beenallowedto fester too long, If we do not, that conflict
will inevitably grow more seriousand may spreadto other
parts of Africa. Indeed, it could produce the most serious
internationalcrisisof this generation.
Council

17. I am aware that somemembersof the Council will
think that I exaggerate.SomeMembershave only recently,
in the last debateon Namibia, said that they did not see
any signof a threat to the peacein southern Africa. I do
not know how anyonecould substantiatestatementswhich
are patently inconsistentwith the facts aswe know them.
18. In 1974, the brave peoplesof Angola, Mozambique
and Guinea-Bissau
won their strugglefor independenceand
endedthe centuries-longeraof Portuguesecolonialism.One
wouldhave thought that the remainingminority rCgimes
in
Afrjca would have got the messageconveyed by that
victory and would have moved towards real negotiations
with the organizationsrepresentingthe majority in South
Africa, Namibiaand Zimbabwe.Instead, they were unfortullatelY
fhOWn
on the
defensive.They chose to try to

crush the liberation movements and to thwart the demands
of the people for freedom and independence, The result has
been a deepening crisis. South Africa has sent more than
50,000 troops and police to Namibia in an effort to impose
a puppet government and to preserve apartheid
in that
Territory. The Smith regime has stretched its manpower
and economic resourcesto the limit in a futile attempt’ to
perpetuate colonial rule in Zimbabwe. South Africa is
mobilizing intensively to contain the internal rebeliion
which began last June. Can it truly be said, in these
circumstances,that there isno crisis? Is it not obvious that
we are not approachinga war but are in the middle of one?

any standard. It indicates that South Africa is now giving
first priority to military matters.

19. The question we confront today is what to do about
that situation. African representatives at the United
Nations, including myself, have in the past repeatedly
demandedaction againstSouth Africa. We have proposeda
mandatory armsembargoand we have proposedconsultations. We have proposed talks, conferences, economic
sanctionsand a hundred other measures.It must, however,
be said that relatively little hasbeen done or that relatively
little proved possiblein the face of objections to African
demands.We now find ourselvesin a worse situation than
ever before, confronted with anescalatingcrisiswhich may
soonbe out of control.

24. The equipment of the Defence Forces is modern and
plentiful. The army pussesses
some 200 modern tanks,
more than a thousand armoured cars and hundreds of
armoured personnelcarriers. It possesses
the most modern
electronic and communications equipment. The South
African Air Force hasnearly 500 combat aircraft, including
squadronsof Mirage 111and Mirage F-l aircraft, AermacchiAtlas Impala strike aircraft and some200 helicopters. The
army and the police are equipped with the most modern
small arms, aswell asspecialequipment for the suppression
of so-calledcivil disturbances.Almost all this equipment is
imported or built under foreign licence in South Africa. A
great deal of it hasbeenimported in the last few years.

20. I wish to confine my statement at this stageto a plea
for the adoption of a draft resolution which will caI1upon
Member Statesto halt further investment in and loans to
South Africa. I realize that this proposal runs counter to
what someMembersseemto regardasa hopeful possibility
for a peacefulevolution towards majority rule. They argue
that continued investment speedsup economic change in
South Africa and that this change is beneficial to the
African population. Expanded foreign investment, we are
told, will encouragesocialchangeand provide the Ieverage
for forcing changeswhich the South African Government
might, if left to its own devices,be reluctant to undertake.

25. South Africa has made the purpose of this ruili tary
expansion quite clear. It has recently demonstrated a
certain diplomatic flexibility, especially in its apparent
encouragement of attempls to assistso-callednegotiated
settlements in Namibia and Zimbabwe. Its basic aim,
however, remains what it has always been. South Africa
intends to maintain and protect the so-calledSouth African
way of life-that is, the system of minority rule which
exploits and oppressesthe African peoplesof the subcontinent. As one observerwrote recently:

23. The effort of the last few years has enabled South
Africa to build the most powerful military machine in
Africa south of the Sahara. Four years ago South Africa
had some 70,000 men on active peace-time duty. Today
there are over 100,000 men in the South African Defence
Forces. There are well over 35,000 police and as many
police reservists. It is estimated that South Africa could
mobilize some 200,000 men within two days in an
emergency.

“Despite a significant change of style, South Africa’s
foreign policy will continue to rely on a combination 0f
the same three components on which is hasbeen based
for a number of years: military preparedness,someform
of ‘outward policy’ toward the black States and a
continuing attempt ,to achieve informal security arrangements with WesternPowers.”

21. J respectthis argument-an argument about which we
have heard a great deal-but I regret I cannot accept it
becauseit seemsto me to be remarkably academic and
unreal. Indeed, if I may say so with respect, it seemslike a
somewhatnai’vekind of wishful thinking. There is no need
for me to go here into its technical deficiencies as an
economicargument.Thesehave been revealedin a number
of scholarly publications, aswell asin someUnited Nations
documents,Rather 1 shalltry to show that this argument iS
practically and concretely wrong. It fails to take account of
what is actually goingon in South Africa at the moment.

26. Thus South Africa intends to ensure “stability”
through the development of overwhelming military power,
The South African Government, furthermore, hastaken the
view that in order to achieve “stability”, it must be
prepared to use its power throughout southern Africa,
Southern Africa is a system of interdependent States, and
the Government believes that it must help to maintain
“friendly” Governments in ne&hbouring States, South
Africa is thus assumingthe mantle of a regional Power. It
now seeksto dominate the whole southern African region,
Ill
the context of the present crisis, its military power
therefore constitutes a standing threat to neighbouring
States and others even further afield. South Africa lids
already shown that it can and will strike out againstothers
when it believes that tllere is a “threat” to its security. It
has mounted a full-scaleinvasion of Angola. It hasimposed
an occupying army on Namibia. It has attacked Zambia.
And it has given, and is giving, military assistanceto the
Smith r6gime.

22. Our discussionmust start from the fact that South
Africa now possesses
an awesomemilitary power and that it
is continuing to develop its military capabilities at a rapid
rate. In 1972, the South African defence budget wasa little
more than 450 million Rand. By last year, total military
expenditure in the budget had risen to some 1,348 million
Rand. The next military budget is estimated to be in the
rangeof 1,700 million to 2,000 million Rand. Thusit would
appearthat defenceexpenditureshave increasedfourfold in
the spaceof four years. Something of the order of 20 per
cent of total Government expenditure now goes for
military purposes,This is an exceptionally high figure by
3

31. It is a well known fact that, in recent years, South
Africa has been confronted with a serious and persistent
balance-of-payments
problem. Its imports have con.
tinuously outpaced its exports over the years and there
have been mounting current-account deficits for some time,
In recent years, the deficit on the current account has
become quite sizeable. In 1975, South Africa had a current
deficit of $2.4 billion. The provisional estimate for the
1976 deficit is $2 billion and this despite vigorous efforts in
the last year to reduce imports and expand exports.

27. South Africa’s actions do not suggest a policy of
“exploring the possibilities of peaceful change”. Its policy
has in reality been inflexible and aggressive. It has created a
garrison State not to promote change but to prevent it. And
the scope of its military effort can only mean that South
Africa intends to “defend itself’, to maintain the status
quo, no matter what the cost in human and economic terms
may be, Consequently, there will be no real change in
South Africa, or perhaps in southern Africa, until South
Africa has been forced or persuaded to change its posture.
And there will be no peace in southern Africa until a way
has been found to bring this about,

32. These particularly large recent deficits are due in part
to the dramatic fall in the price of gold in recent years and
to the impact of the world recession on the rate of
expansion of South African exports. The main reason,
though, for the large deficits has clearly been the cost of
the military effort which South Africa has undertaken to
ensure the so-called security of apartheid. Government
spending has expanded considerably and resources have
been shifted to sectors where production demands large
quantities of foreign exchange. The South African Reserve
Bank recently noted that government spending had pushed
gross domestic expenditure to very high levels, and had
been concentrated:

28. Obviously South Africa’s military expansion has an
important implication for our purposes today. The rapid
military expansion of recent years has required a major
economic effort. It has been necessary to mobilize manpower, raw materials, capital, foreign exchange and technical information in order to ensure that the targets of the
country’s military can be met. The scope of the military
programmes, moreover, has been very large, and the
demands upon economic resources have therefore been very
heavy. The South African Government has had a dominant
role in the economy in order to ensure that resources are
properly
allocated. Thus, programmes to sustain the
defence effort have now been given first priority in the
country’s economic policy.

“particularly
on defence equipment, stockpiling of
strategic material, the initial outlay on television sets
during 1975-76 and the continued high level of expenditure on large capital projects of public authorities and
public corporations, all of which have a high import
content”.

29. South Africa is now pursuing a so-called “strategic
growth programme”. That programme has two objectives:
to expand and develop South Africa’s military capabilities
and to improve its strategic position. Over the last three
years, spending has been directed increasingly towards
projects which contribute to the achievement of those
objectives, The Government itself is spending large sums on
armaments, strategic research, transportation and communications. Public corporations are also playing an important
role. Substantial sums have been spent on oil exploration,
colliery expansion and the production of industrial minerals. Even the manufacturing sector, which is dominated by
private enterprise, has been mobilized. The Standard Bank
described the situation recently in its monthly Review.

33. I come now to the question of foreign investment in
and loans to South Africa. It is common knowledge that
South Africa has never overcome its dependence upon
foreign capital. For many years foreign corporations and
banks have played an important role in financing South
African capital formation. South Africa has had a continuing net capital inflow. In recent years, capital has
moved to South Africa in very large, indeed astounding,
amounts. Between 1974 and 1975, for instance, total direct
investment in South Africa rose by nearly 800 million
Rand. Long-term loans to the private sector rose by m0re
than 1 billion Rand. Long-term loans to the central
government and banking sector rose by nearly 1,300
million Rand. All in all, South Africa’s total foreign
liabilities increased by approximately 3,700 million Rand
between 1974 and 1975.

“In the manufacturing field, semi-public sector projects
were intended primarily to strengthen South Africa’s
strategic position by concentrating on oil technology,
steel production, aluminium and uranium reserves, petrol
refining and developing electricity, gas and water utilities.”

34. The figures for 1976 are not yet available. The
indications arc, however, that there is a massive flow of
foreign capital into South Africa even now. The net capital
inflow of 1976 is at present estimated at some $1 .l billion.
Those funds are being used, first of all, to cover the deficit
which South Africa has incurred on its current account.
They are theref0re assisting the Government of South
Africa to pursue an economic policy which is designed to
support the current military expansion. Those foreign funds
allow South Africa to avoid the problems which large
deficits normally entail. They provide the means which
enable it to live beyond its resources. In this case, however,
South Africa’s propensity to spend more than it earns
abroad has nothing to do with idle consumption. It is the
result of a deliberate policy of military expansion.

30. The South African Government is thus forcing the
pace of economic growth in the country. The so-called
“strategic growth programme” has consequently created a
very serious foreign problem. South Africa’s economy is
still in part a dependent one. The country has an industrial
base which is only partially developed. It cannot yet
develop its own modern technology, especially in the fields
of electronics, avionics, machine tools, heavy equipment,
computers,
telecommunications,
automotive equipment
and advanced weapons. A programme of growth of the kind
now being pursued entails the importation of very large
quantities of sophisticated technology and equipment. It is
therefore exceedingly costly in terms of foreign exchange.
4

35. It is sometimes argued that all this proves very little.
Spokesmen for foreign banks, for instance, often say that
they are merely lending money to South African corporations or public authorities and that they cannot be held
responsible for what is done with that money. This
argument seems at first to have a certain plausibility. It
breaks down completely, however, when one looks at the
facts more closely, In the first place, one must keep in mind
that loans and investments are being made in a context.
They are being made to a country whose Government is in
violation of the Charter of the United Nations and has
denied the most elementary human rights to the vast
majority of its citizens. That country and that Government
are mobilizing economically to ensure the perpetuation of
apartheid and colonial rule in southern Africa. Economic and
iinanrial assistance in such a situation is more than
“business as usual”. It is assistance to a lawless and
militarist State.

garrison State. Those resources are directly and concretely
helping to perpetuate the repugnant policies of apartheid
and colonialism. And for that reason they must be stopped.
40. Our Organization has now been seized of the problems
of South Africa, and in particular the question of apartheid,
for 3 1 years. Various commissions and working groups have
been set up to deal with that question and their work over
the years has cost the world community untold burdens in
financial terms alone.
41. I have requested the Under-Secretary-General
for
Administration
and Management to provide a cumulative
estimate of expenses incurred by the United Nations on the
questions relating to apartheid. I am advised that the
necessary historical data’ permitting the computation of
total expenses for a particular activity such as this from
1946 to 1973 are practically non-existent. Only from 1974
onward could one compile meaningful estimates.

36. Furthermore, it is important to recognize that money
is very rarely invested in or lent for castles in the air. It is
invested in specific projects. It is clear that the money
which is now flowing into South Africa is going for the
most part directly into projects which are basic to the
country’s “strategic growth programme”. It is obvious that,
in the present situatioc, the Government will use a great
deal of the foreign exchange available to it for the qurchase
of arms and related technology.

42. A partial accounting for some of the Secretariat units
concerned, which consisted of the Centre against Apartheid
from January 1967 to December 1976, the Special Committee against Apartheid from January 1963 to December
1976, the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa from its creation to December
1976 and the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa
also from its inception to December 1976, amounted to a
figure of $15.5 million. Those data relate only to direct
costs and do not include indirect expenditures, such as the
cost of conference services or public information.

37, The Government now appears to be spending in excess
of 200 million Rand per year on arms alone. Moreover,
many loans are being made to South A,frican government
corporations such as ESCOM, ISCOR and SASOL. It is
precisely those public corporations which have assumed a
major responsibility for carrying out the Government’s
economic policy. Foreign funds, therefore, are going to
those sectors, such as transport, communications, oil technology, uranium and electronics, which are the mainstay of
South Africa’s military expansion. Indeed, although detailed figures are not yet available, it seems clear that the
great bulk of foreign lending, and perhaps even foreign
investment, is going to such sectors.

43. What have we to show in concrete results for that
investment ? We certainly have not conquered npartheid or
weakened its bastions. A positive contribution has perhaps
been made in alerting world public opinion to the problem
and its dangers.
44. The time has therefore come for more bold and
decisive action against South Africa, which we should take
without further delay.
45. At this stage 1 should like to give advance notice to the
members of the Council that four draft resolutions, which
will be sponsored by non-aligned and other members of the
Council and which are still the subject of consultation and
negotiation, will be introduced during this debate. They
will be simple and non-controversial. Their terms will be
consistent with the Charter and the powers of the Council.
They are intended to strengthen the previous resolutions
adopted by the Council to dissuade South Africa from
pursuing its abhorrent policy of apartheid. The submission
of those draft resolutions should be regarded as the very
minimum that we could do in the present circumstances,
considering the gravity of the situation in South Africa. In
our view, those circumstances demand sterner measures. We
realize, however, the importance of obtaining the unanimity of the Council on this serious matter. We have
opted, therefore, for the achievement of an unusually
modest but clear objective, through peaceful means within
the provisions of the Charter, and we hope that these draft
resolutions will be adopted without
objection at the
appropriate time. We feel confident that our decisions will,
when approved by the Council and implemented by

38. Beneath the surface, therefore, things are not at all
what they seem t9 be. We have recently heard a torrent of
words to the effect that foreign investment will help to ease
the situation for the vast majority of people in South Africa
and in the rest of the subcontinent. It has even been
suggested that foreign investment and loans may actually
lead to the elimination of apartheid. We have perhaps been
too much influenced by these words, since the argument
has rarely been subjected to careful scrutiny. I hqpe that
by looking a little more closely at the matter, I have now
?hed some light on what is really happening.
39. It is crystal clear that foreign investment is not geared
to improving the situation in southern Africa at present.
Foreign funds are not directed to agricultural development
in the rural areas or to social programmes which would
better the life of Africans. The South African Government
is certainly not using those funds, or any other resources
for that matter, to dismantle apartheid in some absentminded way. On the contrary, thanks to foreign investment
and foreign loans, it has been able to build and maintain a
5

50. I should also like to congratulatethe Presidentof the
Council, AmbassadorAndrew Young, a great personand a
great leader of a great country. I had occasionto express
my views on AmbassadorYoung through the media of the
United States. I believe that most of us have read the
curriculum vitae of this great young man who, I am sure,
has an even greater future before him. His life has been
dedicated to the civil rights of minorities in this country.
Judging from his pronouncementsduring the few months
sincehe took office, 1 seeevery indication that his work at
the United Nations will continue in that humanisttradition.

Member States, hasten the collapse of the forces of evil in
South Africa and enhance the prospects of peace in the
world.
46. Mr. President, asthis is the first time I have spokenin
the Council this month, it givesme great personalpleasure
to extend to you, on my own behalf and on that of my
delegation, a warm welcometo the presidency. I wish also
to avail myself of this opportunity to pledge the full
co-operation of my delegation, which is pleasedto have
guiding the debate in the Council a distinguishedbrother
whom we have known over the years as a staunch
proponent of civil liberties and an ardent defender of
human rights. We feel confident that our efforts will be
highly inspired and well directed by your mature wisdom
and true senseof justice. We are heartened already by the
refreshingchangewe havesensedover the past few weeksin
the approach taken by your Government, in Washington
and in these halls, in respect of substanceand style in
international relations. We arc indeed happy to note the
new emphasisplaced on morality and openness,qualities
which we value very highly and which we know are deeply
rooted in your own spirit, convictions and vocation. We
think that the changeaugurswell for the Organization and
we shall therefore spareno effort to ensurethat it produces
the desiredresults.

51. We are happy to note that when President Carter
honoured States Members of the United Nations a few
eveningsago by addressingthem, hispolicy valuesreflected
the samededication to equity and justice for all mankind.
It is our hope that, you, Mr, President, will bring your
experience and knowledge of the values connected with
fundamentalhuman rights and basicfreedomsin the United
Statesto bear on the international scene.
52. Having spoken to you on a number of occasionsand
having listened to your views, I find it fitting to pronounce
my personaladmiration of the great qualitieswhich I find
in you. You are debonair, frank and, moreover, warm and
humble, even though a few daysagoyou describedyourself
as “inherently arrogant”; I would also add that you are
firm, judging by your activities and bearing in private
discussionsin your office. Thoseare qualitiesthat have not
only impressedmany of us at the United Nations but also
brought you, over the years, close to several leadersof
Africa. May I go further and say that in many of our
countries your personality and prestige have had some
bearing on our view of the new Administration which you
represent here. This has gone someway towards changing
the image of the United Statesin severalof the countriesin
Africa, even before we becamefaintly awareof the policies
of the new United StatesAdministration, In this samespirit
we have developed tremendoushope and I am pleasedto
say that, so far, our hopes have not been forlorn. WCare
inspired to work with you in your capacity not only as
President of the Security Council but also as Permanent
Representativeof your great country.

47. I shouldlike to conclude by quoting the wise wordsof
President James Carter-who, 1 understand, prefers to be
called Jimmy Carter, just as you, Sir, prefer to be called
Andy-on the occasion of his historic visit to the United
Nationslast Saint Patrick’s Day:
“In southern Africa we will work to help attain
majority rule through peaceful means. We believe that
such fundamental transformation can be achieved,to the
advantageof both blacks and whites. Anything lessthan
that may bring a protracted racial war, with devastating
consequences
for all.”
48. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the representative of Nigeria, Chairman of the African Group for the
month of March and Chairman of the SpecialCommittee
against Apartheid. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
49. Mr. HARRIMAN (Nigeria): This is the first occasionI
have had to appear before the Security Council asthe chief
complainant, in my capacity as Chairman of the African
Group for the month of March and as Chairman of the
Special Committee againstApartheid. I reservethe position
of my Government which, with the graciousconsentof the
Council and the President, will be well articulated by the
Commissionerfor External Affairs of Nigeria some time
tomorrow. However, on the question of South Africa, I feel
certain that all of us here are complainants, and I believe
that my statement will cover the generalspectrum of views
of even the most reactionary and hesitant among us. It is
also my first opportunity to speak before the Council
directly on the generalquestion of South Africa. I wish to
expressmy gratitude to the President and the membersof
the Council for granting me and the Group which 1
represent, as well asthe Spe& Committee againstApartheid, of which I have the honour to be Chairman, this
singularprivilege.

53. The United Stateshas greatpower and privilege in the
Security Council. Ipso jbcto, your country has grea’t
responsibilitiesand obligations which, I feel certain, you
and your Government are prepared to take on with
conviction and dedication, I hope that, as a result of
co-operation with and from the international community
traversing the barriers of history, geography, communications, race, nationalismand ideology, a new era will be born
in which we can boast that we have moved away from
preoccupations of war and strife, ideological rivalries and
continuing struggle between the polarizedNorth and South
and that our concernswill then be focusedon how to build
up peace based on stability, equity and justice for all
peoplesof the globe.
54. We wish you well in your assignmentand I would say
that Africa, the Special Committee against Apartheid-members of which you have graciously met informally-and the Government and peopleof Nigeriagive you
6

their blessings for your career in the United Nations and for
the contribution which is expected of you, on behalf of
your Government, in moving forward in all aspects of our
endeavours at the United Nations.

some. Very often, the scions of such systems have
precipitated revolutions which have led to permanent
changes in the history of man.
60. The ingredients for such change are all there in
southern Africa, Those who have helped and continue to
assist the liberation process in Africa are automatically
friends of Africa. The corollary is also valid: those who do
not are not. Ideology becomes relevant in the circumstances
only when it is a useful vehicle to carry one towards one’s
objectives.

55. That hope is, I believe, also shared by the struggling
people of southern Africa as a whole. To them it is their
forlorn hope, the type of hope which inspires the drowning
to attempt to snatch at every straw, to try to take hold of
the intangible waves and even of ripples. The situation of
the black man in Africa is, to say the least, very bleak, To
him the future has always been a mirage-hope
and
frustration. For after Sharpeville in 1960 they, like we,
hoped for concerted international pressure against the
oppressive regime of South Africa. Very little transpired;
rather, a lot did happen, but only in the escalation of
Western vested interests. Again, after Soweto, we anticipated more uncompromising action from those who could
influence the racist regime towards change. To our knowledge, SO far, very few Western representatives are looking
beyond their parochial vested interests in South Africa.

61. The position of the South African racist rbgime, as well
as the policies of its supporters, have been based on a
number of fallacies. The first is ideological and concerns the
threat of communism. The second concerns the security of
the Cape route in the context of Western global strategy.
The third relates to the protection of Western civilization
and Christian values. The fourth relates tq the risk to the
vested interests of the West in a change of the system. Any
credence given to such hypocrisy
amounts to selfdeception, if not nai’vety.

56, Today in South Africa we have continuing crosscurrents of the evils of colonialism, slavery, racial supremacy, human frailty and lust for profit and greed. We have
atavism that is born of crass materialism and barbarism that
surfaces in the crunch of fear. There is, on the other hand,
the reaction that all those factors generate among the
underprivileged and downtrodden. This is a syndrome of
fear. It is a lack of serenity to permit acceptance of the fact
that ultimately power is of the majority and that this fact
cannot be changed. All this is at the basis of the problem of
southern Africa.

62. My simple reaction is in the form of pointed questions
which I shall ask the Council. First, how does one articulate
one’s policy options in bondage? Have the liberation
movements of southern Africa had the opportunity to
exercise any options on the basis of the will of their people?
Secondly, why should the Cape route be white? Is the
so-called white race the only custodian of liberal ethics, or
are black people the anti-Western factors in the world?
Thirdly, how can Vorster and his ilk talk about Western
civilization and Christian nationalism while they articulate
values of un-Christian racial chauvinism? Fourthly, as
vested interests of the West grow, will their commitment in
Sohth Africa not become greater? Are the Western Powers
not likely to get involved even more tomorrow than today
in protecting their interests in South Africa?

57. In South Africa, those who have lived in fear of the
majority have continuer! to increase their insurance against
the majority by building up, in an ever more formidable
manner, barriers of hatred and oppressive curtains against
that majority. In that vicious circle, hatred escalates and
oppression is perfected, resulting in even greater insecurity
for the rich as well as for the downtrodden. Polarization, in
turn, escalates. In effect, with the entrenchment of racial
barriers, interracial bitterness and conflict become more
inveterate. The advantaged race acquires more instruments
of torture and oppression as the weak and the underprivileged become more and more desperate.

63. We are moving away from the power that money can
buy. We are groping for principles and policies to be applied
in southern Africa which would fully reflect the value
systems which we cherish within our own borders and at
the United Nations. The paradox is that, even in the most
advanced of countries, there appears to be some conflict
between foreign policy and national value systems. This is
basically a conflict of values. Governments deceive their
people by making a mockery of their national values in the
interest of a few profiteers.

58. Those with a sense of history can easily discern the
in’exorable rising tide of change that flows with the tide of
time. The feudal lords of the Middle Ages, the imperial
autocratic kings and barons, the master-serf era of slavery
and colonialism have all been swept away in time. This is
another epoch in the history of mankind when racism will
be confounded by that inexorable tide of time.

64. The great leaders in history have been those who have
taken a hard look at the realities of the times and
situations, not those who have begged the question. They
we those who have had the courage to change what ought
to be changed, in the language of a wise black slave of this
continent. Short-term advantages should not outweigh
long-term interests, principles must never be sacrificed to
expediency, A great leader of our time, General de Gaulle,
faced the issues in Algeria, even at the risk of military ant!
political rebellion and frequent assassination attempts and,
in effect, threw down the gauntlet to political suicide. He
laid his neck on the block, At the risk of a civil war and the
collapse of the Fourth Republic of his country, he took a
stand. With courage he cast his lot on the side of justice

59. All those phenomena in human history have invariably
resulted in bitterness, uprisings and war, and in history time
has always been on the side of the oppressed. It is ody
when the oppressed have taken the initiative directly, often
with external support, that change has been effected. Such
support may frequently be attracted by external conflict of
interests or the conflict of value systems. The embers of the
burning bitterness of generations of a people are difficult to
suppress or to extinguish-much
to the consternation of
7

and equity. We cannot say the same for several leaders of
the world today, He did not cling to the quixotic fantasies
of empire; his calculations were not based on profit and 10~s
or on the exclusive interests of the pied+noirs-the French
settlers.
65. The problem of southern Africa can be seen against
that background. Sharpeville was 17 years ago to the day.
Sharpeville led to protestations by the Security Council.
Between Sharpeville and Soweto, on 16 June last year,
there was not much action by most of the world Powers,
except for more sales of arms and more investments, loans
and trade.

gates different sets of laws to regulate the 1iVeSof the
people within a nation-State on the basis of the colour of
their sldn and the texture of their hair, iti order specifically
to maintain their minority privileged interests. By an even
cleverer distorted manipulation of lOgiC,
they
relegate
blacks to the status of foreigners, natives of so-called
homelands or bantustans. However, they have yet to
perfect their fraud and find an answer to the question of
how to dispose of the Asians and so-called Coloureds in the
process of rendering every non-white a foreign body in the
“white man’s country” of South Africa.
70. The facts are as follows and we must face them.
71. First, the Dutch arrived in southern Africa after the
Portuguese colonidists, who have since been ousted from
that part of African soil. The fact that those minority
settlers were granted self-government by the British without
the process of self-determination and the application of the
principle of majority rule, brings this problem and situation
in South Africa further into focus and relegates the regime
of that country to the status of a white racist settler
colonialist regime. Yet the protagonists of equality are not
those settler colonialists but the blacks. Those denying the
majority are not the owners of the land but the descendants
qf alien settlers. The oppressers, repressors, torturers and
killers ar: not the majority, but an alien minority.

66. Let us recall the action we have taken to curb, if not
confound, the atrocities of racial colonial settler oppression
and continuing usurpation of power by a minority in South
Africa. How has the worsening situation been checked by
those who claim the rights and privileges of power but fail
to act under the Charter to bring down this obnoxious
system, the crime of apartkeid, the crime against the most
basic and elementary form of humanism-wanton killings,
increasing measures for oppression and repression on the
basis of racial supremacy, the dehumanization of the black
people of South Africa to keep them perpetually in
bondage, and the expropriation of their country?
67. During the debates on apartheid in the General
Assembly last year, the representative of a member State of
the European Economic Community, a State whose leaders
have traditionally been in the vanguard of the anti-apartheid movement in Western Europe, made the following
statement:

72. Africans, however, in their traditionally stoical mildness and tolerance, have the Lusaka Manifesto, the Dar-esSalaam Declaration, the Freedom Charter of the African
National Congress of South Africa and the pronouncements
of the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania to show for their
magnanimity, We recognize that, for the 4 million white
settlers, South Africa has become their home. We only call
for majority rule based on equal rights for all the racial
groups of South Africa.

“As the legislative measures to give effect to apartheid
were introduced in South Africa through the legislative
process, the best way to remove apartheid would likewise
be #rough a process of peaceful change.”

73. Secondly, through this legislative process, the black
people of South Africa have been subjected to disfunctional
labour ethics that relegate the black man to the status of a
serf, reducing and tying the white and black to the
relationship of slave-master and slave.

I could not ascertain whether this was cynicism. It could
not be an uninformed approach to the whole question of
the apartheid system.
68. Others tend to lean towards a circumscribed approach
to apartheid in the context of their own experience of
human and civil rights movements in their respective
environments. However, because such statements and approaches emanate from leaders and Governments which
should be even more concerned than those with more
inveterate interests in South Africa, I intend briefly to go
into the substance of the question of apartkeid.

74. Thirdly, by means of bantustanization, the blacks in
South Africa are being forcibly herded and cramped into
so-called homelands which are unviable, non-contiguous
tracts of empty veldt. They are reduced to sucl~ poverty,
misery and dependence in order to keep them ad infinitum
as reserves of cheap “migrant” labour for the farms, the
factories and the kitchens of the white man. As Vorster
very succinctly put it:

69. Let us not confuse the apartheid system with the
violations of fundamental human rights. As I said earlier
today, apartheid does not come within the ambit of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It is moulded on
baser values. Apartheid is a unique innovation as a
socio-economic and political philosophy. It has a parallel
only in the context of historical experience of barbarism. In
that system, a self-imposed
minority rBgime of whites
._.
arrogated unto itself the right to institute laws based on the
principle of racial supremacy. It is the very abyss of human
values where, in contemporary human relations today in
South Africa, a white minority regime unilaterally promul.

“It is true that there are blacks working for us. They
will continue to work for us for generations in spite of
the ideal that we have to separate them completely. The
fact of the matter is this. We need them because they
work for us, but the fact that they work for us can never
entitle them to claim political rights-not now, not in the
future, under no circumstances.”
That was said by Mr. Vorster, in the House of Assembly. I
quote him again, from the report of the South African
Governmental Commission:
8

“The native should only be allowed to enter the urban
areas which are essentially the white man’s creation when
he is willing to enter and to minister to the needs of the
white man, and should depart therefrom when he ceases
to minister.”

both through direct deliveries and through the sale of
licences. The South African authorities freely obtain
so-called spare parts and components for their military
hardware. This has enabled the South African racist rdgime
not only to continue its oppression but to defy the
authority of the United Nations and the Security Council in
Namibia and to continue to hold the Organization to
ransom. Through that assistance, South Africa continues to
relegate the United Nations Council for Namibia and the
United Nations Commissioner for Namibia to the status of
phantom institutions, despite unanimous resolutions of the
CounciI and all the declarations of the United Nations
concerning the exercise of its sacred responsibility for the
people and Territory of Namibia.

75. By the system of bantustanization, the black man in
South Africa is automatically denied citizenship in his own
country and becomes a temporary sojourner if he works
anywhere outside the 200 enclaves that are to make up nine
or ten bantustans occupying non-contiguous tracts that
amount to only 13 per cent of the whole land area of South
Africa. The result, in effect, is that 20 million blacks have
to dwell in that I3 per cent of the country away from the
mines and the cities, with 87 per cent of the area
comprising the richest agricultural and mineral areas
reserved for whites. “If the farmer and the oxen till the
land”, said Mr. Verwoerd, the predecessor of Vorster,
“there is no integration”. That is the cynical level to which
the relations between the blacks and the whites are
relegated in the context of South Africa. On that basis and
in accordance with those principles, the Bantu education
system has been developed, on the premise that the African
cannot be allowed to aspire beyond certain forms of labour
and, as was well said, “the role of the oxen”.

81. Some Western States connive at the defiance of
sanctions against Rhodesia by South Africa and in the same
breath extol the allegedly creditable role South Africa is
playing in the solution of the problem of the Rhodesian
white-minority rebellion. The Security Council continues to
adopt resolutions on mandatory sanctions against Rhodesia
but will not apply any sanctions against South Africa,
which provides the main loophole in those sanctions. The
value judgement made with regard to Rhodesia appears to
me to differ from that on South Africa, in spite of the more
obvious state of belligerency of the South African racist
@ime against the United Nations and against neighbouring
African States, as has been made clear in Angola, Zambia
and Lesotho.

76. Fourthly, the peaceful opposition to the apartlzeid
system manifested by blacks has invariably led to wanton
killings, bannings, widespread violence, torture, life prison
sentences and the murder of black prisoners in gaol. All
they have asked for is equity and justice. They have never
been armed. South African blacks have never been armed,
except for the children who pick up sticks and stones, as we
can see from the films that are shown everywhere at the
United Nations.

82. Despite all altruism, those selective actions lead one tc~
believe that it was easy for the Security Council to apply
Chapter VII of the Charter against Rhodesia, because
Western vested interests in that country were limited at the
time of the illegal unilateral declaration of independence by
Ian Smith, gaps being left open to thwart those sanctions
by dealing through South Africa and because Rhodesia was
no major source of raw materials and was of little so-called
strategic importance, since it had a limited market, and
probably because Britain’s amour-prop/~ was involved in
that case of a rebellion against its sovereign power.

77. FiftNy, the cultural education of the blacks is
modelled and designed to fit them into a stratum of
perpetual servitude., In his exposure to culture, the black
man is oriented away from liberal values and knowledge
and experience of the outside world. This is a continuing
process of dehumanization.

83. The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute
(SIPRI) last year wrote about “the risks of a steep
escalation of the conflict in South Africa which may grow
into the next major international battlefield”. As was stated
recently by Olaf Palme of Sweden, to whose appearance
before the Council during this debate we look forward:

78. Sixthly, economic power is exclusively in the hands of
the whites. Foreign investments and loans and active
trading relations with South Africa enable it to extend the
exploitation of cheap labour for sheer shameful profit.
Western companies and banks, and to some extent Western
Governments, continue to exploit the helplessness of the
black workers who have no bargaining rights on conditions
for offering their labour. They earn, with no option,
below.subsistence stipends.

“the continuing oppression by the apartheid rCgime of
South Africa and its illegal occupation of Namibia are
already a potential threat to world peace. Apartheid is by
its nature a system of violence which can only be
maintained by force”.

79. Seventhly, in the military field, a few Western countries refuse to apply a voluntary arms embargo and
continue to arm the Fascist groups at Pretoria for profit.
The application of mandatory sanctions to pressure the
regime into change has been subject to the triple veto more
than once because of those very vested interests in the
continuing and growing repression of the black people.

And, I would add personally, it can only be brought down
by force. Even the Zulu Chief Catsha Buthelezi, who chose
to work within the constraints of apartheid, last year said
that the racist rCgime’s intransigence amounted to white
“commitment to a bloody revolution”. Again, interviewed
soon after the Soweto massacre, talking about apartheid, he
said: “What is required is not just a readjustment of the
details of the problem but a changein the system. Separate
development is not a policy. It is a problem.” The
Honourable Olof Palmestated recently also:

80. Let us now take a look at the initiatives of South
Africa in southern Africa. The r6gime’s military systems are
being built up with Western assistance and participation,
9

“The right type of foreign intervention is that Which
will support the liberation struggle and reduce the
stubborn resistance of the forces which still cling to the
ideas of maintaining white supremacy. The wrong kind of
intervention is the continued introduction of majorPower rivalries in the region.”

action in whih pressure is applied on the racist rigime in
South Africa in the spirit of the draft resolution that we
have presented to the members of the Council. A mandatory arms embargo is not a violent approach. Economic
sanctions are not warfare. These are the minimum pressures
required to bring about change in South Africa.

84. Every day that goes by sees the Western community
more and more involved in the destiny of South Africa, on
the negative side. Every day that goes by sees the military
budget of South Africa soaring. Every day that goes by
gives the South African racist regime some more breathing
space to get over incidents like Sharpeville and Soweto, and
to improve its momentum towards building itself into one
of the world’s important military and economic Powersand all this with the assistance of Western States.

90. The General Assembly, at its last session, considered
the situation thoroughly and adopted a series of resolutions
for igternational action against apartheid. By overwhelming
majorities, it requested the Security Council to take action
within its responsibilities under the Charter. In resolution
31/6 I, it declared that
“the situation in South Africa, resulting from the policies
and actions of the racist regime, constitutes a grave threat
to the peace, requiring action under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations”.

85. In 1960, at the time of Sharpeville, the military
budget of South Africa was only 44 million Rand; at the
time of Soweto, last year, it had risen to 1,350 million
Rand. Foreign loans for support of the South African
budget-loans that come mainly from Western banks and
the World Bank, which is an intergovernmental organization-have essentiaIly gone to offset the cost of these extra
military acquisitions, almost to the dollar.

In resolution
Council

31/6 D, it once again requested the Security

“to take urgent action, under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, to ensure the complete cessation
by all States of the supply of arms, ammunition, military
vehicles and spare parts thereof, and any other military
equipment to South Africa, as well as any co-operation to
enable the building-up of military and police forces in
South Africa”.

86. Foreign investment in South Africa in 1960-that is, at
the time of Sharpeville-was 3 billion Rand. At the time of
Soweto it was over 10 billion Rand. United States
investment alone, in 1960, was $286 million. Today-almost
one year after Soweto-it is over $1.6 billion. In 1960, at the
time of Sharpeville, the Federal Republic of Germany had
hardly any investments in South Africa; at the time of
Soweto, the value of its investments was over $1 billion.
France’s investment between Sharpeville and Soweto rose
from less than $200 million to almost $1 billion.

It further requested the Council to call upon all Governments in particular: (a) to implement fully the arms
embargo against South Africa, without any exception;(b) to
refrain from importing any military supplies manufactured
by, or in collaboration with, South Africa; (c) to terminate
any existing military arrangements; (d) to prohibit any
institutions, agencies or companies, within their national
jurisdiction, from delivering to South Africa or placing at
its disposal any equipment or fissionable material or
technology that will enable the racist regime of South
Africa to acquire nuclear-weapon capability. In resolution
3 l/6 K, the Assembly urged the Council,

87. There is the problem. It is a vicious problem. Action,
swift action to ensure that the basic value systems professed
by the Western countries were imposed in South Africa
after Sharpeville-after the articulation of bantustanization
and the implementation of the slave-master relations of the
apartheid system-was not to be undertaken, because of the
investments of those Western countries. As can be seen
from the statistics I have quoted, these investments have
more than trebled since Sharpeville in 1960. Tomorrow
they will continue to increase, ad infinitum.

“when studying -the problem of the continued struggle
against the apartheid policies of South Africa, to consider
steps to achieve the cessation of further foreign investments in South Africa”.

88. Peaceful change becomes impossible as the arsenals of
the racist regime of South Africa develop into the formidable machinery of both military and economic power for
internal oppression and external aggression. It is obvious to
most of us in Africa that orily concerted and maximum
pressure on the racist regime can effect change. Alternatively, as President Carter rightly discerned a few days ago:
“A gathering racial conflict threatens southern Africa”, He
rightly stressed the need for a “fundamental transformation” towards majority rule, adding that anything less than
that may bring “a protracted racial war, with devastating
consequences for all”.

91. The Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity, meeting in Mauritius in
July 1976, and the Conference of Heads of State or
Government
of Non-Aligned
Countries, meeting at
Colombo in August 1976, called for effective sanctions
against the South African r&me under Chapter VII of the
Charter. So have numerous non-governmental organizations
and a great number of Governments, representing wide
segments of public opinion all over the world.
92. I should like to draw particular attention to the special
appeals made by the General Assembly to the Governments
of France, the United Kingdom and the United States of
America to desist from using their veto power to protect
the apartheid r&ime, and to facilitate the adoption of

89. That is the scenario that has built up since Sharpeville
and Soweto.
NO African, no member of the non-aligned
movement,
no friend of Africa can fail to subscribe to
10

effective measures, under Chapter VII of the Charter, to deal
with the grave situation in South Africa. I hope that those
Powers, which have in the past vetoed even mandatory arms
embargoes against South Africa, will heed the appeals from
the overwhelming majority of Member States,
93. I believe that the scenario is clear. Those who consider
their vested interests and investments in South Africa will
find it even more difficult tomorrow
to apply these
pressures.
94. It is with such a clear recognition of this imminent and
grave danger to peace, and of the need for fundamental
transformations, that the international community must
address itself to the question of South Africa today.
95. We do not see a conflict of interests, but a concert of
interests. That is why we crave the adoption of resolutions
that do not allow day-to-day problems to become insurmountable and that avert the danger that the chance for
peaceful solution through action under Chapter VII of the
Charter may slip away. With the understanding and support
of all the member of the Council, which is endowed under
Chapter VII with great responsibility, I again reiterate my
earnest expectation that our hopes are not forlorn and that
they will be justified. Otherwise, let us be aware of the
options. We all know what those options are.
96. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Sri Lanka, tihom I now invite to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
97. Mr. FONSEKR (Sri Lanka): Mr. President, while
thanking the Security Council for giving me this opportunity to speak, I should like very much to offer my
congratulations to you on your assumption of the office of
President of the Council for the month of March. I have no
doubt that your wide experience and the high principles
that you have consistently espoused will greatly facilitate
and assist the debate before us.
98. I am speaking today both on behalf of my Govcrnment and as the representative of the current Chairman of
the 86 countries members of the non-aligned group, which
constitute nearly two thirds of the membership of the
United Nations.
99, In reconvening for consideration of the question of
South Africa,, the Security Council is again focusing
attention on the South African Government’s policies of
apartheid, which continue to be a threat to peace: At this
series of meetings the Council will hear many more speakers
and some of us may be inclined to regard much that is said
as the same old refrain, or even dismiss it as just “old hat”.
But we must ask them to bear with us because, while talk
of apartheid is indeed an old refrain, the continued
application of the policies of apartheid by the South
African Government, with all the oppression, violence and
depravity it entails for the black people of South Africa, is
not at all “old hat”. We all know why today, 21 March,has
been chosen for the reconvening of this meeting of the
Council, In another place at the Headquarters of the United
Nations this morning we observed the International Day for
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, because on this

day, 17 years ago, the world community was made aware of
the brutal massacre that took place at Sharpeville, a small
town in South Africa. Ever since, this tragic anniversary has
been observed as a reminder of the inhumanity that man
can perpetrate against his own kind merely because people
happen to be born into a different racial group, because
their skin is not white.
100. Since then, there have been other Sharpevilles inflicted on the people of South Africa, some of which
received the attention of the international community in
some measure, while others, by virtue of their frequency,
have perhaps passed unnoticed, and th_e victims of that
violence died unsung. But for the black people of South
Africa, Sharpeville and all that it connotes is an every-day
experience in one form or other. Just last year, on 16 June,
the South African Government made a further demonstration of another aspect of the meaning of apartheid by
wreaking vengeance on a group of children who asked no
more than that they be alrowed to be taught in their own
language instead of the language of the oppressing minority.
I do not need to repeat what we all know of the
perpetration of that savagery in Soweto, that ghetto on the
outskirts of Johannesburg.
101. The General Assembly gave much of its time during its
session last year to a debate on that very subject, and a
resolution, containing several parts and bearing the number
31/6, was adopted under agenda item 52. Some parts of
that resolution were adopted without a vote. Others were
adopted with numerically small, but not insignificant,
abstentions or votes against. Nevertheless, all who addressed
their minds to that resolution were agreed in their
condemnation of the legalized racist policies which pass as
apartheid and are pursued by the Government of South
Africa. Dissent, where expressed, was in regard to the
measures for implementing a reversal of those policies.
102. But what purpose have those condemnations served?
Have they had any discernible impact on the attitude of the
regime in South Africa? We are told from time to time that
conditions are improving and that, given time, changes will
take place. But the record of the South African Government, whether before or since those resolutions, shows
little evidence of a change of heart. World opinion, if it has
touched it at all, has made no more than a dent on the
conscience of South Africa’s rulers. We are told that
measures are being taken to eliminate what is described as ’
petty apartheid, but that in reality comprises minor
irritants; and we know that even those are grudgingly
conceded, making little difference to the day-to-day lives of
the black people of South Africa who constitute the vast
majority.
103. On the other hand, the more tangible measures and
those of consequence taken by the South African regime
are clear enough evidence of its determination to safeguard
and perpetuate the hard core of apartheid. The policy of
bantustans, which they have pursued so vigorously, is
intended to emasculate the territory of South Africa with a
view to preserving all that is best of its land and its
resources within the boundaries of apartheid South Africa,
with the impoverished and isolated shells earmarked for
bantustans. Unfortunately for South Africa, the world was

too wide awake to fall for this deception and the General
Assembly, in its resolution 31/6 A, called upon all Govern.
ments to deny any form of recognition to the Transkei, the
first of those bantustans, or to any others that would
follow. But we may ask, will that resolution and the denial
of international recognition deter the South African
Government from pursuing its perverse scheme? We think
not. Whatever their short-comings, the rulers of South
Africa are not lacking in a certain tenacity which has
enabled them to survive with their policies of apartheid
intact, as they have done so far.
104. An examination of the voting pattern on resolution
31/6 does give some indication of the reasons that have
deflected the world community’s resolve to banish the evil
of apartheid. It is not for us today to inquire into or
comment upon why and how this has come about. But let
us agree that among us, at the United Nations, there is a
hard core of representatives who, while reaffirming their
condemnation of apartheid, find the observance and implementatiJn of that resolution inconvenient, to say the least.
105. Apartheid, they agree, is a manifest evil, but their
political, economic and strategic interests must in the
immediate present and, we fear, in the foreseeable future
take priority over the dictates of their conscience, And if,
until the day of deliverance from apartheid comes, there are
some floggings, some little torture and some killings, these
must be borne as the small price payable for a peaceful
transition, but also, may we truthfully add, because their
victims happen to be just black people. If these remarks are
construed as uncalled-for cynicism, one must plead guilty.
But let me ask: what other meaning can one attach to the
conduct and protestations of powerful States which recog
nize evil and yet do so little to hasten its removal?
106. If we are to evaluate the real prospects of an end to
apartheid and evaluate all the forces that uphold it and the
strength of those forces, we must go outside the borders of
South Africa to Zimbabwe. In the weeks coinciding with
the commencement of the last session of the General
Assembly, there was a stir, a last-minute effort to apply
pressure on the illegal Smith r&me. What result did it bring
about? Not all the efforts of two great Powers could move
Ian Smith anywhere near really sharing political power,
which has hitherto been and continues to remain the
monopoly of the white minority in Zimbabwe. During and
after a brief encounter at Geneva, Smith again demonstrated a capacity to argue, procrastinate and immobilize-a
capacity which has been his forte ever since he unilaterally
seized power in November 1965. The Geneva encounter
and what followed was not entirely unrewarding for him.
He used that opportunity to try to divide the ranks of the
nationalist forces within and outside Zimbabwe. We might be
asked why this diversion from South Africa to Zimbabwe. I
have referred to it only as an indication of the stubbornness
and tenacity of the white minority regimes in southern
Africa, where Smith’s Rhodesia is still in a position to
thumb its nose not merely at the world community but at
those who are in a position to exercise their power with a
view to influencing events. If that is the outcome in
Zimbabwe, what is the future for the people of South
Africa, whose Government is militarily more formidable
and regards apartheid as an article of faith?

107,

more speakers are to address the Council
this series of meetings and I should not take UP more
of the Council’s time in putting forth arguments and
sentiments which they can more competently and
eloquently
express.However, before concluding, I wish to
say that the picture is not entirely bleak. During theselast
six weeksour attention hasrepeatedly been drawn to the
vexed subject
of humanrightsand, of course,the persistent
violations all around us. My delegation, for one, fully
endorsesthis concern for human rights-attachment to
which we have all professedby our acceptance of the
Charter of the United Nations.We do know that not only
are there different interpretationsof human rights and their
violation but also that concern varies according to the
violater and the placewherethe rightshappento have been
violated. Whatever differenceswe may have on the infringement of humanrights elsewhere,my delegationwould like
to think that, in sofar asSouth Africa is concerned,there is
nb dispute at all, becausethe regimethere incorporates a
violation of humanrightsinto its Constitution and laws.
Many

during

108. I have stated that I do not seethe picture aswholly
bleakbecause,if a real concernfor upholdinghuman rights
is manifest, we should begin, after having subscribedto
resolutions, by taking some tangible action to ensure
and hastenthe observanceof humanrights in South Africa,
which doesnot even pretend that its black population has
any rights. And here my delegation’scontribution to the
Council’sproceedingswould be incomplete if we did not
add that all of us were well awareof where that capacity
for action lay. Without recrimination, my delegationasks
that those who have the capacity should usethe power at
their disposalnot merely to remind the South African
Government of its obligations but also to take such
measuresas would compel that Government to give its
black people, who comprise the vast majority of its
population, even a modicumof the human rights which we
have seen being espousedso vocally during the last six
weeks.
109. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the represew
tative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table andto makehis statement.
110. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): Mr, President, allow
me first to conveyto you my delegation’swarm con’gratulations on your assumptionof the high office of Presidentof
the Security Council for this month. I am convinced that
your vast experienceand parliamentary skill, together with
your dedication to the freedom of man and respect for
human rights, will be instrumentalin guiding the deliberations of the Council towards a satisfactory conclusion. AS
the delegationof an African country, we are particularly
happy that this debateon the question of South Africa is
beingheld under your presidency.
111. I shouldlike to beginby reaffirming the full support
of the people and Government of Egypt for the people of
South Africa and their solidarity with the heroic struggleof
that Peopleto regain its inalienableright to self-determination and self-governmentand to put an end to the
inhumanand hateful crimeswhich arebeing committed by
the white minority regimesin the southern part of our
African continent. We shouldlike alsoto welcomeandhail

the struggle of national liberation movements acting on
behalf of all the peoples of southern Africa to free their
peoples from the yoke and arrogance of racist rhgimes.

117. Moreover, South Africa still continues its illegal
occupation of Namibia in flagrant defiance of resolutions of
the Security Council and refuses to hold g dialogue with the
genuine representatives of Azania and Namibia, namely, the
African National Congress of South Africa, the Pan
Africanist Congress of Azania and the South West Africa
People’s Organization (SWAPO). Gradualism has been
proposed, without any concern for the urgency vyhich the
oppressed peoples attach to their rights. Yet the latest
criminal invasion carried out by Pretoria against Angola,
reports of which were confirmed by the Defence I-Ieadquarters at Pretoria on 3 February 1,977, shows intensified
bad faith on the part of the Pretoria r6gime.

112. While we express our pride in the struggle of the
people of South Africa today, the great sacrifices made by
them during their long and arduous struggle and their firm
resolve to continue along the path leading to national
liberation serve to confirm what we have repeatedly
maintained, namely, our firm conviction that the will of the
people cannot be conquered and that their continued
struggle for their freedom has become a historical inevitability and a well acknowledged
right borne out by
international documents and by the facts, and upheld by all
peace-loving forces in the world that are supporters of
freedom, justice and human rights.

118. The attempts made by tha regime to maintain its
domination have taken the form of the so-called policy of
bantustans, which has borne fruit in the declaration of the
so-called independence of the Transkei-denounced
by the
international community as a manoeuvre aimed at consolidating the usurpation carried out by the racist r&&me of
South Africa and forcing millions of people of that country
to become aliens in their own homeland. General Assembly
resolution 31/A of 26 October 1976 is seen to be the best
reply to all those attempts.

113. Certainly the central problem in southern Africa is
the immutability of South Africa’s racial policies on which
all other problems ultimately turn. Since the Sharpeville
massacre of March 1960, international public opinion has
become increasingly aware of the urgent need to put an end
to fhe tragedy of the non-white population of South Africa,
114. For more than 15 years, and at all levels, our
Organization has been discussing ways and means of putting
an end to the impossible and inhuman situation in South
Africa. During this period it has become clear to the
international community that, in the face of South Africa’s
intransigence and procrastination, it is necessary to impose
diplomatic and economic sanctions against the Government
of that minority rBgime as the only effective method of
forcing that @ime to abandon its intolerable policy.

119. The question, then, is for how long can we afford to
let South Africa go from defiance to defiance, and,
furthermore, as an Organization entrusted with safeguarding the interests of peoples subjected to foreign domination
and oppression and, above all, entrusted with maintaining
international peace and security, whether we will be able to
live up to our responsibilities and moral obligations.
International public opinion looks to our Organization to
ensure that the rules of international morality and the
principles set out in the Charter and the Universal Declara.
tion of Human Rights prevail in that country.

115. Proceeding from that premise, the Security Council,
in 1963, adopted resolution 181 (1963), in which it called
upon all States to cease forthwith the sale and shipment of
arms, ammunition of all types and military vehicles to
South Africa. Since then numerous resolutions have been
adopted by the General Assembly and the Security Council
reaffirming the gravity of the situation and condemning the
continuation of the inhuman policy of apartheid. In spite
of that, the arrogant racist rigime has persisted in its
inhuman and barbaric behaviour through cold-blooded and
indiscriminate massacres of school children, students,
women and many innocent people at Soweto, Langa and
other townships in South Africa.

120. Admittedly, racial discrimination is still practised in
many parts of the world, but everywhere it is recognized as
an evil which has to be fought vigorously. South Africa,
however, stands out in stark defiance of the purposes and
principles of the Charter and the morals of the world
community. As far back as 1948, in the early days of the
United Nations, elementary manifestations of respect for
human rights were consistently trampled underfoot by
South Africa. South Africa proceeded to promulgate one
law after another to entrench and put into practice a weird
philosophy based on the treatment of its nationals on the
basis of colour. In South Africa, each person is classified as
either white or non-white. If a person is white, he governs
and has a licence to live off the exploitation of the
non-whites. In every sphere of national life, the non-whites
are discriminated against and reduced to the status of
slaves.

116. The Soweto massacres of June 1976 and the many
others which have followed since demonstrate beyond all
doubt that the racist rCgime of South Africa is determined
to perpetuate apartheid by all coercive means. It will not
hesitate to intimidate and ruthlessly repress those who
oppose it. As recently as last October, Mr. Vorster, Prime
Minister of the South African rCgime, in reply to a query
from a correspondent of 2% New York Times as to
whether he could foresee the possibility of white rule
eventually being replaced by blaclc rule in his country, said:
“I cannot foresee such a day at all, and I repeat that it is
our right to be here on the land we occupy. We did not take
away from black people anything whatsoever.” One could
ask Mr. Vorster what his regime has left to the black people
of South Africa, having deprived them OF their own land,
their liberty, their honour and their dignity.

121. The African people of South Africa are tired of the
verbal condemnation of apartheid. They need practical and
effective support for their cause. We cannot deny them that
support if we are committed to the search for peace and
stability in South Africa.
122. It should be clear to us that the struggle for freedom,
racial equality and human dignity in South Africa has
reached the crossroads. One road leads to the total
13

liquidation of apartheid with a minimum of human
suffering. The other leads to a bloody racial holocaust. If
the situation in South Africa is @lowed to persist, it may
well lead to a war whose proportions we may not have
envisaged. Any analysis of recent developments assures us
that in the near future the international community wili
have to choose between two clear possible courses: either
to work seriously and decisively to establish the necessary
conditions for the realization of the will of the people and
consequently to maintain international peace, which would
give our world tranquillity and time to confront the
challenge of creating a better future for mankind, or to be
faced with a wide-ranging liberation war that would entail
changing the present state of affairs by force and violence.
We believe, however, that we can minimize the bloodshed,
restore the dignity and worth of man in that country and
avoid another catastrophe by taking the necessary and long
overdue decisions immediately.

Israel. On 9 August 1976, the Israeli radio disclosed that
Israel was building long-range gunboats for South Africa.
The vessels are to be armed with sea-to-sea missiles. Some
reports put the number at two, others put it at six.
128. As noted earlier, South African volunteers fought on
the Israeli side in Israel’s numerous wars. As the black
national liberation movement gains strength in Africa, a
situation may arise where Israel will find itself forced to
repay the favour by sending Israeli “volunteers” to fight
alongside South African troops. It may also find itself
oblige&to put its know-how and expertise at the disposal of
its South African benefactors, Additionally, unconfirmed
reports from Africa indicate that there may even be some
direct collaboration between Israeli and South African
soldiers in actual combat situations. According to representatives of SWAP0 who were on a mission to Angola, Israeli
soldiers are now actively involved in the fight against their
forces.

123. Whether or not apartheid will be liquidated with a
minimum of human suffering will depend largely upon the
exercise of our collective will and the readiness of certain
Members of our Organization to desist from collaborating
with the racist rigime in the political, economic, military as
well as nuclear fields. It is through such collaboration that
the South African r&ime has been able to acquire some of
the most sophisticated weapons in use today, weapons
which it has already actually used for both internal
repression of the African people and external. aggression
against independent African States.

129. More ominous is the rumour that South Africa is
preparing to supply Israel with uranium. If that rumour is
confirmed, the threat presented by this dangerous development would be incalculable, given the desperate situation
of those two States and the fact that neither is a signatory
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
A nuclear deterrent might appear to both as the only
alternative to their complete dependence on the West. With
such a state of military self-sufficiency, they could pursue
their policies unhampered by world public opinion or by
any pressures from their Western supporters.

124. In this connexion, Egypt has always drawn attention
to the danger of the ever-increasing ties between the racist
regime in South Africa and its counterpart in Israel. Our
realization of that danger is based on purely objective
considerations, the primary one being the fact that both
rdgitnes have become fully-fledged arsenals of the most
advanced and sophisticated destructive weapons situated in
the sauth and to the north of our African continent.

130. Very recent reports have revealed the real dimensions
and objectives of the rapidly growing area of military
co-operation between Israel and South Africa. The Frankfurter Rundschau, published in West Germany, reported, in
its issue of 9 December 1976, that:
“The Israeli company Tardiran Israel Electronic Industries, which speciaiizes in armament production, has,
together with the South African Calan Group, founded a
subsidiary in Rosslyn near Pretoria. This was announced
in Johannesburg on Wednesday. In the Rosslyn works a
broad programme of electrical and electronic devices will
be produced. Moreover the branch will occupy itself with
the sale of very modern Tardiran products, which cannot
be manufactured in Rosslyn.”

125. The military relationship between Israel and South
Africa dates back to 1948 when South African Zionist
volunteers fought on the side of the Zionist settlers in
Palestine. To quote Israeli sources, the small Jewish
community in South Africa “contributed more to the
Israeli war effort, in terms of skilled volunteers, than any
other country in the world”. The same holds true for the
1956 and 1967 wars, during which many South Africans
volunteered, and a number of them actually did fight with
the Israeli forces. The 1973 war witnessed even wider
co.operation--1,500
Jews of South African descent took
part in actual combat, At least one jet fighter of South
African origin was shot down over the Suez Canal.
126. During his visit to Israel, on a tOUr which
the
Ambassador to South Africa tried to pass off as mere
siglltseeing, Prime Minister Vorster inspected Israeli aircraft
factories, naval facilities and an air force base. The Israeli
army, llavy and air force, according to the Israeli Ambassador, were viewed by Mr. Vorster as more or less tourist
attractions-“like
the Western Wall and Mount Zion”.

131. Just last week, in its issue of 15 March 1977, 7%e
CWistian Science Monitor published a report in which it
gave a good account of the areas of co-operation between
the two countries. One of the facts provided in that report
is that South Africa has long been purchasing arms from
Israel, supplying it with diamonds and other raw materials
and sharing technology in areas such as railroads, the
development of gas energy from coal and arms manufacture. And now Israeli newspapers and other published
sources report that South Africa operates, with IsraeI, a
Iarge plant to manufacture electronic devices for counterinsurgency and other sensitive fields denied to South Africa
by Western Governments.

127. I;urther details of the Israeli-South African military
collaboration were contained in a report broadcast on Kol

132. In our evaluation, the power of the huge stockpiles
of destructive weapons in both the south and north of our
14

African continent will no doubt be directed against our
African peoples and consequently will continue to represent a threat to the security of our continent and the
security of our peoples. And certainly all this has a great
impact on peace and security in the world.

people to recover its full inalienable rights. That was
Egypt’s position and objective at the first Afro-Arab
Summit Conference Meeting.
137. The Political Declaration of that Conference, among
other commitments, contained the following:

133’. The real danger in co-operation between Israel and
South Africa, however, is evidenced by the fact that both
regimes continue to usurp the lands and rights of peoples
by force and to impose a fait accompli on the international
community as a whole. In the light of the fact that Pretoria
and Israel have both continued to refuse to implement
resolutions of the United Nations and to participate in the
search for peaceful and just solutions, and with the growing
feeling among the Palestinian people and the people of
South Africa that their patience has been exhausted as
regards the arrival of a just solution, revolution among these
peoples has become inevitable.

“The Afro-Arab Summit Conference decides that increased efforts should be made with the Organization of
African Unity, the Arab League and the United Nations
and all other international forums, to find the most
effective ways and means of accentuating, at the international level, the political and economic isolation of Israel,
South Africa and Rhodesia, so long as the regimes of
these countries persist in their racist, expansionist and
aggressive poiicies. To this effect, the Conference affirms
the need to continue to impose a total boycott, political,
diplomatic, cultural, sporting and economic and, in
particular, the oil embargo against these regimes.” (Ibid.,
para. 8.1

134. When the fifth Sumit Conference of Non-Aligned
Countries was held at Colombo in August 1976, it was clear
that there was a growing consciousness of the serious
danger of co-operation between the two regimes, which has
entered a new phase that called for the adoption of
effective and corrective measures. This was expressed in
political resolution No. 1* adopted by the Conference,
which was attended by 86 States members of the nonaligned movement. That resolution concerning South Africa

138. In the light of its national experience, Egypt believes
that time is pressing for an adoption of all necessary
international measures, including the application of the
provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter, so that the racist
regimes may return to their senses, give up their policies
and try to understand events before they are overtaken by
them.

“Strongly deplores the continued political, economic,
military and other collaboration by a number of Western
Powers, as well as some other States, particularly Israel,
with the South African regime.”

139. We are convinced that the violence and repression by
the South African racist regime have greatly aggravated the
situation in South Africa and will certainly lead to violent
conflict and racial conflagration, with serious international
repercussions.

135. Just a few days ago the first Afro-Arab Summit
Conference held at Cairo from 7-9 March 1977, stated in its
Political Declaration that:

140. The Security Council, in our view, is under the legal
obligation to assume its responsibilities, under the Charter,
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Accordingly,
the Council should condemn the South
African racist regime for its resort to massive violence and
repression against the black people, who constitute the
great majority of the country. The Council should declare
that the South African racist regime has flagrantly and
persistently violated the principles of the Charter, and that,
consequently, the policies and actions of this racist regime
have seriously disturbed peace in the region and, if
continued, would constitute a grave threat to international
peace and security,

“The African and Arab Heads of State and Government
condemn the constant military aggressions as well as
other political and economic manoeuvres carried out by
imperialism through the racist regimes of South Africa
and Rhodesia and their allies, against the sovereign ,Ptates
of Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Mozambique and Zambia,
with the aim of politically destabilizing the Governments
of these countries and of sabotaging their efforts for
economic development. The Conference regards such
aggressions as directed against the Afro-Arab world and as
a threat against world peace. The Conference also
condemns similar activities carried out by Israel against
Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria and the people of Palestine .” (S/12298, annex, para. 7./

141. Certainly, such a declaration is a mere obligation on
the part of the Council. Yet the Council should adopt
further effective measures by demanding that the racist
regime of South Africa: first, end the violence and
repression against the black people and all other opponents
of apartheid; secondly, release all persons imprisoned under
arbitrary security laws and all those detained for their
opposition to apartheid; thirdly, cease forthwith indiscriminate violence against peaceful demonstrators against
apartheid, as well as the murder in detention and torture of
political prisoners; fourthly, abolish all measures of apartheid and racial discrimination; and fifthly, abolish the
policy of bantustanization, abandon the policy of apartheid
and ensure majority rule based on justice and equality.

136. Egypt is one of’ the countries which have repeatedly
drawn attention to the danger of the continuation of unjust
conditions in South Africa and we have never failed on any
occasion to underline the grave situation created when such
conditions are allowed to exist. We have therefore extended
all possible aid and assistance to the representatives of that
brotherly people and to their national liberation movement.
In all international forums we have stressed the need to
speed up the adoption of effective measures to enable that
1 See A/31/197,

annex IV.
15

142. Furthrmore, the Council must find effective ways to
ensure implementation by the South African regime of the
Provisions of its resolutions 387 (1976) and 393 (1976) and
its resolutions regarding Southern Rhodesia,

148. Now we should like to express our strong conviction
that the problem before our drganization is the choice
between action and inaction, between reluctance to adopt
certain resolute but effective methods and the need to
respond without hesitation to Vorster’s defiance. The
triumph of justice and equality can be effected only
through a coherent approach, including specific measures,
The responsibility of the Security Council is, in our view,
clearly defined: it is to proceed urgently to assemble the
measures proposed during this debate in order to ensure
their acceptance and implementation by the entire international community.

143. The Council should call on all States to take all
appropriate measures to secure the implementation of those
resolutions. Thus, the Council should call on all States to
cease forthwith the sale and shipment to South Africa of
arms, ammunition of all types and military equipment, and
to refrain from any co-operation with the South African
rdgime in the nuclear field. All Member States of the United
Nations have the obligation to implement fully the provisions of paragraph 4 of resolution 282 (1970), adopted by
the Council on 23 July 1970, for the strengthening of the
arms ambargo.

149. The PRESIDENT:
The last speaker today is
Mr. Leballo, to whom the Council has agreed to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

144. The Council should address itself to the importance
of the cessation of foreign investment in South Africa, as
well as of other measures to discourage economic co-operation with that racist r6gime. Thus, the Council should
request all Governments and all specialized agencies of the
United Nations to refrain from any investment in or loans
to the South African racist r&me or companies registered
in South Africa.

150. Mr. LEBALLO: Mr. President, I wish to thank you
and the members of the Security Council for giving me the
opportunity to address you at the opening of your
important debate on the situation in Azania.
151. For us in the Azanian national liberation movement
there is great significance in the fact that this debate has
opened on an auspicious date in the calendar of our
protracted struggle for freedom and independence: 21
March, which this year marks the seventeenth anniversary
of the historic Positive Action Campaign and the 1960
Sharpeville and Langa massacres.

145. To ensure the effectiveness of those measures, it is
incumbent upon the Council to call on the South African
regime to take steps to comply with its obligations under
the Charter and the provisions of the relevant resolutions of
the Council and to report within a specific time-limit on the
steps it has taken. If that regime fails to comply with such
resolutions, the Council should consider immediate action
under all the appropriate provisions of the Charter, includhg those of Articles 5 and 6 and Chapter VII,

152. The Council will recall that the earth-shaking events
which followed the campaign lifted our struggle to new
heights and filled our people with great hopes. It wasonly
through the use of wanton violence that the South African
apartheid regime managed to contain the situation and halt
the emergence of the democratic State.

146. In order to reflect the conscience of the world
community, the Council should express its support for and
solidarity with all those struggling for the elimination of
aparrheid and racial discrimination and all the victims of
violence and repression by the South African racist rdgime.

153. Three years later, a noted Azanian writer, Lewis
Nkosi, observed that Mangaliso Sobukwe, the national
leader of the Azanian people and President of the Pan
Africanist Congress of Azania, who personally launched and
led the Positive Action Campaign, had “helped to orchestrate a crisis that panicked the South African Government
and nearly brought about the kind of political anarchy
which all too often makes possible the transfer of power
overnight”.

147. For its part, Egypt has clearly expressed its position
in the statement made by Mr. Ismail Fahmy, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, on the
International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. In that statement he declared, inter afia, that
“The Arab Republic of Egypt strongly condemns the
crimes perpetrated by the racist colonialist rt$ime of
Vorster against the brotherly African people in the south
of the continent, through the bloody massacres it is
organizing in order to maintain its domination and
inlposc racial discrimination. We in Egypt would like to
renew our pledges to our brothers who are struggling
against racist and colonial r6gimes; we promise to grant
them moral and material assistance and would like to hail
the martyrs and aI those struggling for freedom and
againstcolonidism and racism in all its forms.”

154. Today, our sad remembrance of those who fell at
Sharpeville, Langa, Vanderbijl Park, Nyanga and other
African townships, as well as memories of those recentIy
massacred in the wake of the national uprising which broke
out at Soweto on 16 June, are gravely compounded with
the assassination of yet another outstanding hero of the
African revolution, President Marien Ngouabi of the
People’s Republic of the Congo.
155. As one who stood and worked closely with a
dynamic black leader who is always in our minds, Martin
Luther King, you, Mr. President, can appreciate even more
intimately the loss Africa has suffered through the foul
assassination of an esteemed leader. Our deep-felt con-

Our promise has been fulfilled by what President Sadat
declared in his keynote address to the first Afro-Arab
Summit Conference Meeting at Cairo, on ‘7 March 1977.
16

dolences go to the brotherly people of the Congo and the
family of President Ngouabi.
156. As you know,

162. Whether apartheid South Africa’s traditional supporters wish to acknowledge it or not’, the whites in that
country are confronted by a tempestuoustide of black
angerand have their backsagainstthe open seas.Those who
are temporizing must bear the full consequencesof the
inevitable catastrophe that is impending for the whites in
South Africa.

Mr. President, there has been more

than a mere abundanceof euphoria over the selection of

yourself to head your country’s delegation to this august
Organization. Therefore, the significance of your presiding
over this debate is great, particularly so soon after your
assumptionof this responsibility. If we have not sharedin
that euphoria, this is no reflection on your person. On the
contrary we, like you, are only too well awareof the many
great obstaclesthat must be overcome before the powers
that be ever sidewith the overwhelmingmajority of United
Nations Member States in implementing resolutions that
run counter to the vestedinterestsof the powerful minority
in this world body.

163. To a number of perceptive whites, the coming
dangershave crystallized. Although shut out of the centres
of rebellion by paramilitary police, they sawenough of the
black anger in the newspaperswhen black militants broke
out of the encirclementsat Soweto, Guguletu or Athlone,
taking the fight to the downtown areasof Johannesburg
and Cape Town after June of last year. The raw courage
and iron determination of our youth, as with stones and
sticks they took on para-military police armedto the teeth
with modern weapons,has arousedgreat fear amongstthe
whites.

157. This debate is held as a sequel to resolution
392 (1976) of 19 June 1976, which unanimously condemned the South African apartheid regime for the
massacreof school children and other Azanian patriots at
Soweto on 16 June. It wasthen decided that the Security
Councilwould remainseizedof the matter.

164. For us in the liberation movement this has no
significant meaning other than that the unprecedented
victory of the mildly anti-apartheid and white Progressive
Reform Party during the recent Johannesburgmunicipal
elections must be seen in the context of panic amongst
those whites. And so too must be judged the desperate
plots to dump Vorster, hatched by someof the leadersof
his security forces. These half-hearted moves’away from
apartheid, while they are insignificant in view of the
fundamental demandsfor unfettered self-determinationfor
all of the people of Azania, are also doomed, because
Vorster can always point out to the white minority that
supports him the fact that the leading Westerncountries,
with their actions in the United Nations, support the status
quo in South Africa.

158. As we are all aware, the situation, namely the
recklessblood-letting by South African police, hasdeteriorated more than a hundredfold. The atmospherein Azania
reekswith the blood of fallen martyrs. Men, women and
children, someof as little as four years of age,have been
pitilessly mowed down all over South Africa, in large cities
like Johannesburg,Cape Town, Pretoria, Port Elizabeth,
Pietermaritzburg, Bloemfontein and Durban, and in small
villageslike Ngoye, Turfloop, Thaba Nchu and Qwaqwa, as
well asin smallbantustantowns like Umtata and Mafeking.

16.5. In the next round of the unfolding struggle,it must
not be expected that Azanian freedom fighters will be
relying exclusively on stones, sticks and other primitive
weapons. The courageous young men and women who
shook South Africa to its foundations after 16 June are
resolved to equip themselveswith guerrilla warfare skills
and are preparing to wage a people’s war with modern
weapons.History is heavy with evidence that peoplewaging
a revolutionary war eventually overcome any enemy, no
matter how powerful. For our inspiration in Azania we
have only to look across the border to the People’s
Republic of Mozambique, and recall the similar victories
over Portuguesecolonialism of our brothers and sistersin
Angola, where the apartheid South Africa army was
humiliated, and in Guinea-Bissau.Indeed, who can forget
the triumph of the heroic peoplesof Cambodia,Laos and
Viet Nam over American aggressors?

159. Those atrocities are apartheid South Africa’s customary contemptuous answer to the world community’s
exhortations, such as resolution 392 (1976). Yet, on the
very eve of this debate, leadingopinion makersin this city,
the seat of the IHeadquartersof the United Nations,
complain that the mild calls for African majority rule in
Azania will only serveto hardenthe whites in South Africa.
160. As before, it is the selfish sensitivities of the
oppressorthat are paramount for those elementsand not
the gross injustices suffered by the oppressed in our
country. This hypocritical pontification is nothing more
than an elaboratesmoke-screen
puffed out to cover up the
real reasonsfor preservingthe status qllo in Azania: the
lucrative incomes which flow from the oppression and
exploitation of the indigenousmajority and our natural
wealth.
161. Seventeenyears after first taking up the question of
apartheid colonialism, and subsequently recognizing the
fact that that obnoxious system posesa danger to peace,
the Security Council cannot afford to remain trapped in a
revolving-doortype of paralysis,a situation in which its vast
membershiprecognizesthat the United Nations has to act
in support of the oppressedin Azania, and where an
inordinately powerful minority deliberately sabotagesSLIC~I
support.
17

166. During a recent interview with a black American
journalist, winner of the Pulitzer Prize, our respected
leader, Mangaliso Sobukwe, described the prevailing situation in Azania asfollows:
“In Sharpeville we overcame the fear of the consequencesof disobeying the law . , . It becamerespectable
to go to gaoland emergeaswhat Kwame Nkrumah called
‘a prison graduate’. We stripped the white man of that
weapon againstus.

“The whiti: man now, in Soweto, had to fall back on his
ultimate weapon, the gun . . , Soweto has been a lesson in
overcoming the fear of the gun. And now that he relies on
the gun and we too can get the gun, confrontation is
inevitable.”

countries. Also, given the fact that the martyrs of our
national liberation struggle, our incarcerated leaders and the
freedom fighters of Azania are true champions of those
same United Nations principles, negative votes by the
Western countries will show that Western sermons about
respect for human rights are selective and, therefore,
hypocritical.

167. There are those who excel in the dubious exercise of
portraying African liberation movements as mere pawns of
other Powers. This crass nonsense is an unmitigated insult
to the dignity of the men, women and children who have
risen to restore their birthright in their own lands. I bring
this up because it is frequently the red herring the opinion
makers, to whom I referred earlier, draw out to rationalize
support for the white minority regimes in southern Africa.

170. The peoples of the world have their attention glued
to this debate, and it needs to be demonstrated in practical
ways that the neo-fascist regime at Pretoria stands isolated.
After all, less than two weeks ago even the opposition in
the white Parliament itself denounced the Vorster regime as
a Nazi rCgime during the introduction of yet another
Draconian law, a press censorship bill. Hitler’s disciples at
Pretoria are a confirmed affront to the rest of mankind.

168. The main forces spearheading the struggle in Azania,
those who have made their mark at Sharpeville and Soweto
and are resolved to wage a self-reliant people’s war against
apartheid, colonialism and imperialism, owe their allegiance to none other than the struggling masses and our
fatherland. Our objective is a non-racial and democratic
Azania. We have opted for the creation of an egalitarian
society because it is the inalienable right of every nation on
earth to chart its own course. We make no apologies for
this, just as we make no apologies for opting for the noble
policy of non-alignment in our relations with the rest of the
world. We are definitely not struggling in order to become a
sphere of influence for any foreign Power.

17 1. The four draft resolutions coming before this Council
are but a small step in the right direction. If they are not
adopted as they stand, apartheid South Africa will be
encouraged in its sanguinary oppression of the African
majority, as well as in its bolstering of the white minority
regime in Zimbabwe and in its maintenance of a state of
war against the United Nations in its Trust Territory of
Namibia.
172. A mandatory ban on the sale of arms to the
pathological child killers at Pretoria is, after all, a peaceful
way of combating apartheid colonialism. Those who advocate the peaceful way are challenged by their own professed
stand. To be convincing, they must support a mandatory
arms embargo against South Africa as well as the other
peaceful calls for economic sanctions, a ban on investments
in South Africa and a resolute condemnation of the
apartheid r&me.

169. I wish now to turn to the question which Africa is
requesting should be the object of the debate on this
occasion. Four reasonable draft resolutions are being
prepared. Given the fact that apartheid South Africa has
conclusively been proved to be heavily addicted to violating
the sacred principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and those enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, we are hoping that, on this occasion, we shall not
receive negative votes from the leaders of the Western

The meeting rose at 7.10 p.m.

18
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S.

2.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-700014anuary

1978-2,200

,
