UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
1,\)q \J$+w

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR,)UN

51985

tJ~,p.L;

;;;.< ‘-les: 1.43~

1934th

MEETING:

25 JUNE 1976

NEWYORK.

CGNTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l934)

1

. . . . . . . . .*...........................

Adoption of the agenda . . . :. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .,. . . .

1

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee established under General Assembly resolution
3376 (XXX) (S/12090) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1934

:
.’

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfJicial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, .which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1934th MEETING
Held in New York, on Friday,
President:

Mr. Frederick

R. WILLS

25 June 1976, at 10.30 a.m.
(Jordan), Mr. Boalom (Lao People’s
Democratic
Republic), Mr. El Hassen (Mauritania),
Mr. Zaimi
(Morocco), Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Al/of
(Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Tiirkmen
(Turkey),
Mr. Humaidan (United Arab Emirates) and Mr. Petrie
(Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

(Guyana).

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan,
Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1.

Adoption

2.

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee established under General Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX) (S/12090)
The meeting

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Indonesia and Tunisia,
containing requests to be invited to participate without the right to vote in the discussion, in accordance
with the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure. In accordance with the usual practice, I therefore propose with
the Council’s consent, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote.

agenda (S/Agenda/l934)

of the agenda

was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Adoption

3. In view of the limited number of places available
at the Council table, I invite those representatives to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber, on the understanding that they will
be invited to take a place at the Council table when
it is their turn to speak.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people
of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee established under General
Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX) (S/12090)’

At the imitation
of the President, Mr. Rahai (Aigeria), Mr. Marpalrng (Indonesia) and Mr. Driss (Tanisia) took the places reserlved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 1924th, 1928th and 1933rd meetings,
I shall now invite the Chairman and other members
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, the representative
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization,
and the
representatives
of Afghanistan,
Bahrain,
Cuba,
Democratic Yemen, Egypt, the German Democratic
Republic, Hungary, India, Jordan, the Lao People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Mauritania,
Morocco,
Saudi
Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, the United
Arab Emirates and Yugoslavia to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.

4. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom):
Mr. President, may I say at the outset what a pleasure it is that
this meeting is taking place under the presidency of
the Foreign Minister of a country, a friendly Commonwealth country, with which the United Kingdom
has many ties of long standing, many traditional contacts and, indeed, with which, we have extremely
friendly relations.
5. First, I shoud however like to express to the
United States delegation our profound condolences
for the tragic deaths in Beirut on 16 June of Ambassador Meloy and his companions. Those deaths have
brought home to us all once again the tragedy of the
events in Lebanon. They underline the sacrifices
which are being made there in the cause of peace.

At the invitation of the President, the delegation of
the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People and Mr. Terzi (Paiestine Liberation
Organization)
took places at the
Council table and Mr. Siddiq (Afghanistan),
Mr. AiSuffer (Bahrain).
Mr. AiarcBn (Cuba). Mr. Ashtai
(Democratic
Yemen), Mr. Ahdei Meglrid (Egypt),
Mr. Florin (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Bcinycisz. (Hungary),
Mr. Jaipai (India),
Mr. Sharaf

6. Before turning to the substantive question before
us today, I should like to explain briefly why my
delegation abstained, as we have done on similar
1

occasions in the past, in the vote taken on 9 June
[192&h meeting] on the question of the participation
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO). Let
me make it clear that my delegation’s vote should not
be interpreted as an objection to the presence of the
representative of the PLO in this Council. Indeed, we
believe, as we have said before, that it is right that
he should be here. But, like others who have already
spoken, we have strong reservations about the procedure which has been followed since it does not
conform with the established rules of the Council
concerning invitations
to non-members,
which are
set out clearly in rules 37 and 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure. My Government believes.that,
in
continuing to ignore its own rules, the Council is
setting what could prove to be a damaging precedent.

9. We start from the premise-which
is, I think,
accepted by the vast majority not only of the members
of the Council but also of the Members of the United
Nations as a whole-that
the problem of the Middle
East should be resolved by peaceful means, through
negotiations and not through war. In the view of my
Government,
a just and lasting settlement should be
based on three main requirements: first, Israeli withdrawal from territories occupied in June 1967; second,
respect for and acknowledgement
of the sovereignty,
territorial
integrity
and political
independence
of
every State in the area and their right to live in peace
within secure and recognized boundaries; thirdly, the
recognition of the right of the Palestinian people to
the expression of their national identity.

7. I should also like at the outset of my remarks to
remind the Council why my delegation voted against
General Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX) by which
the Assembly set up the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and
which requested the present meeting of the Council.
The reasons were in fact set out in the statement made
by my colleague from Italy, Ambassador Vinci, on
10 November 1975, when he spoke on behalf of the
nine member countries of the European Community*.
In that statement he expressed our concern that resolution 3376 (XXX) took no account of Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), the principles of which
in our view must provide both the basis for a peaceful
settlement and the framework for negotations.
Secondly, he explained the reservations which we held
about the establishment
of a committee with a mandate based on resolution 3236 (XXIX) upon which all
members of the Nine had abstained. We abstained on
that resolution because, in our view, it did not take
into account all the essential elements for arriving at
a just and lasting settlement in the Middle East, in
particular, the need to recognize the right of all States
in the region, including Israel, to live within secure
and recognized boundaries. We feared that a committee established in those circumstances and with
such a mandate, however well intentioned its members might be, would be unable to arrive at a balanced
report which would make a helpful contribution to the
cause of peace in the Middle East.

10. The first two of those requirements
from the
basic principles of resolution 242 (1967), yhich is to
be brought into effect as provided in resolution 338
(1973). Those two resolutions form the widely accepted foundation for a settlement and my Government therefore opposes any unilateral attempt to alter
them or to detract from them. The third requirement
is not expressed in resolution 242 (1967), and for this
reason my Government
has stated our view that
resolution 242 (1967) must be supplemented,
but not
supplanted, so as to take account of the political rights
of the Palestinian people and to enable them to express
their national identity. But we have also pointed out
that this must be done in a way which can be reconciled with the right of all States in the area, including
Israel, to exist within secure and recognized boundaries.
11. There is, I believe, a very wide measure of agreement in the Council on the fundamentals
of those
three principles, even if there are differences that may
divide some or others of us on the use of this or that
word. But what I think must be emphasized is that
those three principles have to be taken together. As
Ambassador Malik put it recently, they need to be
seen as an integrated whole. A similar point is made
in paragraph 51 of the report we are now considering,
where the view is stated that “Palestinian
rights could
not be achieved outside a comprehensive,
just settlement...“;
and in paragraph 52, which begins: “The
view was accordingly expressed that a just and durable settlement in the Middle East must be based on
the following fundamental
principles”.
The report
then goes on to list three principles in very similar
terms ’ to those which I have just stated. We very
much regret that the authors of the report should have
lost sight of the importance of considering those three
principles as a whole when they came to draft the
.I
report’s recommendations.

8. The Council has already had a number of oc-casions this year to consider the Palestine question
in its debates-from
1% to 26 January [187&h to
1879th meetings],
22 to 25 March [1893rd to 1899th
meetings]
and 4 to 26 May [f9/6th to 1922nd meetings].
The views of my own Government were fully set out
in,the statements I made in the Council on 15 [1873rd
meeting]
and 26 January [1879th meeting]
and yet
again on 25 March [189&h meeting].
I do not therefore wish to take th.e time or to try the patience of the
Council-which,
in all conscience, must already be
tried sufficiently-by
going ‘over .again at length all
that I said on those occasions. I would, however, like
to summarize the views of my Government
in the
following way.

12. Turning now to the recommendations
themselves, there are a number of points on which.: my
delegation would agree. First, .on the section of .Part
Two concerning the right of return of Palestinian
refugess, my Government
voted for Council re’solution 237 (1967) which, inter alia, called on the Govern2

ment of Israel to facilitate the return of the inhabitants
who had fled during the conflict of June 1967. We have
also voted consistently in the General Assembly for
resolutions regretting the lack of progress in carrying
through the programme provided for in paragraph 11
of resolution 194 (III). We welcome the fact that the
Committee
should have based its recommendations
firmly on resolutions commanding
a wide degree of
support. A settlement of the problem of Palestinian
refugees, which can only be fully brought about within
the context of negotiations for an over-all settlement
of the Middle East problem, remains one of the most
urgent facing us today. In the interim, my Government
has given very substantial support to the work carried
on by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
We are in fact both currently and cumulatively
the
second largest contributor to UNRWA’s
budget.

nition of the right of all States, including Israel, to live
in peace within secure and recognized borders.
16. We regret also that, while there is at least a
reference in paragraph 72 (g) of the recommendations
to the establishment of peace, it is suggested that this
should only be discussed after Israel has already
withdrawn to the pre-1967 borders and a Palestinian
State has already been established.
,

17. Finally, we regret the suggestion in this subparagraph that, even after those two conditions have
been carried out, further steps would still be necessary for the full implementation
of Palestinian rights.
The Israelis could be excused if they were to see in
this a threat to their right to live in peace within secure
and recognized boundaries.
18. The main aim of the Council at this time must
be to get the negotiations
going again in whatever
framework seems most likely to work, and with the
participation
as appropriate
of all the parties concerned. The Council itself cannot carry on the negotiations. It will not help, therefore, for the Council to
try to dictate to the negotiators in advance, for example by setting purely arbitrary timetables. What we
can do and what we should do is to encourage the
parties-and
that means all the parties-to
resume
the negotiating process. We should also do our best
to. try to check the dangerous polarization in the positions of the two sides and work towards creating common ground between them. This will, I recognize,
require a considerable degree of statemanship on all
sides and, above all, a willingness to compromise.

13. In this connexion, we have noted the role which
the Committee proposes that UNRWA might play in
the return of Palestinian refugees. It might therefore
be appropriate to remind the Council and the Committee -of the very serious financial crisis now facing
UNRWA and of the warning that the CommissionerGeneral has recently issued-that,
if further funds are
not forthcoming,
the Agency may actually have to
cease operations at the end of next month. My own
Government
has now agreed to make a special contribution to UNRWA
this year, in addition to our
regular contribution
for 1976, which we had already
increased to f3 million. Wherever the responsibility
for the refugee situation may or may not lie, we believe that UNRWA
will only be able to maintain its
services to the refugees, let alone take on the additional tasks foreseen by the Committee, if there is now
a concerted effort by all Member States to provide
additional funds urgently.

19. We understand and sympathize with the feelings,
born out of frustration and despair, of those who have
for so long been homeless refugees. But we believe
that they must come to accept the reality of Israel’s
existence as recognized by the great majority
of
Member States. Without this acceptance, there clearly
cannot be any prospect of a peaceful settlement in the
area.

14. In this connexion, we were very pleased to note
the generous additional contribution
to UNRWA
of
$10 million recently announced by the Government
of Saudi Arabia, and also the recent announcement
by the Government of Japan. We hope that all those
who have shown their concern for the Palestinians by
taking part in this debate will demonstrate their concern in this very concrete way by increasing their
own contributions
to UNRWA.

20. From a close reading of the various statements
of the PLO over the past two years, it could be inferred that they might come to accept this reality. If
this is so, could it not now be made more explicit?
If the PLO could now say clearly that the existence
of the State of Israel can indeed be reconciled with
the rights of the Palestinian people, this would be of
the greatest help. On the other side, we believe that,
just as the Israelis have fought for the recognition of
their own rights as a people, so they should be ready
to recognize the rights of the Palestinian people and to
accept that Palestinian nationalist sentiment will have
to be taken into account in a settlement.

15. Moving on now to the section of the recommendations dealing with the right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination,
my delegation was pleased to
note the emphasis in the report on the frontiers existing
in June 1967, particularly
in view of the favourable
comments that have been made on the report by the
PLO. At the same time, we regret very much the
failure of this section of the report, as I have pointed
out above, to take account of all three fundamental
requirements of a settlement, and to‘consider them as
an integral whole. We regret that nowhere in this section is there any mention of the need for the recog-

21. By the end of this debate the Security Council
will have devoted well over 30 meetings this year so
far to considering the Palestinian question. We cannot
but note with regret that our activity here, useful
3

“The Palestinian people has the inherent right to
national
independence
and
self-determination,
sovereignty in Palestine. The Committee considers
that the evacuation of the territories ocoupied by
force and in violation of the principles of the Charter and relevant resolutions of the United Nations
is a conditio
sine qua notI for the exercise by the
Palestinian people of its inalienable rights in Palestine. The Committee
considers, furthermore,
that
upon the return of the Palestinians to their homes
and property and with the establishment
of an
independent
Palestinian
entity, the Palestinian
people will be able to exercise its rights to selfdetermination
and to decide its form of government
without external interference”.

though it may be, has not been paralleled by any
progress in the area itself or in the negotiations. It is,
in our view, vitally important that our meetings here
should not be allowed to become a substitute for
progress in the negotiations, because at the end of the
day it is only through negotiations between the parties
-and not through our deliberations here-that
peace
will be achieved. We hope, therefore, that the present
meeting and the discussions which may come later
this year in the General Assembly will be directed
primarily to the end of getting the negotiations going
again; and we hope, too, that this time they will
succeed.
22. Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan): Mr. President, may
I say, first of all, how privileged I feel to be addressing
the Council under your presidency, having had the
honour of knowing you for some years-from
before
the time that you took up the portfolio of Foreign
Affairs-and
knowing also the friendly feelings which
your country and you yourself bear towards my
country and my people. They are feelings which,
I assure you. are fully and heartily reciprocated.

27. The people of Pakistan has always supported
the cause of the Palestinian people. Our support is
based on principles which we hold dear, the principles
of self-determination,
respect for and observance of
the principles of the Charter and the resolutions of
the United Nations, and the rejection of force and
intimidation
in. international
relations. My country
has always considered the partition of Palestine to
have been misguided and unjust. There were other
solutions to the problem which partition was intended
to resolve but they were not considered. There were
other waysin which, given time and detachment from
the power politics of the time, Palestine could have
attained independence
to the benefit, and with the
consent, of all its inhabitants.
The founder of the
nation of Pakistan, Quaid-i-Azam
Muhammad
Ali
Jinnah, whose centenary we celebrate this year,
warned in 1947 that “the proposed United Nations
plan for Palestine would entail the gravest danger and
unprecedented
conflict”.
Who will deny that that
gloomy forecast has been proved true?

23. I have already conveyed the condolences of my
delegation and my own to the Mission of the United
States on the tragic death of their colleague Ambassador Meloy and his companions. I wish to place on
record here my delegations’s
abhorrence and condemnation of such gratuitous acts of violence.
24. Needless to say, as a member of the Committee
established under General Assembly resolution 3376
(XXX) to consider how the Palestinian people might
be enabled to exercise their rights, my delegation
subscribes to the Committee’s
report. I do not intend,
therefore, to dwell at length on the contents and recommendations
of the report or to discuss their
details. That was done with admirable clarity and
thoroughness
by the Committee’s
Chairman,
the
representative
of Senegal,
and its Rapporteur,
Mr. Gauci of Malta [192&h meeting].
As a member
of the Committee and of the Council, I should like to
pay a tribute to both of them for the ability and perseverance with which they have performed their by
no means easy task.

28. Nor was Pakistan alone in expressing doubts
and fears about the establishment by external fiat of a
State based on a mythical racial concept and, almost
by definition, for people who were foreign to it, in a
land where Jews, Christians and Moslems had lived
in peace and amity for centuries. When the British
Cabinet considered the proposal that the British Government should undertake the establishment
of a
Jewish homeland in Palestine, the member who opposed the proposal was the only Jewish member of
the British Cabinet, Mr. Edwin Montagu. He opposed
the notion of establishing a Zionist homeland in Palestine or in various other parts of the world which were
suggested at the time, for, said he, the national home
of every Jew is the country to which he belongs and of
which he is a citizen. As for Palestine, he pointed out
that if Palestine had played a large part in Jewish
history, it had had an equally important role in the
history of Christianity
and of Islam. Mr. Montagu
believed that the future of Palestine, as well as of
other parts of the former Ottoman Empire, should be
determined by the will of its inhabitants and the free
exercise by them of the principle of self-determination.
His long Minute of Dissent argues with great cogency

25. Broadly speaking, the report deals with two
aspects of the subject: first, the concrete nature and
precise extent of the rights of the Palestinian people,
and, secondly, the modalities
and programme
for
enabling them to regain those rights. We have no
illusions about the controversial nature of the report’s
findings and recommendations
in both respects.
26. Paragraph 70 of the Committee’s
report sums up
what in the Committee’s
view is the essence of the
Arab-Israeli conflict and the root cause of the 30-yearold Middle East crisis, and this passage bears repetition. With the permission of the Council I should like
to read it out:
4

to all those who have been so deprived. The right to
do so if they so choose or to receive compensation
was formally recognized in their case as natural and
inalienable by General Assembly resolution 194 (III)
and Security Council resolution 237 (1967).

the true Jewish case and helps to put into perspective
the argument over the philosophy and purpose of
political Zionism.
29. The British Government
went ahead, nevertheless, for considerations which had more to do with
the conduct of the First World War than with the
welfare of the peoples concerned, and committed
itself to the aims of political Zionism. It is a moot point
what precisely was intended by the creation of a
national home in Palestine for Jews, but the Balfour
Declaration itself stipulated on behalf of His Majesty’s
Government “that nothing shall be done which may
prejudice the civil and religious rights of existing nonJewish communities
in Palestine”.3
Neither the Balfour Declaration nor the partition resolution of 1947
[General Assembly resolution 181 (If)] visualized the
complete disappearance of the State of Palestine or of
the entity of the Palestinian people. Indeed, resolution 181 (II) spelled out in considerable detail the
duties and responsibilities
of the partitioned
State.
Nothing that has happened since then can be taken to
sanction the infringements
of Arab rights which
ensued and which have never ceased to occur.

33. Some have preferred to dispute or to ignore this
reality. They would like to see the Palestinian problem
disappear by ignoring the existence of the Palestinian
entity. They urge that the rights of the Palestinian
people can be protected by their absorption into neighbouring countries. Israel, which all along professed
to seek a negotiated settlement with the Arabs, refuses
to recognize the representatives
of the Palestinian
people as a party to the negotiations. It seeks explicit
recognition of its own entity from the representatives
of a people whose entity it has destroyed and to whose
re-emergence it continues to pose every obstacle. My
delegation considers that the United Nations, and
even more, those of its Members which were instrumental in the partitioning
of Palestine and which condoned the uprooting of the Palestinian people, owe it
to them now to help to restore their individual and
national rights.

30. What happened, in fact, was that an ancient
nation was deprived of its heritage and driven into
refugee camps. It was hoped that somehow. they
would accept their fate and that the very name of
Palestine would disappear from the map. The reality
is otherwise. Mr. Yasser Arafat, when he spoke before
the General Assembly two years ago, told us:

34. It is, above all, the bounden duty of Israel itself,
not merely morally but in terms of its legal obligations
under the United Nations resolutions which sanctioned its existence, to allow those Palestinians who
left their homes and property in what is now the State
of Israel to exercise the option of returning to their
homes and property or to compensate them if they
choose otherwise. Israel must at the same time cease
to stand in the way of the exercise of the right of selfdetermination
by the Palestinian people and, to that
end;evacuate
the territories of Palestine occupied in
1967.

“All along, the Palestinian
dreamt of return.
Neither the Palestinian’s allegiance to Palestine nor
his determination
to return waned; nothing could
persuade him to relinquish his Palestinian identity
or to forsake his homeland. The passage of time
did not make him forget, as some had hoped he
would.“4

35. ‘This is what the report of the Committee states
in sum. There are those who consider the report to be
lacking in impartiality,
balance and realism. We do
not agree with those sweeping criticisms, but let me
say in passing that if the views of the critics of the
report are not reflected in the report, that is primarily
due to their own systematic and organized boycott of
the Committee and their failure or refusal to extend
to it the necessary co-operation.

3i. In 30 years we have come full circle. Those who
blew up the King David Hotel, decimated the population of Deir Yassin and murdered Count Bemadotte
now piously decry the use of violence by the victims
of their violence. They wish the world to forget, as
they have themselves chosen to do, that the very act
which brought their State into existence, resolution
181 (II), also recognized the continued existence of
the Palestine State.

36. It must be remembered that the Committee was
set up to define the rights of the Palestinian people,
rights which every other people enjoys as a natural
and inalienable part of its national identity. The Committee’s mandate required it, furthermore, to state how
those rights could best be implemented.
These questions cannot be separated from the issue of peace in
the Middle East, and, as the Committee has reiterated,
they lie at the root of the Middle East conflict. Although the United Nations system as a whole has
recognized the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian
people, in the Security Council we still lack unanimity
on the matter. This lack of unanimity
needs to be
remedied before there can be hope for an over-all

32. We consider the report of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian
People as picking up from where the decisions and
events of 1947 and 1948 left off. It is based on the
belief that the question of Palestine is at the heart of
the Middle East problem and that no solution of that
problem can be envisaged which does not take fully
into account the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people. What are these aspirations? The desire
to return to the homes and property which they had
to leave is not peculiar to the Palestinians, but natural
5

peace settlement in the Middle
to all and would last.

East that would be just

the present juncture. Their refusal to face facts and
to heed the counsels of their friends holds out little
encouragement for the future. The duty of the United
Nations is, however, clear: it must point out to all
concerned in which direction lies the road to peace.
That is what we feel the report of the Committee has
sought to do.

37.. The optimism
aroused by last year’s partial
agreements has been dissipated. The Middle East is
the scene of turmoil and tension, and the tension is
mounting.
On two occasions in preceding months
the Council has had to deal with the situation created
by unrest and revolt in the occupied West Bank and in
Israel itself. Can anyone question the fundamental
cause of these tensions and turmoils? It lies in the
continued refusal by Israel to restore their usurped
rights to the Palestinians,
to give recognition to the
Palestinian reality, its pursuit of a policy which assumes that the existence of Israel requires the extinction of Palestine. The expropriations
of Arab lands
and property, the establishment of Jewish settlements
in Arab territories in order to accommodate
more
Jewish immigrants, a policy which a former general of
the Israeli army has compared to the Nazi doctrine
of Lchens~a~~~n-these
are the specific obstacles to
the resumption of efforts to establish peace in the
Middle East.

42. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President, first of all I should like
to say how appreciative my delegation is of the honour
you do us by personally directing our work today.
The reputation you enjoy for the contribution
you
have made to the work done in other bodies convinces
us further of the usefulness of your presence.
43. Like many other speakers, I wish again to express
to the United States delegation our condolences on
the murder, in particularly unpleasant circumstances,
of the Ambassador of the United States in Beirut and
his two companions.
This senseless act has quite
rightly aroused general indignation.
How can we fail
at the same time to think of all the victims of the
tragic events in Lebanon, all the suffering of the people
of that country, which was for so long a model of
equilibrium
and tolerance?
France has particular
attachment and sympathy for that country. We very
much hope that, without further delay, the time of
national reconciliation
will be at hand.

38. A just and enduring peace would require, in addition to the recognition and restoration of the rights of
the Palestinian people, that Israel withdraw from all
the Arab territories it occupied in 1967 and that arrangements be made to guarantee the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of all
the States in the area and their right to live in peace
within secure and recognized boundaries.

44. Meeting as required by the General Assembly
to examine “the question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of their inalienable rights”, the Security
Council is not.dealing
with a new problem. Indeed,
this problem is one of the fundamental aspects of a
case which has existed since the very first years of
our Organization’s
existence, and on many occasions
since then we have had to consider further developments in it, and we have particularly had to consider
these matters several times in recent months. The
report transmitted
to us by the S,ecretary-General
constitutes a new and i.mportant element in this case.
It represents an effort to give concrete expression to
the recent trend towards restoring the question of the
rights of the Palestinian people to a prominent place
among the factors which sould be taken into account
in any lasting settlement of the Middle East problem.
It therefore constitutes an important contribution
to
the deliberations of the Council, which is acting quite
properly within the framework laid down by its own
resolutions.

39. The Committee has presented to us the result of
its deliberations in the form of certain recommendations. Are those recommendations
unrealistic? Not
in their essence and fundamentals.
Some. may hold
different views about the manner of their implementation, and that can be the subject of discussion, but
one cannot justifiably find fault with the main preoccupations reflected in the report.
40. What is, indeed, unrealistic is the assumption
that Israel can continue to flout the dictates of justice
and good sense, to defy world opinion and United
Nations decisions, to suppress internal dissent and
for ever hold at bay the Arab people in whose midst
it must exist, spuming and mistrusting their offers to
coexist, depending for its survival on the supply of
unlimited,
unending
and unquestioning
military,
economic and political support from abroad, support
not for the survival of Israel but for the preservation
of its conquests and furtherance of its aims.

45. Indeed, as I stated in the important debate that
we held in January [1872nd meeting],
what is involved
for us here is to see to it that in the search for a settlement, all the aspects of the matter are taken into
account, that is to say, those connected with the results of the 1967 conflict and those which relate to the
more recent upsurge of interest in the aspirations of
the Palestinian people to have, like all other peoples,
a homeland of their own. Now if the former aspects
are very familiar and have been particularly reflected

41. The alternative
to a redress of the injustices
done the Palestinian people over the last three decades
is more war and bloodshed-needless
war and needless bloodshed. Unfortunately,
and. tragically, there
is little evidence that the Israeli Government
and
leaders are ready to seize the opportunity
offered at
6

in the fundamental
texts, namely, resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), which lay down the principles
for a settlement and indicate the path to be followed
in order to achieve it, the latter have not yet won a
generally accepted definition or expression. The discrepancy observable between those aspects which are
today clearly defined and those which remain controversial, when all of them should be taken into account
on the same footing, is, as anyone can see, something
which generates tension in efforts aimed at a settlement and frustration for the Palestinians. It contributes to the current stalemate and-let’s
face it-it is
not without its effect on the troubles in the area.

genuine negotiations
between the parties. Since a
global settlement of the conflict presupposes the recognition of the rights of the Palestinians,
they must
be given the opportunity
to express their own views
on the nature and scope of a solution to the Palestinian
problem. There must therefore be a Palestinian voice
in the negotiations. But we cannot at one and the same
time call for negotiations, as the Council did in resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and anticipate their
results. For its part, France, which voted in favour of
resolutions 194 (III) and 237 (1967), recognized and,
of course, continues to recognize, the right of return
of the Palestinian refugees, unless they prefer to receive compensation.
Similarly,
France recognized
and recognizes the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination.
But the ways in which these rights
are to be exercised cannot be determined
in isolation from all the other considerations which the Council has always been at pains to recall when it has laid
down the principles for a settlement.

46. All efforts aimed at spelling out the recognized
elements of a settlement in order to ensure that they
can simultaneously
be taken into account in negotiations deserve the attention of the Council. Our objective surely is to see to it that any settlement brings
that satisfaction of the concerns and the legitimate
objectives of each of the parties which alone can be
the foundation for a just and lasting peace.

50. I should like to be clearly understood. We do not
mean to go back on the general principles which have
been recognized and whose implementation
is an
important element in a settlement. It should be stressed
that one of the elements of this settlement cannot be
implemented
unconditionally
and, in the case of the
return of the 1967 refugees, immediately,
while the
others are reserved for negotiation and for a subsequent stage. The purpose of negotiation is not to go
back on recognized principles. Negotiation
makes it
possible, according to the guidelines determined by
those principles, for all elements to be taken equally
into account so that each party can find reasons for
endorsing
their implementation.
Furthermore,
as
I pointed out as far back as 26 January last [1879rh
meeting], when I explained the affirmative vote of
France on the draft resolution before the Council, the
return of the refugees might become a subsidiary
feature once it is recognized by all the parties, and
I quote the text of the draft resolution, that the Palestinian .people have a right to “an independent State
in Palestine” [S/11940].

47. Our approach, which has been open-minded with
respect to all the evidence and to every effort that has
been undertaken with the sincere wish to help in the
search for a settlement, is based upon the conviction
that there can be no peace in the Middle East except
within the framework of an over-all settlement. This
conviction prompts us to make three points which
determine our views on the report before the Council.
48. My first point is that the elements of a settlement
are inseparable: first, the right of the Arab States to
recover their territorial
integrity, which entails the
evacuation from the territories
occupied in 1967;
second, the right of the Palestinian people to an independent homeland; and third, the right of every State
in the area to live in peace within secure, recognized
and guaranteed frontiers. On this basis, we note that
the report of the Committee, in keeping with the terms
of the mandate it received, deals with the second of
these points and indirectly with the first. It disregards
the third. If we call upon the whole’intemational
community, and primarily
Israel, to concede a major
political factor, namely, the right of the Palestinian
people to a homeland, we are also calling upon the
same international community to confirm or recognize
the rights which Israel possesses as a State, like all
other Member States. The responsibility
of the Council, which, contrary to that of the Committee,
is not
limited to the mandate laid down by the General
Assembly, is to reconcile these rights, taking into
account the human and historical legitimacy
of a
Palestinian homeland, while enabling Israel to co-exist
peacefully with all its neighbours. In our view, this
over-all approac’h requires that the winning of certain
rights, however legitimate
they may be, must be
accompanied ‘by respect for other rights, which are
equally legitimate.

51. My third point, which derives from the considerations I have already mentioned, is that the role of
the Council is to lay down the principles, as it has
already done, and to recommend to the parties the
terms of the settlement it deems appropriate. It is not
the Council’s role imperatively
to require the implementation of any one of those principles to the exclusion of the others, in accordance with any programme
it might arbitrarily determine. This comment applies
also to the recommendation
in the report inviting the
Council to establish a time-table for the withdrawal
from the territories occupied in 1967.
52. The Council is also, in our view, acting in accordance with its role if it demonstrates its readiness to
help the parties in applying the settlement, particularly
by contributing
to a system of guarantees. My Government has repeatedly stated that it would be ready

49(, My second point is that, in accordance with
resolution 338 (1973), a settlement can result only from
7

to participate in international
guarantees designed to
ensure peace in the region, for it considers that such
guarantees are a fundamental
element in producing
a settlement.

nations’ endeavours to achieve an international
order
based on equity, universality
and interdependence.
It is a source of pleasure and satisfaction for the Arab
League delegation to address the Council while you,
Sir, are its President.

53. Similarly, the Council might declare itself willing
to contemplate direct assistance from the international
community
for the re-establishment
of the Palestinians. In such an operation, existing agencies, and
particularly
UNRWA
could have a special role to
play. But, of course, in the light of the serious financial
difticulties confronting the Agency, such a development of its activities would presuppose considerably
greater support than it has received so far.

59. It is not an exaggeration for me to say that the
Arab world is living a tragedy. An integral part of its
body is suffering and bleeding. The tragedy began in
1948, when the indigenous Palestinian people were
displaced by force, uprooted from their homes, their
society and their country. Most of them became refugees. Tents were and still are their only shelter; charity, which they never asked for, became their source
of survival. In that context the Palestinian problem
is unique in its character. It is not only a problem of
Zionist colonialism and racism, but also a problem of
a people that was driven by sheer force from its
homeland.

54. All our efforts should therefore be directed
towards encouraging
the resumption
of genuine
negotiations, which it will be our task to follow very
closely, in order to satisfy ourselves that all the elements have in fact been taken into account and to
endorse the results.

60. For almost 30 years the United Nations has been
trying to relieve the pain, rather than taking effective
action to stop its causes. But the tragedy goes on.
Accordingly,
several bitter wars have taken place in
the area and others are still looming on the horizon
and will continue to do so unless something is done.

55. The Committee’s
report.is a valuable contribution in the sense that it helps us to appreciate the rights
of the Palestinian people, which we have recognized
-rights
the exercise of which should be one of the
basic elements of the settlement, along with the implementation
of the principles laid down in resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (f973). As I have stressed,
we do have some reservations about this study. But
in giving the Council food for thought, it maintains
a useful trend towards demonstrating
to the Palestinian people, so sorely tried and still prey to frustrations, exile and, for very many of them, the harsh
reality of the camps, that the international community
now recognizes that consideration
of the Palestinian
factor is an essential element in any truly just and
lasting over-all settlement.

61. Only in 1974 did the General Assembly realize
that charity-by
any measure, no matter how it is
rendered--cannot
be an effective treatment.
The
Assembly addressed itself to the origin of the problem,
to its roots, by giving a precise definition of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. By its resolution 3236 (XXIX) the Assembly
“1.

the inalienable
rights
people in Palestine, including:

(a) The right to self-determination
external interference;

56.
will

The PRESIDENT:
The members of the Council
recall the Council’s
earlier decision [/933rd
meeting] to extend an invitation under rule.39 of the
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Amin Hilmy II,
the Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States,
to participate in the Council’s consideration
of the
item now on its agenda. Ambassador Hilmy wishes
to speak at this time. Accordingly, I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

of the

Reaffirms

Palestinian

(b) The right
sovereignty;

to national

without

independence

and

“2.
Reaffirms
also the inalienable right of the
Palestinians to return to their homes and property
from which they have been displaced and uprooted,
and calls for their return.”

57. Mr. HILMY:
I should like at the outset to take
the opportunity to express to the delegation, the Government and the people of the United States the
League of Arab States sincere condolences and sympathy on the tragic loss they have sustained in the
death of the United States Ambassador to Lebanon
and his colleagues.

62. Those rights, however, are not simply a piece
of intellectual literature. They are not in a vacuum.
They should and must be given material form in deeds
and actions. Therefore, the following year, 1975, the
General Assembly took another sound step in that
direction when it decided, by its resolution 3376 (XXX),
to establish the Committee
on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, in order
to develop a programme of implementation
designed
to enable the Palestinian people to exercise the rights
recognized in paragraphs 1 and 2 of Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX). The Committee,
under the able
chairmanship of Ambassador Fall, with the assistance

58. May I, Sir, extend my delegation’s congratulations to you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council. Guyana’s outstanding contribution to the noble causes of liberation, peace and security is a landmark in the history of the third-world
8

of its efficient and untiring Rapporteur,
Mr. Gauci,
and the contribution
of its members, succeeded in
fulfilling its assigned task by submitting
its recommendations to the Council. Now it is the turn of the
Council to take over the responsibility
for the translation of those recommendations
into action.

no room for that and there is no necessity for that.”
When asked if she would sit with the Palestinians at
a conference table, Mrs. Meir said: “No, because
we have no negotiations with the Palestinians. They
have nothing to offer us and we have nothing to offer
them”.

63. My delegation does not intend to deal here with
the Committee’s
report, since its recommendations,
which are inspired by previous United Nations resolutions in this context, are specific and self-explanatory. However, my delegation cannot avoid addressing
itself to the claims of those who advocate a balanced
resolution
and negotiations.
Such claims paralyse
the Council’s action, particularly when the case under
discussion is that of the inalienable rights of a certain
people-the
Palestinian people.

67. Conceptualizing
the Israeli denial of the Palestinian people’s inalienable rights, Yediot Ahoronorh
of 17 October 1969 indicated that Menachem Begin,
at a conference at Ain Hahoresh in Mapom kibbutz,
when asked about the recognition of the existence of
the Palestinian people, said:
“My friends, take care. When you recognize the
concept of ‘Palestine’,
you demolish your right to
live in Ain Hahoresh. If this is Palestine, and not the
land of ‘Israel, then you are conquerors and not
tillers of the land. You are invaders. If this is Palestine, then it belongs. to a people who lived here
before you came. Only if it is the land of Israel do
you have a right to live in Ain Hahoresh and Deganiyah. If it is not your country, your fatherland, the
country of your ancestors and of your sons, then
what are you doing here? You came to another people’s homeland, as they claim, you expelled them
and you have taken their land.”

,64. Inalienable
rights derive from the fact that all
human beings are born free and equal. In political
terms, this implies that man is entitled to self-determination and independence,
and to practise his sovereignty within the framework of his homeland without
foreign intimidation
or interference. In this context,
the inalienable rights could be reduced to two words:
the “identity”
and “dignity”
of man. Identity and
dignity are to be or not to be; there is no compromise
on their basic tenets.

68. Against that background,
it is a paradox pm
excellence that there are some who still insist on
advocating
negotiation
of the Palestinian
people’s
inalienable rights.

65. That background denies any call for balancing
resolutions when the subject under discussion is the
inalienable
rights of a certain people. Palestinian
inalienable rights, therefore, will never be the subject
of compromises.
Any call for a compromise through
insistence on a so-called balanced resolution is, in fact,
an attempt to keep those inalienable rights unresolved,
thus sharing in compounding the existing tragedy. By
the same token, any demands for negotiation of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people are baseless and unfounded, since such demands imply that
Palestinian
identity and dignity are negotiable.
.

69. International
peace and security are seriously
threatened so long as the Middle East crisis remains
unresolved. It is a fact that the Palestine question is
the core of the crisis. An example of that threat is the
repercussions of the October 1973 war, during which
the structure of international
peace and security was
on the verge of collapse.
70. Respect for the inalienable rights of man is the
cement of world order, since it implies that man can
determine his destiny freely and without exploitation
or intimidation.
All other values, such as the interdependence of international
relations and universality,
are therefore derived from the basic value of respect
for the inalienable rights of man. Accordingly,
international peace and security will continue to be vulnerable so long as the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and of the peoples of Zimbabwe,
Namibia, Azania and other countries are denied and
ignored.

66. The hypocritical
nature of those demands becomes crystal clear when one considers them from
the perspective of Israel. Israel does not recognize the
Palestinian people’s identity or its dignity. In this respect, Mrs. Golda Meir said the following in an interview with Frank Giles, published in The Sunday Times
of London on 15 June 1969:
“There was no such thing as Palestinians...
It
was not as though there was a Palestinian people in
Palestine considering itself as a Palestinian people
and we came and we threw them out and took their
country away from them. They did not exist.”

71. It is the responsibility of the Security Council to
maintain international
peace and security. In doing
so, the Council has the duty to take the necessary
immediate steps to put the recommendations
of the
Committee into ample action.

I repeat: she said “They did not exist.” In elaboration
of such an obstinate position, Mrs. Golda Meir, in an
interview with the British B~roadcasting -Corporation
on 27 September 1972, added that she could see no
possibility of the Palestinians in the Middle East ever
having a homeland of their own. She said: “There is

72. In this connexion, acting in a spirit of close cooperation with the United Nations and in accordance
9

with its adherence to the principles of maintaining
peace and security, the Arab League would like to
confirm
its willingness to cooperate fully with the
Council in order to restore the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people, under the authentic leadership
of the PLO, to self-determination,
national independence and sovereignty, and their right to return to their
homes and property which were seized from them by
the usurpers.

to the representative of the United States on the tragic
death in Beirut of the American Ambassador,
his
Economic Counsellor and the chauffeur of the American Embassy in Lebanon.
79. I also wish to thank the members of the Council
for having allowed me to participate in this debate and
pay a tribute to their ceaseless efforts to maintain and
safeguard international
peace. In the course of the
last two months, under the presidency both of Ambassador de Guiringaud,
the representative
of France,
who displayed decided wisdom and praiseworthy
technical skill, and of our friend Ambassador Jackson,
the representative of Guyana, whose competence and
devotion I am pleased to pay a tribute to, this Council
had dealt in particular with two important problems:
the activities of Israel in the occupied Arab territories,
and those of South Africa against our African brothers
in Azania. By the statement of the President reflecting
the views of the majority in the first case [1922nd
meeting],
and then by its unanimously adopted resolution in the second case [resolution
392 (197611, the
Council has expressed the concern of the international
community
in regard to the explosive situations in
Palestine and in South Africa. At the same time, the
Council has indicated its support for the .peoples of
Palestine and Azania in their struggle against oppression. I am convinced, Mr. President, that, thanks to
your dedication and competence and to the support
you will surely be given by Council members, this new
debate in which we are involved will yield encouraging
results.

73. World opinion represented in the 188 resolutions
of both the General Assembly and the Security Council dealing with the Palestine question is looking
anxiously and with deep concern to the present deliberations of the Council to see what action it will take.
My delegation is hopeful that the Council will act in
accordance with the demands and aspirations of world
opinion, which imply the return of the Palestinian
people to their land, where they should be guaranteed
the right to practice freely their sovereignty and independence, and where they can live in peace in the
land of peace, in Palestine.
74.. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have just received a
letter from the representative of Oman in which he
asks to be invited to participate in the discussion, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.
Accordingly, I propose, in accordance with the usual
practice, and with the consent of the Council, to invite
the representative of Oman to participate in the discussion without the right. to vote.

80. In paying a tribute to your lofty qualities, Sir,
I wish above all to salute your country, Guyana, a
member of the non-aligned Group and of the Group
of 77.

7j. In view of the limited number of seats available
at the Council table, I invite the representative
of
Oman to take the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber, on the understanding’ that
he will be invited to take a place at the Council table
when it is his turn to speak.

81. The Security Council’s
consideration
of the
report of the Committee. on the Exercise of the Inalien‘able Rights of the Palestinian
People, which was
established by the General Assembly under resolution 3376 (XXX), prompts me to address this body at
a time when the struggle of the Palestinian people for
the attainment of its inalienable rights is being pursued
and is acquiring new dimensions. This statement is
prompted also by the brilliant introduction
of this
report here by Ambassador Fall, whose outstanding
qualities and competence during his chairmanship of
the debates I must emphasize, and whose wisdom and
tact have enabled the Committee to reach, such fruitful results.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Al-Said
(Oman)
took the place reseriled for him at the side of
the Council
charrrher.

76. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Tunisia whom I invite to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
77.

Mr.

DRISS
(Tunisia)
(interpretation
from
Mr. President, it is particularly gratifying to
me to congratulate you most warmly on behalf of the
delegation of Tunisia for the initiative you have taken
in coming personally to preside over the meetings of
the Council. I should like to take this opportunity to
voice the wish that the Ministers of Foreign Affairs
of Council members would come more frequently to
Council meetings to shoulder their responsibilities
for
the maintenance
and safeguard of international
peace.
-- --

French):

82. First of all, on behalf of my country, I wish to
praise this struggle of an entire people, which is one
with all national and patriotic struggles against foreign
domination.
As all these historic struggles have been
crowned with success, so too will that of the Palestinian people, in its turn, succeed one-day in its
hour of victory-a
victory all the more deserved
because of the heavy sacrifices which that people has
willingly borne.
/1

78. With your permission,
Sir, I wish in turn to
express the sincerest condolences of my delegation
10

.

elements
peace.

83. Despite the hardships and suffering that struggle
has caused the Palestinian people, which has been
suffering this tragedy for nearly 30 years, I shall not
lengthen the debate which the Council has decided to
conduct at this time by dwelling on the responsibilities
of those who have placed the Palestinian people in
this tragic situation.
Rather I shall endeavour,
in
dealing with the problem before us, to maintain the
thoughtful attitude which we should properly adopt in
our ardent search for a solution to a conflict which
has lasted all too long and on which without doubt
universal peace depends. This is, furthermore,
the
attitude we.adopted in the Committee, that Committee
which was so decried and deprecated when it came
into being, yet which has produced a constructive
report and recommendations
which, in our opinion,
contain the premises for a solution of the problem of
the Middle East, the main factor of which is the attainment of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.

required

to-build

a future co-operation

and

87. In addition,
the illustrious
French statesman,
Mend&s France, on his return from Israel, made a
statement which was mentioned at the beginning of
this debate [!924th meeting, puru. 481 by Ambassador Fall the representative of Senegal and the Chairman of the Committee,
and which deserves to be
studied. In this statement Mr. Mend&s France analyses the situation in the Middle East in the light of
the Israeli-Arab conflict and invites Israel to acknowledge the urgency of a solution which recognizes the
rights of the Palestinian people.
88. The last new element is the.recent evolution of
the situation in the Middle East, where the Palestinian
element is increasingly becoming an essential factor
in the search for a just and lasting peace in that region
of the world.

84. Is the situation propitious for the conclusions
and recommendations
contained in this report to be
adopted in their present or an improved form? These
recommendations
are the result of a compromise, and
in substance are in accord with the draft resolution
accepted by the members of the Council in January
1976 [S/119403 but rejected by a single Power. In
comparing the recommendations
with the draft resolution, we perceive that the recommendations
are
more practical because they provide for stages and
modalities
for their application.
whereas the draft
resolution rejected last January merely stated the
foundations for a peaceful solution of the entire problem of the Middle East.

89. All these elements lead us to consider the problem with which we are concerned from a new point
of view and impose on us the obligation to find a solution which is all the more urgent since the threat of the
conflict spreading is becoming more acute.
90. The Security Council was seized., in the months
of March and May last, of certain aspects of the Palestinian problem, such as the question of the Holy
Places, the establishment
of settlements in the West
Bank and the repression of national demonstrations.
Consideration of these problems by the Council led to
its noting a poignant feature, and that is the deadlock
in which the Council finds itself since the positions
of the Powers have not changed. They have remained
the same as at the end of the debate in January 1976.

85. Since then, new elements have been added to
the facts of the case: first, the Palestinian demonstrations; secondly, the municipal elections; thirdly, the
statements made by American senators, among them
Jacob Javits, James Abourezk,
Adlai Stevenson,
Floyd Haskell, Charles Percy and .George McGovern,
who, in the course of a debate in the United States
Senate, criticized the establishment
of Israeli settlements in the occupied territories in the West Bank of
the Jordan. Senator Javits was particularly
severe
with regard to Israeli settlements in the West Bank.
He said, “These settlements cannot alter the final
disposition of these territories”,
and he went on to
say: “Israel’s position is one of isolation with regard
to these territories. These are, in our opinion, measures which nothing can justify nor any country
approve of, however close its ties to Israel.” What is
even more, in the course of the debate Senator Abourezk proposed .that the Foreign Affairs Committee
adopt and transmit to the Senate a resolution condemning the establishment
of settlements
in the
occupied territories.

91. It is true that the United States representative,
Mr. Scranton, tried to warn the Government
of
Israel of the consequences of its policy, particularly
the establishment
of settlements,
as regards
which runs counter to the peace procedures. But if no
agreement can be reached on the basis of a draft resolution which could start us on the road to peace in the
Middle East, we are convinced that, with the change
in attitudes and in the situation, agreement will be
possible tomorrow and will of necessity, in our opinion, include the establishment of an independent and
sovereign Palestinian
State that would co-operate
perfectly with its neighbours.
92. Will the Council, after consideration of the Committee’s report, .be closer to a unanimous decision
than it was in the months of January, March and May,
and closer to the objective which we have ceaselessly
sought for many long years, that of a just and lasting
peace in which all communities can live and prosper?
The reality is complex and might lead us to be sceptical. Should we therefore renounce any attempt at
seeking and promoting
the elements of a solution
which, however difficult, is essential to delay, if not

86. This shows how attitudes have changed and that
one can begin to glimpse a solution of this painful
problem through an appeal to reason and to the basic
11

avert, a fifth war which would be deadlier and more
destructive for ail parties than any of the four preceding ones, which have only led to the accumulation
of hatred and have complicated
an already complex
problem?

earned tribute to the Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Paiestinian People, our good friend Ambassador Fall of
Senegal, for the great competence and statesmanship
that have characterized the manner in which he has
guided the work of the Committee. It was with great
satisfaction that my delegation was able to participate
in the work of the Committee,
which, under the skilful leadership of Ambassador Fall, was able to discharge its work successfully.

93. The work done by the Committee,
of which
Tunisia was a member, was constructive, as the report
proves. For the first time in the United Nations, we
have as complete a dossier as possible on the Paiestinian problem with reasonable and realistic recommendations which allow us to contemplate the future
with optimism
in regard to relations between the
parties to the conflict, while enabling the Palestinian
people to enjoy their inalienable
rights, which are
recognized by the international
community.
These
rights cannot be denied them by Israel, which has
benefited from United Nations resolutions,
in particular resolution 181 (II), which is its birth certificate,
defines its functions and is the international legal basis
to which any United Nations solution must refer.

99. It cannot but be noticeable to ail that the manner
in which the Committee carried .out its task was refreshingly different from the methods sometimes followed by committees or bodies of our Organization,
which is encouraging.
Notwithstanding
the great
complexity of the problem and the existence of widely
divergent
views, the Committee
made steadfast
efforts not to allow its deliberations to degenerate into
acrimonious
and meaningless debates. Adopting a
persistent problem-solving
approach, the Committee
devoted its efforts to making progress which could be
expected to bt acceptable to and at the same time
serve the interests of all parties concerned.

94. The Committee’s
recommendations
which the
Council is invited to consider would, if implemented,
make it possible to break the vicious circle in which
we now find ourselves when we discuss the Middle
East. We venture to hope that the Council wii endorse
the Committee’s and will, above ail, avoid altering its
recommendations,
and in answer to that constructive
effort made by our delegations with the co-operation
of the PLO, whose realism and spirit of moderation
we are pleased to emphasize here, endeavour to formulate a constructive approach, which will strengthen
the cause of the martyred Palestinian people and lead
to a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

100. It gives my delegation great satisfaction that
the Committee has brought into focus what has always
been the view of Indonesia and of a great many other
countries-namely,
that the question of Palestine
constitutes a root problem of the Middle East question
as a whole and that the obstacle to progress in past
efforts was largely the fact that this central aspect
was not given the consideration it deserved.
101. Pursuant to that policy, Indonesia has always
been consistent in its support for the cause of the
Palestinians and, consequently, for the participation
of the PLO, as the sole representative of the Paiestinian people, in ail discussions regarding their destiny. During Indonesia’s membership in the Council,
my delegation pointed out on several occasions that
the solution of the Middle East problem cannot be
separated from the elimination
of its root causes,
which are mainly twofold.

95. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Indonesia, whom I invite to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
96. Mr. MARPAUNG
(Indonesia):
Mr. President,
I deem it very fortunate indeed that in its co.nsideration
of a matter to which my delegation attaches great
importance, the Council should be guided by you, Sir,
an eminent son of Guyana, with which country Indonesia has close relations, particularly in the family of
non-aligned
nations. You well-known
and distinguished contributions
to the work of our Organization
leave me in no doubt as to your skill and qualities,
which will greatly contribute to the success of the
work of the Council during the current month. Allow
me, therefore, on my own behalf and on behalf of my
delegation, to offer you our warmest congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month.

102. The first is the injustices inflicted upon the
Palestinian people, which for 30 years, as is stated in
paragraph 13 of the Committee’s
report, forced hundreds of thousands of them to live “in destitution...
not once, but twice or even three times in their iifetime. This tragedy has been recognized by the international community
as one that should no longer be
tolerated”.
The injustices inflicted
upon the Palestinians must be redressed.
103. The second root cause is the continued occupation by force of arms of territories belonging to the
three neighbouring
Arab countries. The inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war is a generally recognized principle which has been frequently
enunciated in various Security Council resolutions.
I cannot but believe that even Israel does not harbour

97. Allow me also, through you, Sir, to thank the
members of the Council for the opportunity to participate in the present debate which my delegation has
been given.
98. I would be remiss in my duties if I failed to take
the present opportunity to pay a most sincere and well
12

any illusions about the possibility of achieving a just
and lasting peace in the area as long as its forces are
still occupying Arab territories.
However,
shortsighted perceptions
about secure and recognized
boundaries apparently prevail over sense and reason
and long-term interest. No geographical borders are
really secure, given the level of sophistication
that
arms technology has reached. Really secure borders
can in the long run be effectively guaranteed, not
primarily by force of arms but by peace and good will.
It is Israel’s return of all occupied Arab territories to
their rightful owners that will pave the way towards
such a situation, as a result of which Israeli borders
will be secure because there will be peace.

109. Peace in the Middle .East is certainly in the
interests of all parties concerned, and not least of
Israel. My delegation would like to appeal to the
Council not to let this opportunity
pass and to make
such decisions as would lead to the initiation of a new
era in the Middle East, an era marked by genuine and
lasting peace in the area. The dangers of a failure on
the part of the Council to adopt realistic and constructive measures as recommended
by the Committee must be obvious to us all. If peaceful measures
are exhausted, and this is what a failure on the part
of the Council in this respect would mean, then there
would inevitably
be more determined
efforts to
redress injustice and humiliation
by force. Israel
would do well to heed the muted and carefully worded
warning contained in paragraph 32 of the report, the
last sentence of which reads:

104. The Committee
did not fail to recognize the
basic concern of Israel. In paragraph 45 of its report,
it refers to a proposal that the Security Council not
only should demand the urgent withdrawal of Israel
from Palestine territories occupied since 1967 but also
could provide international
guarantees for the peace
and security of all-and
I repeat “all”-States
in the
Middle East.

“The growing opposition of the Palestinian population to occupation,.as
well as the outcome of the
municipal elections recently held in the West Bank
and other occupied areas, had more than a symbolic significance in this respect.”

105. My delegation does not consider it necessary
to elaborate on the first report of the Committee. The
Chairman and Rapporteur
of the Committee,
and
other speakers who have preceded me, have already
done so more eloquently than I could expect to do
myself. Allow me, however, to reiterate what in the
view of my delegation constitutes the essence, or the
thrust, of the report.

110. I earnestly share the ‘belief expressed by the
Chairman of the Committee,
when he presented the
report to the Council that:
“The Israeli leaders have too much imagination
and too great a sense of political responsibility
not
to understand that time is working against them.
Unfortunately,
we must recognize the fact that they
are now beginning to count far too many lost opportunities.” [1924th meeting. pm-a. 47.1

106. It is, in the first place, an appeal to the Council,
while, on the other hand, it is also a warning. The
report appeals to the Council-the
body entrusted by
the international
community with the most influential
role with regard to international
peace and securitynot to forsake that trust, but to discharge the responsibility incumbent upon it, to make serious efforts
and to take concrete steps towards an over-all settlement of the Palestinian problem.

111. As a non-member of the Council and when not
directly involved in a dispute under consideration by
the Council, Indonesia usually does not intervene in
its debates. The deep solidarity felt by the people of
Indonesia towards the Arab peoples in general and the
Palestinian people in particular, and also the fact that
Indonesia is a member of the Committee,
make it
incumbent upon my delegation to participate in the
present deliberations
of the Council. In fact, Indonesia’s solidarity with the Arab peoples in the common struggle for the restitution of the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people and the restoration of freedom and justice in the Middle East is a matter of great
pride to us. That solidarity and our unflinching support
for the demands of freedom and justice in Palestine
are not based upon hostility towards any other human
entity, but, as stated in the declaration adopted by
the Second Islamic Summit Conference in Lahore
in February 1974, it is based “on the positive and
eternal precepts of equality, fraternity and dignity of
man, freedom from discrimination
‘and exploitation,
and struggle against oppression and injustice”.

107. My delegation believes that the report of the
Committee -could usefully assist the endeavours of
the Council in the search for and implementation
of
such settlement. The proposals and recommendations
contained in the report cannot but be termed constructive and realistic as regards the search for practical means whereby progress towards peace could be
achieved and redress could be given a people which
has been subjected to injustice for three decades. It is
also our belief that those proposals will permit a
mitigation of the genuinely felt concern of Israel.
108. Besides being an appeal, the report serves also
as a warning. Those who can clearly see the facts as
they are must be able to recognize that time is running
out, that a peaceful and comprehensive
solution of
the Palestinian problem must be found soon, that the
people of Palestine cannot wait for ever for the United
Nations to redress the injustice that has been inflicted
upon them for so long.

112. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretcrtion
from
Russinn):
First of all
I have great pleasure in welcoming you, Mr. President, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of a friendly
13

country, who are presiding today over the debate in
the Security Council. The presence of a Foreign
Minister at meetings of the Council, our experience
has shown, is a rare phenomenon and so we cordially
welcome you and note with satisfaction your willingness to be with us today.

those of the Government
of the United Kingdom
shows that there is substantial discrepancy between
the positions of the two countries.
117.

Our first principle

is as follows:

“First, the withdrawal of Israeli troops from all
Arab territories occupied as a result of Israel’s
agression in 1967” [S/12063, annex. point 31.

113. Speaking on 14 June [1926rh meeting] in the
discussion of the Cyprus question, I had great pleasure in welcoming your outstanding representative
to the United Nations and the Security Council,
Ambassador Jackson. At that time I pointed out
that the Soviet people was following the efforts of the
friendly people of Guyana with sympathy, and wished
them continued success in the further consolidation
of their independence and ensure in their efforts to
the social and economic progress of their country.
The tenth anniversary of the independence of Guyana
is an occasion on which the Soviet people would like
to express their conviction that the friendly relations
and co-operation between our two countries will be
developed further and expanded, to the benefit of
both peoples and in the interests of universal peace.
I felt I had to repeat what I said at that time, since
you have joined us today and are presiding over the
meeting of the Council.

In the first principle as stated by Mr. Richard, the
British Government does not include the word ,“all”.
That word is conspicuous by its absence, and that
omission means that that the Israeli troops would not
have to be withdrawn from all the Arab territories
occupied as a result of Israel’s aggression in 1967.
Therefore, there is no basis for asserting or for attempting to create the impression that the position of
the Soviet Union and that of the United Kingdom with
regard to this important key principle for a Middle
East settlement are identical.
118. An equally important discrepancy exists with
regard to our second principle, which reads as follows:
“satisfaction
of the legitimate national demands of
the Arab people of Palestine, including their inalien- :
able right to establish their own State” [ibid.].

114. I shoud also like to express our condolences to
the delegation of the United States on an irreparable
loss, the death of the United States Ambassador in
Lebanon and of a Counsellor of the Embassy. As an
Ambassador who has so often been the victim of
attacks in the host country when the Soviet Mission
in New York was attacked, I know only too well what
feelings are aroused when hostile elements make
attempts on the lives of ambassadors. It is therefore
with particular sympathy that I should like to express
my condolences for the death of the United States
Ambassador and his Counsellor.

That is the Soviet principle. It not only provides for
satisfaction of the legitimate national demands of the
Arab people of Palestine, but also recognizes that
people’s inalienable right to establish its own State.
In the third British principle, on the other hand, we
find only a nebulous formula-the
kind of formula
that is often typical of British diplomacy-with
regard
to the recognition
of “the right of the Palestinian
people to the expression of their national identity.”
That nebulous formula has nothing whatever in common with the clear-cut, definite formula contained in
the second Soviet principle, which calls for satisfaction of the legitimate national demands of the Arab
people of Palestine, including their inalienable right
to establish their own State.

115. I should now like to make a brief statement
concerning one of the comments contained in the
statement made today by the representative of the
United Kingdom.
Mr. Richard. I regret that he has
left, but I think that my remarks will be reported to
him.

119. The third Soviet principle provides for “international guarantees for the security and inviolability
of the frontiers of all Middle Eastern States, and their
right to independent
existence and development”
[ibid.]. But in the British principle there is no reference
to,such international guarantees.

116. I am grateful to Mr. Richard for referring to me
by name in his statement and the three organically
interrelated elements which the Soviet Government
is firmly convinced should be the basis for any radical
political settlement of the Middle East conflict. Unfortunately, Mr. Richard permitted
himself, to put it
mildly; a certain freedom in his interpretation of those
principles and attempted to create the impression in
the minds of the Council members that those three
principles
formulated
by the Soviet Government
coincided with the three principles he himself set forth
as constituting the position of the Government of the
United Kingdom on a settlement of the Middle East
conflict. However, the most sursory ‘examination
of
the three principles of the Soviet Government
and

120. That brief, purely preliminary
comparison
between the three Soviet principles and the three
British principles for a settlement of the Middle East
conflict shows that there are serious differences.
I would stress the existence of these extremely serious, substantial
divergencies,
since this demonstrates that there was very little ground for Mr. Richard
to state this morning that the differences are only
minor, relating to “the use of this or that word” [WC
pam. 11 nhore]. The fact is that there are differences
14

not only in words but in substance in the approaches
to a settlement of the Middle East conflict.
121. I felt it necessary to make that brief explanation
in order to eliminate any possible doubts or misunderstanding.

125. I think that Mr. Richard’s intention was to draw
attention to the fact that there was wide agreement on
the point that the three principles should be seen as
an integrated whole. He was not attempting to suggest
that the Soviet Union’s view of these three principles
was identical to our own.

122. Mr. BATTISCOMBE
(United Kingdom):
briefly to reply to Ambassador Malik.

126.

I wish

127. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian):
It was precisely
that point in Mr. Richard’s statement that I had in
mind, and that is why I explained that there existed
not minor differences, but differences in substance in
approaching a.Middle East settlement.

123. I have, of course, taken very careful note of
Ambassador Malik’s remarks, which I shall convey
to Ambassador Richard. I am sorry that Ambassador
Richard was not able to hear Ambassador Malik’s
comments personally. I regret that Ambassador Malik
did not find it possible to warn us that he intended to
make his comments, because had he done so Ambassador Richard might have arranged to be here.

128. Mr. SHERER (United States of America): My
delegation would like to join others in expressing
pleasure at having you among us today, Sir, presiding
over our deliberations.

124. I do not wish at this time to make any comments on the substance of Mr. Malik’s remarks. I
would merely draw attention to the precise words
used by Mr. Richard in his statement earlier today.
He said:

129. My delegation would like also to .extend its
sincere appreciation
to the representatives
of the
United Kingdom,
Pakistan, France, Tunisia and’ the
Soviet Union and to the Permanent Observer of the
League of Arab States for their expressions of sympathy and the other remarks they made concerning
the death in Beirut on 16 June of Ambassador Meloy
and his two colleagues.

“There is. .. a very wide measure of agreement
in the Council on the fundamentals of those three
principles”-that
is to say, the principles to which
he had just referred- “even if there are differences
that may divide some or others of us on the use of
this or that word.” [Ibid.]

The meeting

He went on:
“But what I think
those three principles

I wished merely to make that point clear.

must be emphasized is that
have to be taken together.”

rose at 1.20 p.m.
N&es

’ For the report, see Official Records of the General Assembly,
Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 35.
2 O$%ial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 2399th meeting.
’ Ibid., Second Session, Supplement No. II, vol. II, annex 19.
4 Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, Plenary Meetings, 2282nd meeting.

[ibid.]

Mr. Richard then quoted from a recent statement by
Mr. Malik in which he had said that the three principles needed to be seen as an integrated whole.

15

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes, New York ou Gentve.
KASE

IIOjLYYHTb

HaAaHm
snfax

Opramrsasuu
w at-e~~m~ax

ZI3AAHLIR

OPI’AHU

Obze~~~e~xb~x
BO BC~X pakoHax

aauxM

KXWXCHOM r.xaraaxHe

wnw nnmn~e

Haqwfi.

Ce~qw~

mAawul.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

no npo~~axe

PUBLICACIONES

Oli’bEAHHEHHhIX

3AUW11
Haud
Mupa.

MOH(HO
Hasonu~e

no anpecy:
Hbm-Ffop~

~ynwrb
cnpaeitu

Opraxxwsasuff

HAIIZIR
B KHUXH~IX
Mara06 WSA~HWRX
B
O~~~XUH~HHJJX

HJIW Xexzeea.

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerlas y casas distribuidoras
en
todas pat-&s del mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Scccion de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00400

83-40801-February

198%2,200
