A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/65
24 February 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 18
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/53/594)]
53/65.

Question of New Caledonia

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of New Caledonia,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to New Caledonia,1
Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determination as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960,
Noting the importance of the positive measures being pursued in New Caledonia by the French
authorities, in cooperation with all sectors of the population, to promote political, economic and social
development in the Territory, including measures in the area of environmental protection and action with
respect to drug abuse and trafficking, in order to provide a framework for its peaceful progress to selfdetermination,

1

A/53/23 (Part V), chap. IX. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third
Session, Supplement No. 23.
99-76675

/...

A/RES/53/65
Page 2

Noting also, in this context, the importance of equitable economic and social development, as well
as continued dialogue among the parties involved in New Caledonia in the preparation of the act of selfdetermination of New Caledonia,
Welcoming the strengthening of the process of review of the Matignon Accords2 through the
increased frequency of coordination meetings,
Noting with satisfaction the intensification of contacts between New Caledonia and neighbouring
countries of the South Pacific region,
1. Welcomes the significant developments that have taken place in New Caledonia as exemplified
by the signing of the Nouméa Accord of 5 May 1998 between the representatives of New Caledonia and
the Government of France;3
2. Notes the relevant provisions of the Nouméa Accord aimed at taking more broadly into account
the Kanak identity in the political and social organization of New Caledonia, and also those provisions
of the Accord relating to control of immigration and protection of local employment;
3. Also notes the relevant provisions of the Nouméa Accord to the effect that New Caledonia may
become a member or associate member of certain international organizations, such as international
organizations in the Pacific region, the United Nations, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and the International Labour Organization, according to their regulations;
4. Further notes the agreement between the signatories to the Nouméa Accord that the progress
made in the emancipation process shall be brought to the attention of the United Nations;
5. Invites the administering Power to consider inviting to New Caledonia, at the time the new
institutions are established, a mission of information which could comprise representatives of countries
of the Pacific region;
6. Calls upon the administering Power to transmit information regarding the political, economic
and social situation of New Caledonia to the Secretary-General;
7. Urges all the parties involved, in the interest of all the people of New Caledonia and building
on the positive outcome of the review of the Matignon and Nouméa Accords, to maintain their dialogue
in a spirit of harmony;
8. Invites all the parties involved to continue promoting a framework for the peaceful progress of
the Territory towards an act of self-determination in which all options are open and which would safeguard
the rights of all New Caledonians according to the letter and spirit of the Matignon and Nouméa Accords,
which are based on the principle that it is for the populations of New Caledonia to choose how to control
their destiny;

2

See A/AC.109/1000, paras. 9–14.

3

A/AC.109/2114, annex.
/...

A/RES/53/65
Page 3

9. Welcomes measures that have been taken to strengthen and diversify the New Caledonian
economy in all fields, and encourages further such measures in accordance with the spirit of the Matignon
and Nouméa Accords;
10. Also welcomes the importance attached by the parties to the Matignon and Nouméa Accords to
greater progress in housing, employment, training, education and health care in New Caledonia;
11. Acknowledges the contribution of the Melanesian Cultural Centre to the protection of the
indigenous culture of New Caledonia;
12. Notes the positive initiatives aimed at protecting the natural environment of New Caledonia,
notably the “Zonéco” operation designed to map and evaluate marine resources within the economic zone
of New Caledonia;
13. Acknowledges the close links between New Caledonia and the peoples of the South Pacific and
the positive actions being taken by the French and territorial authorities to facilitate the further
development of those links, including the development of closer relations with the countries members of
the South Pacific Forum;
14. Welcomes, in particular, in this regard, continuing high-level visits to New Caledonia by
delegations from countries of the Pacific region and high-level visits by delegations from New Caledonia
to countries members of the South Pacific Forum;
15. Decides to keep under continuous review the process unfolding in New Caledonia as a result of
the signing of the Nouméa Accord;
16. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue the
examination of this question at its next session and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fiftyfourth session.
78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
