UNITED

’
1‘)“$ .i [ ;”

NA TIONS

,,

SECURITY C&N&L
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
. . . . . . . . .‘. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I .

1

Statements made on the occasion of the successful landing on Mars of
Viking I , , . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , , . , . . , , . . , . . . . , , , . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . +.

1

Adoption of the agenda , . . . . , , , . . . . . . . , . . , , . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint’ by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 July 1976 from the Charge d’affaires, a.i., of the Permanent
Mission of’zambia to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/12147) , . . . . , . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l944)

I

S/PV. 1944

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a -United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

.

1944th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 27 July 1976, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Piero VINCI

that does honour to the United States, which has one
of the most innovative and creative societies in the
history of mankind.

(Italy).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab
Republic,
Pakistan,
Panama,
Romania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania and United States of
America.
Provisiotizil

1. Adoption
2.

4. The PRESIDENT:
With the Council’s permission,
I should like to subscribe totally to the statement
just made by the representative af Panama about this
great event constituted by the landing of Viking I
on Mars. I think I shall be speaking for all the members of the Security Council as well as for my own
delegation if I say that this historic event has filled
us all with great admiration.
We have been tremendously impressed by this landmark in the exploration
of the solar system-and
perhaps beyond it-which
will widen our knowledge of life in the solar system.
That is of the greatest importance for the future of
mankind.

agenda (S/Agenda/l944)

of the &genda

Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 July 1976 from the Chargk d’affaires, a.i., of the Permanent Mission of Zambia
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/12147)
T?le meetirlg

Statements

5. On behalf of all the members of the Council.
I shouEd like to offer our very warm congratulations
to the United States representative
on this great
success.

WNS crrlled to order Nt 3.55 pm.

6. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America): As
the representative of the Government of the United
States, I should like to say how much we appreciate
and how touched we are by the statement of the
representative
of Panama arid by your statement,
Mr. President. We hope that this feat will indeed be
in the interest of mankind.
I think that when we
enlarge the horizons of any country we enlarge the
horizons of all countries. I should like to feel that
this event is going to be in the interest of all of us.

made on the occasion of the successful landing
on Mars of Viking I

1. Mr. ILLUECA
(Panama) (interpwtr/fiorr
fivnr
Spn~~ish): A week ago-on 20 July 1976, to be precise-an
astonishing event occurred which brought
joy to all manking and about which I should like to
say a few words before we begin our work today.
I am referring to the landing of Viking I on the planet
Mars, after a voyage through space that had lasted
one year and covered more than 400 million miles.
That feat initiated
a new era in interplanetary
exploration..

Adoption
The qwrltr

2. This mystical juncture of time and space heralds
further tremendous advances in technology that fill
US with hope for a better life for mankind.
But that
can happen only within a system of peace and justice,
under the aegis of the United Nations.

of the agenda

II-C/S trdoptrti.

Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 July 1976 from the ChargC d’affaires,
. of the Permanent Mission of Zambia to the
a.l.,
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12147)

3. This scientific and technological accomplishment
represents more than the triumph of a single nation:
it represents the victory of the human spirit, of
individuals,
of scientists, of engineers, of technicians,
of experts, both in government and in private industry,
who, working from this part of the earth, have made
this glorious feat possible. This event will go down in
the annals of history, with universal congratulations
and applause. It was without doubt an act for peace

7. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
members of the Security Council that I have received
letters from the representatives
of Zambia, South
Africa and Mauritania
requesting to be invited to
participate in the Council’s discussion of the question
just inscribed on its agenda. Accordingly, I propose,
if I hear no objection, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
I

rCgime of Ian Smith in the British colony of Southern
Rhodesia. In this regard, the Council, irztes aliu,
condemned the aggression perpetrated against Zambia
by the illegal minority Smith rCgime. The Council
also addressed itself to the need for putting an
immediate end to the illegal Ian Smith rCgime as
an effective way of terminating its hostile acts against
my country.

vote, in accordance with the provisions of Article 31
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.
8. I invite the representative of Zambia to take a place
at the Council table, and the representatives of South
Africa and Mauritania to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber, on the
understanding that they will be invited to take a place
at the Council table whenever they wish to address the
Council.

14. With specific regard to South Africa, on 12 October 1971, the Security Council considered South
African aggression against Zambia and unanimously
adopted resolution 300 (1971), in which the Council
called upon South Africa to respect fully the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Zambia. Furthermore, the Council declared that
“in the event of South Africa violating the sovereignty or territorial integrity of Zambia, the Security
Council will meet again to examine the situation
further in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter.”

9. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The first speaker is the representative of Zambia,
on whom I now call.

15. This is not the first time this year that the Council
has considered the question of South African aggression against a sovereign and independent African
country. Only a few months ago the Council considered
South African aggression against the People’s Republic
of Angola.

10. Mr. MWALE (Zambia): Mr. President, allow
me first of all to express the gratitude of my delegation
to you and to all the other members of the Security
Council for having promptly acceded to our request for
this meeting to consider the numerous acts of aggression committed against my country by the racist
minority r&me of South Africa. I also take this
opportunity to congratulate you on your assumption
of the high office of President of the Council for the
month of July. My delegation looks forward to fruitful
co-operation with you, as indeed with the other
members of the Security Council, within the spirit of
the cordial relations existing between your country
and Zambia. Permit me also to convey to you and your
colleagues on the Council the greetings and best
wishes of my President, Mr. Kenneth David Kaunda.

16. It is obvious, therefore, that the existence of
white minority and racist rCgimes in southern Africa
constitutes a grave threat to the peace and security
of the independent African countries of the region.
Such a situation has implications for Africa in particular
and for international peace and security in general.
17. I need not remind the Council that those of us
who are constant victims of the acts of aggression
perpetrated by the white minority rCgimes have a
duty to defend ourselves. We also reserve the right to
call upon our friends to assist us. But, because of
our abiding faith in the United Nations and the principles and purposes enshrined in its Charter, we have
once again come to the Security Council-the
organ
primarily responsible for the maintenance of imternational peace and security-so
that we can togethel
determine an appropriate response to the numerous
acts of aggression committed against my country by
the arrogant, belligerent
and intransigent
South
African white minority racist regime which, like the
illegal Ian Smith rkgime in Southern Rhodesia, is
bent on perpetuating the status L~IIO and hence rlzfusing
to heed the demands of the African people and the
international community as a whole for the establishment in the area of a just order and the respect fol
human dignity,

I I. This is a fitting occasion for me to register the
deep thanks and appreciation of the Party, the Government and the people of the Republic of Zambia for
the commitment and tireless efforts of the SecretaryGeneral, in connexion with the liberation of southern
Africa. The Secretary-General has, moreover, shown
a deep understanding of the special problems of frontline countries in southern Africa.
12. This is not the first time that we have brought to
the attention of the Council the acts of aggression
perpetrated against Zambia by South Africa and
other racist white minority rCgimes of southern Africa.
13. In July 1969 the Council considered the aggression
committed against my country by the former colonialist
and Fascist rhgime of Portugal, and, iuter trlirr , strongly
censured the Portuguese aggression and called upon
Portugal to desist forthwith from violating the territorial integrity of Zambia and carrying out unprovoked
raids against it. In January 1973 the Council considered
the aggression committed against my country by the

18. We view with grave seriousness the recent act of
aggression committecl against my country by the racist
white minority rkgime of South Africa. This act of
aggression was committed on 11 July 1976, 30 kila2

metres inside Zambian
territory:
specifically,
at
Sialola, in the Kaunga Mashi area of the Western
Province. This act of aggression committed
inside
Zambia is a blatant and flagrant violation of our
territorial integrity which the Council and the entire
international
community should vigorously condemn.
The immediate target of this violation was a freedomfighter transit camp of the South West Africa People’s
Organization (SWAPO).

in southern Africa, drew up a map in which it claims
the whole of Africa south of the Sahara as part of its
territory for strategic and defence purposes‘? Is it any
wonder that the racist rCgime ‘has recently rammed
through the racist South African parliament a “law”
which authorizes and makes “hot pursuit” of freedom
fighters a State policy and which empowers the rkgime
to cross into any neighbouring country and violate its
sovereignty and territorial integrity? Indeed, is it any
wonder that in utter defiance of the decisions of the
United Nations, of which it is a Member, South Africa
continues with impunity
to collaborate
militarily,
economically and politically with the illegal rCgime of
Ian Smith in the British colony of Southern Rhodesia?

19. The scenario leading to the attack on the camp
is that South African military aircraft, flying from the
south-east to the north-west, hovered over the area
and dropped armed men, who planted land-mines all
around the camp. Subsequently, they attacked and
shelled the camp. The inhabitants of the camp hollowed
out, but some of them were caught in an ambush
and killed. Others died of injuries from land-mines
which exploded as they ran over them. The preliminary
count of casualties of this senseless attack was
22 people dead and 4.5 others injured. The list of
those dead has since risen to 24 and could grow as
additional bodies are discovered. The area to this day
remains infested with live land-mines.

23. As I have already said, South Africa is illegally
occupying Namibia in utter defiance of the United
Nations. More than in any other case, here you have
a direct challenge to the authority
of the United
Nations by one of its own Members. South Africa
cannot escape responsibility
for the deteriorating
situation in Namibia and in the whole of southern
Africa. Moreover, its designs on the independent
countries in the region, including all those south of
the Sahara, show that the rCgime is also expansionist
in nature.

20. This diabolical act of aggression by South Africa
demonstrates the lack of consideration and respect
for human life on the part of the white minority racist
r&gimes of southern Africa. But this act is condemnable
for two other specific ‘,reasons. First, it is an act
perpetrated in blatant violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of my country. Needless to say,
this is a direct contravention of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations. Secondly, the
attack was directed at a SWAP0 freedom-fighter
camp. I need not remind the Council, in this regard,
that South African occupation of Namibia is itself
illegal. Therefore, it is cruel and totally without
justification
for the South African rCgime to attack
Namibians fighting to liberate their country from the
illegal occupation rCgime, which is flouting with
impunity the authority of the United Nations.

24. The central issue, therefore, is black majority
rule in Namibia and Zimbabwe, and the destruction
of upcrr/heid in South Africa. As long as the white
minority racist rCgimes continue to exist in the region,
the international
community
will witness repeated
acts of aggression by these rkgimes against independent
African countries, such as the one my country was
subjected to on 11 July 1976. Indeed, as long as
the white minority racist rCgimes continue to exist in
the region, peace and security in southern Africa
will remain precarious, and internjtional
peace and
security will be threatened.
25. So the chalIenge before the United Nations-and
in particular the Security Council, which has the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security-is
to take decisive measures
to hasten progress towards majority rule in southern
Africa. Failure by the international
community to act
decisively can only lead to intensification
of the racial
conflagration in the region, which in fact has already
started.

21. Indeed, the cruelty of the racist South African
rkgime was recently blatantly demonstrated by the
savage and shocking massacre of innocent black
people, including women and, children, in Soweto and
other African townships in South Africa itself. That
massacre, which surpasses the horrors of Sharpeville,
should, together with the general aggressive and
belligerent nature ‘of the South African rkgime, as
evidenced by its wanton attacks against my country,
serve notice on the international community as to the
extent to which racist South Africa and the illegal
tninority rCgime in Southern Rhodesia are prepared
to go to defend their reign of terror. It is a fact that
these racist r&gives have embarked on genocide
against the black man in southern Africa in order to
preserve the region for themselves.

26. Let me emphasize here that the South African
aggression committed
against Zambia on 11 July
was not an isolated incident, but was part of a series
of acts of aggression to which we have been subjected
since our independence 12 years ago. Because of our
geopolitical position, and because of our principIes and
our commitment
to the liberation of southern Africa,
we have been and remain the target of hostile acts
by South Africa. Suffice it to say that this year alone
we have been subjected to no less than 14 provocative
acts perpetrated by South Africa. These are as follows:

22. Is it any wonder that South Africa, in its determination to perpetuate its evil system of apartheid
3

(1) On 19 January 1976, a South African
craft twice violated o& airspace at Kazungula;

the illegal Ian Smith rkgime in Southern Rhadesia,
has deployed air and infantry commando forces along
the Caprivi Strip and Kazungula borders with Zambia.
These commandos have not only posed a real danger
to the lives of those living closely behind the Zambian
borders but have also caused havoc and created terror
by actually crossing over our border and planting
anti-personnel and anti-vehicle land-mines which have
taken a heavy toll in human life and property.

air-

(2) On 14 February, a South African helicopter
violated our airspace at Katombola;
(3)’ On 11 March, a South African anti-personnel
mine went off, injuring several herds of cattle at
Likonda Village in Sesheke district;
(4) On 12 March, six South African soldiers
crossed the border at Katima Mulilo and defaced a
border sign by writing and drawing skeletons on it;

28. The same situation obtains on the border between
Southern Rhodesia and Mozambique.
The illegal
rCgime of Ian Smith has wantonly bombed certain
places in the sister Republic of Moiambique.

(5) On 1 May, an innocent Zambian civilian
woman at Imusho had her foot blown off by an antipersonnel mine planted by South African agents;

29. In addition to the acts of aggression I have just
cited, the Council will wish to know that we in Zambia
have irrefutable evidence that for a long time South
Africa has been interfering in our internal affairs.
The racist rCgime of South Africa has, in fact, trained,
financed and armed certain dissident elements in
Zambia. Among the agents used by South Africa
was William Chipango, who together with some of
his henchmen, was recently sentenced to (death,
having been convicted of treason by our courts of
law. Chipango was paid millions of dollars by South
Africa, with the express objective of subverting the
Zambian Government.
To achieve this s.inister
objective, Chipango was to recruit-and
he did
recruit-a number of collaborators VGho subsequently
received military training in South Africa, in Namibia,
in the then Fascist Portuguese-ruled
Angola, and in
Southern Rhodesia. These dissidents were trainled by
South African racists in sabotage, espionage and
subversion.

(6) On 3 May, a military vehicle was damaged
beyond repair when it hit an anti-tank land-mine
planted by South African agents at Imusho;
(7) On 14 May, houses were damaged when
South African troops fired arms and guided antitank missiles from armoured cars at Sesheke Boma;
(8) On 28 May, South African troops fired
arms at Sesheke Borna, causing serious damage to
property;
(9) On 14 June, a Zambian Government Roads
Branch Office was damaged when South African
troops fired mortars and guided missiles. On the
same day, a South African aircraft violated our
airspace at Sesheke Boma. Again at Sesheke Boma,
on the same day, a nine-year-old girl by the name
of Nalishebo Ilukela was hit by South African armed
forces with a bullet, which went through her leg;

30. One of William
Chipango’s accomplices was
Bratson Mushala, a Zambian dissident who was
responsible for the recruiting and training of Zambian
recruits in the then Fascist Portuguese Angola.
Mushala went to South Africa from Angola with 23 men
armed with sophisticated weapons to lead an attack on
Zambia. He entered Zambia, through the Senanga
district in the Western Province, from Namibia near
.the end of 1975. Our law-enforcement
officers arc
currently searching for Mushala and his gang, who
are terrorizing our people. They have committed
numerous murders and destroyed and stolen property.

(10) On 16 June, a Land Rover hjt a South
African land-mine, killing one soldier and seriously
injuring three others at Sesheke;
(11) On 20 June, South African troops again
shelled Katima Mulilo, causing serious damage to
property;
(12) On 7 July, six persons were seriously
injured when a Land Rover in which they were
travelling hit a land-mine planted by South African
agents at Sinjembela;

31. All these activities by South Africa are designed
to change our policy with regard to the liberation of
southern Africa. They are intended 10 put an end to
our support for the liberation
movements, which
are waging a heroic struggle for the freedom and
independence of their countries.

(13) On 8 July, one Zambian was killed and two
severely injured when a Land Rover in which they
were travelling was wrecked by a land-mine planted
by South African agents at Sinjembela;
(14) Then there was the aggression of 11 July,
which was the most serious of them all.

32. South Africa hopes that, as a result of these
acts of aggression and interference in our internal
affairs, Zambia w&abandon
SWAP0
and other
liberation moveme&
of southern Africa and sacrifice
their just cause at the altar of expediency.

27. The Council may wish to know that the white
racist rCgime of South Africa, in collaboration
with
4

33. I wish to state categorically that these acts of aggression have only made us more united and more
resolute in our support for the liberation movements
and their just cause. We shall support them to the
end, for we believe in the legitimacy of their cause.
We shall not fail them nor abandon them, for we also
know that their struggle is in accordance with the
United Nations and its resolutions. These liberation
movements are fighting for the inalienable right of
their peoples to self-determination
and independence.
Moreover, we in Zambia realize that we shall enjoy
genuine peace and security only when we have free
and independent
neighbours around us. We cannot
co-exist with racist white minority rkgimes.

38. The Security Council can ill afford to be aloof
in the unfolding -political drama in southern Africa.
Conscious of its responsibilities
under the Charter,
the Council must demonstrate its full support for the
just cause of the oppressed people of southern Africa,
Such support must include concrete action by the
Council totally to isolate the white racist minority
regimes of southern Africa, which are in fact merchants
of death and destruction. The support must also be
reflected in the Council’s sensitivity to the plight of
the front-line
independent
African
countries in
southern Africa. In rendering all possible support’to
the liberation movements, Zambia and other front-line
States are in fact assuming the burden that should
equally be the responsibility
of the international
community as a whole.

34. I take pride in stating here publicly that Zambia
will continue
to render every possible form of
assistance to the people of Namibia and their national
liberation movement, SWAPO.

39. In the specific case before it, the Council vust
condemn in the strongest terms South Africa’s wanton
aggression against Zambia and the senseless, savage
and cold-blooded
murder of innocent people. The
Council must also demand. that the racist rkgime of
South Africa henceforth respect the sovereignty and
territorial
integrity of Zambia, as well as those of
other front-line States. Moreover, the Council should
declare in no uncertain terms that South Africa should
relinquish forthwith its illegal hold on Namibia, and
that peace and security in southern Africa are
inextricably linked with the liberation of the region.
In this regard, the Council must, therefore, express
its unqualified support for SWAP0 and for the other
liberation movements in southern Africa.

35. South Africa has demonstrated that it does not
want a peaceful settlement of the Namibian problem;
the so-called
constitutional
talks being held in
Windhoek, Namibia, are being conducted by its handpicked stooges and puppets. These talks are a smokescreen to cover the diabolic intentions of the South
African rCgime to legitimize
the fragmentation
of
Namibia on thq basis of its policy of bantustanization.
South Africa has blatantly ignored numerous Security
Council resolutions on Namibia. Indeed, last January
[r’esolufion 385 (1976)], the Council gave South Africa
until 31 August 1976 solemnly to declare its intention
to withdraw from Namibia
and to agree to the
convening of a national election in the Territory under
United Nations supervision and control. However,
instead of complying with this important resolution,
South Africa has increased its oppressive rule over
Namibia,
has conducted wholesale massacres of
Namibians,
and has also stepped up its tinwarranted
and wanton aggression against Zambia, including the
violation of its airspace and territorial integrity. In
cornF ting these acts of aggression, South Africa
hay used the international Territory of Namibia as a
ba$e.

40. In making these demands, I wish again to remind
the Council of its resolution 300 (1971), to which
1 referred at the beginning of this statement, South
Africa has again violated the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of my country. In resolution 300 (l971),
specifically in pa&graph 3, the Council declared that
it would examine any recurrence of such hostile South
African acts against Zambia in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter. This is the moment
for the Council to honour its pledge. 1 now appeal
to the Security Council to take stern and effective
measures within its jurisdiction
against South Africa.

36. Since South Africa is not prepared to promote
genuine independence in Namibia, the rightful owners
of the Territory have no alternative but to struggle
using all means at their disposal. They have the right
to struggle for what is theirs. Those who have fled
their country in order to promote the struggle need
transit facilities. It would be inhuman of us if we did
not assist the victims of such racial cruelty.

41. I trust the Council will live up to its responsibilities.
1 hope to return home with a clear and
sound Security Council message of solidarity with the
people of Zambia and, indeed, with the people of
other front-line States who continue to make tremendous sacrifices in th,e interest of the liberation of
southern Africa, a responsibility
of the entire international community. The solidarity of the Council, which
we hope will be reflected in the unanimous adoption
of a resolution containing all our demands, would be
a source of great encouragement
to us. Everything
must be done to isolate South Africa and other forces
of evil in southern Africa. Indeed, everything must be
done to speed up the liberatibn
of Namibia and
Zimbabwe as dell as the destruction of the evil policy
of trpcrr*thcitl, so ruthlessly practised by the South
African white minority rkgime.

37. We in Zambia have an obligation to the oppressed
Namibians to offer these facilities. Incidents such as
the bombing of a transit camp on our soil on 1I July
and the cold-blooded murder of Namibian patriots will
not halt the struggle. The struggle will be stopped only
by the total and unconditional
withdrawal of South
Africa from Namibia and the accession of the Territory
to independence
as a single entity on the basis of
miority
rule.
5

--

_.

48. At the outset I wish to state that the South A:Frican
,
Government
had no knowledge of an attack on a
Zambian village at Sialola on 11 July 1976. The South
African Government at no time authorized and would
not authorize attacks on Zambian villages. It is lin our
interest to endeavour to maintain friendly relations
with all the States of southern Africa, including
Zambia. The interests of the States of our region
continue to lie in the direction of endeavouring to
settle their differences peacefully and bilaterally.

42. The PRESIDENT:
1 wish to assure the Foreign
Minister of Zambia that I will convey to the SecretaryGeneral his expression of appreciation for the close
attention with which the Secretary-Genera1 is following
the problems of southern Africa and his dedication
to carrying out the main purposes and principles of the
Charter. 1 would like to add that the Secretary-General
sincerely regrets not being here with us today. His
schedule, which was prepared a year in advance,
has taken him to Geneva to deal with important work
of the Organization. 1 shall certainly keep him informed
of the Council’s deliberations.

49. The representative of Zambia has referred to a
number of other incidents. There have indeed been a
number of incidents on both sides of the border in
the past. The South African Government is fully aware
of them, and, for their part, the South African
authorities have had occasion to bring a number of
infringements by Zambian nationals to the attention
of the Zambian Government-for
example, incidents
which occurred on 19 and 23 June and 3 August 1974;
and on 21 April, 14 May and 14 June 1976. Our
records show that, in addition, a nuinber of border
violations have occurred in respect of which we have
not made representations. We did make representations in regard to the incidents I have just listed, as
I am sure the Foreign Minister of Zambia would be
able to confirm. Incidents in respect of which we have
not made representations, which involved violence,
occurred on 26 January, 16 and 18 March, 8 and
14 April, 26 June, 18 July, 6 and 9 September 1975
and 3 June 1976. Moreover,
violence has been
committed by hostile elements which enjoy refuge in
Zambia. These elements have crossed the border on
numerous occasions, killing innocent inhabitants uf
South West Africa, both black and white.

43. I’ should now like to fulfil a pleasant duty and
respectfully extend a warm welcome to the Foreign
Minister
of the United
Republic
of Tanzania,
Mr. lbrahim Kaduma, who is honouring the deliberations of the Council at this meeting with his presence.
44. 1 wish to inform the Council that 1 have received
a letter dated 26 July 1976 from the Acting President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
which
reads:
“The Security Council is about to consider the
complaint by the Republic of Zambia concerning the
repeated acts of aggression committed against the
Republic of Zambia
by South Africa which
apparently used for this purpose the territory of
Namibia.
“I wish to convey to you the desire of the United
Nations Council for Namibia to participate in this
debate, without right to vote, and to be represented
by a delegation headed by myself as Acting President
and including the representatives of Botswana and
Yugoslavia.”

50. Complaints about border violations on both sides
have lately been handled by notes exchanged between
the two Governments.
That is a commendable
procedure which enables investigation
of alleged
incidents to take place and steps to be taken to
prevent recurrences.

45. It may be recalled that on previous occasions the
Council has extended invitations to representatives of
the United Nations Council for Namibia, most recently
at its 1902nd meeting, on 29 March. Accordingly,
if there is no objection, I propose that the Council
extend an invitation, in accordance with rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure, to the Acting
President and the other mentioned members of the
United Nations Council for Namibia.

51. However, in the case of the alleged incident ut
Sialola, the South African Government learned of the
events that are said to have taken place there h!
way of reports in the press. My Government took the
initiative of trying to establish the facts. On Sunday,
18 July, the South African Department of Foreign
Affairs dispatched a message to the Zambii8n
Government seeking particulars of the incident. There
was no reply.

46. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of South Africa. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

52. For its part, South Africa is willing to discuss the
situation with Zambia, with a view to establishing the
facts and, on that basis, taking any further joint steps
which might seem appropriate. South Africa hs.s at all
times been willing to do this.

47. Mr. BOTHA (South Africa): Mr. President, may
1 congratulate you on your assumption of the important
and responsible position of President of the Security
Council for the month of July.

53. During his statement the representative of Zamhiit
referred to a group operating, under one Mush& and.
if I understood him correctly, he alleged that the
6

group was encouraged or assisted by the South
African Government to act against Zambia.
54. It is true that we know of Mushala.
as we know them, are briefly as follows.

him. All he was offered was a place to reside. He
was neither assisted with his plans against Zambia
nor permitted to act against Zambia from South African
or South West African territory.

The facts,

60. The thrust of the allegation is that South Africa
countenances, and in this case has countenanced, the
mounting of a campaign of subversion and terrorism
against another African country. The representative of
Zambia should know that such activities do not accord
with the policies of the South African Government.
As is known, there are numerous dissident elements
and groups that operate inside and outside Africa for
the overthrow of established Governments. I think
I must be frank about this today: these dissident
groups appeal to other Governments inside and outside
Africa for assistance in the subversion of their established Governments. I believe that it is my duty to
state here in the Council today-although
I am
somewhat hesitant about doing so-that we have in
the recent past been approached by no less than
II dissident African groups from 11 different African
countries with requests for assistance to subvert and
overthrow the Governments of the countries concerned. Requests of that kind have not been limited,
may I add, to the African continent. In not one single
case-and I must emphasize this-have we given any
consideration to these requests. It is, moreover, firm
South African policy not to render assistance of any
nature to elements designed to commit subversion
against their Governments.

55. On Sunday, 17 November
1974, an aircraft
arrived at Rundu in Ravango in the north of South
West Africa, with Mushala and 67 of his followers,
including women and children,
aboard. No prior
notification of the aircraft’s arrival had been received.
Mushala is a Zambian. He came from the north.
He presented his group as refugees and asked for
asyIum. The authorities were thus confronted with a
difficult situation. After consideration
of the alternatives, it was decided to grant asylum to the group
for humanitarian
reasons, but it was made clear to
them that the asylum was conditional-the
condition
being that in no circumstances would they undertake,
nor would they be allowed to undertake, any subversive activities against Zambia.
it became doubtful whether
56, Subsequently,
Mushala would abide by his undertakings. We doubted
his sincerity. Consequently, he was separated from his
followers, and both he and they were then restricted
to two camps at different locations. Attempts were
made to keep them occupied by offering them work.
These attempts were unsuccessful. They did not want
to work. For example, a number of Mushala’s
followers agreed to assist with guard duties at a local
road construction project. However, they proved to
be so inefficient that we had to return them to the
main group within a short space of time.

61. Can there be any doubt that South Africa desires
peace in Africa, and in particular in southern Africa’?
No one can argue this point, really. An escalation of
conflict and strife would be catastrophic for all of
us. It would hurt all of us badly.

57. On 29 November
1975, following renewed
assurances from Mushala that he would comply with
the initial conditions, he was allowed to return to the
camp where the rest of his people were confined.
During the night of 7 to 8 December, Mushala and
a number of his followers absconded, after raiding a
storeroom in the vicinity. Efforts to track them down
failed, as rain had obliterated their tracks.

62. There seems to be a predisposition automatically
to lay at South Africa’s door responsibility for any
and every incident in southern Africa, almost-if
I may say so-as if by reflex. This is not a legitimate
reflex in regard to a region which has been plagued
by turmoil and guerrilla attacks for years; where
factions, rival movements,
private armies and
maurauding bands are rife. South Africa is not the
initiator or instigator or supporter of this regional
unrest. Zambia also has not been immune to it.
Zambia also has been ,compelled by circumstances
known to be completely unrelated to South Africa to
take emergency action. And quite recently there have
been reports of internecine struggles waged by
movements which are guests in Zambia, with serious
implications for Zambia and other countries of the
region.

58. I wish to state very clearly here today that
Mushala is no friend of the South African Government,
and neither is the South African Government a friend
of Mushala’s.
Mushala was granted asylum for
humanitarian reasons, He is a disreputable character
who became a nuisance and an embarrassment to US.
I admit that. He is not welcome, and should he again
attempt to cross the border he and his followers would
be arrested and banded over to the Zambian
authorities.
59. Mushala’s background and his activities are well
known to Zambia,indeed,
better known to the representative of Zambia than to me. His apparently
immutable hostility to the Zambian Government is not
of South African origin, Of that I can assure the
Council, Far from encouraging Mushala in his activities
and hostility towards Zambia, South Africa restrained

63. It is the unsettled nature of the situation in
southern Africa which itself is to blame for developments such as those that have given rise to this discussion. It is the toleration in the region of armed
groups which owe allegiance to no one and which
frequently act on their own initiative, without regard
7

future peace. We remain hopeful indeed that, despite
the inhibitions and prejudices of the peoples and
nations involved, peaceful solutions to the problems
of southern Africa as a whole are indeed attainable,
however remote they may sometimes seelm. We
remain hopeful that peace is attainable. We are
appreciative that the United States of America has
recently renewed its identification with this hope and
taken a positive initiative in this direction. We are
realistically alive to the considerable obstacles along
that path, but in principle we are willing to explore it,
We now need a bold willingness on the part of those
directly concerned in southern Africa and elsewhere
to trust one another, for trust is the essential but
elusive ingredient in the southern African si’tuation.
We cannot at this particular time afford acrimony.
Acrimony does not help to build confidence. The real
issue is peace; and it is not merely desirable; :itis not
merely important; it is an overriding necessity that the
countries of southern Africa, with the encoura\gement
of the outside world, should come together to examine
the underlying issues,not simply discussthe symptoms
of dispute, and conflict, and to lay the foundations
of permanent harmony in the area.

to the interests of the sovereign States of the region
or of the region as a whole, which is at the root of
the trouble. Surely what the area needs is a solution
wider in scope than the issues of shooting incidents
and aggravations, a solution which promises hope of
stability, of permanence, not only for one boundary
or locality but also for the whole of southern Africa.
Only in such a way can region-wide tensions and
suspicionsbe allayed. South Africa subscribes to such
a recipe for peace; we are ready to discuss it with
other countries concerned. We would wish to think
that all the other countries of the region are willing
to examine together, seriously and responsibly, the
very ‘real possibilities for promoting a condition of
lasting peace.
64. We are as concerned as anybody to find a way
to eliminate the friction which must inevitably be
generated by the sort of situation which I have
described.
65. As regards the situation in South West Africa,
substantial progress has been made by the Constitutional Conference. The Conference has already
achieved agreement on many matters which would
have been considered impossible a short while ago.
What was anathema yesterday can become acceptable
tomorrow-but not in an atmosphere of tension and
terror and not under threat. Further progress requires
an atmosphere of understanding.

68. I appeal to the Council not to mete out condemnations, criticisms and pejoratives to South Africa.
The Council would do well to weigh the consequences
of such an approach. Perhaps the Council is not
sufficiently aware of its counter-productive effect.
What is needed how in southern Africa is encouragement for efforts and successes in moving away
from old and outmoded attitudes to more constructive
conceptions which would result in fruitful co-operation
and the dissipation of the fear of domination of one
nation or group by another. I urge the Council members to recognize that the problems that have to be
solved in southern Africa are of a far greater order than
those experienced in many of their own counttriesand
to consider these problems with tolerance and realism.
We need conciliation; we do not need vituperation.
We needcommunication; we do not needexacerbation.

66. ‘On the delicate issue of the composition of the
Constitutional Conference, I should like to reiterate
what my Prime Minister said recently in the South
African Parliament. He stated:
“They themselves decided on a certain modus
That ~notlus opmdi
is theirs. If they
want to bring in other people-whether I like it or
whether I do not like it-it is their business. I am
not going to interfere with that.”

opmrndi.

On the subject of the status of South West Africa,
the South African Prime Minister said:

69. Let us not allow our emotions to march us into
a war no one can’win. Let us rather allow reason and
realism and confidence in each other’s good faith IO
win a future for all of us. Peace can be won without
conquering anyone. We can ,achieve the peace we
seek, but we can achieve it only if all of us once and
for all firmly accept that the devastation of war is the
one alternative which not one of us can afforcl.

“South West Africa has a particular international
character. Whatever our standpoint on the Mandate
may be, and however we may differ in regard to it,
the fact remains that South West Africa has a
particular international character and that one may
not ignore this.”
He added:

70. The PRESIDENT: The next, speaker is the
representative of Mauritania. I invite him ta1 take a
place at the Council ttible and to make his statement.

“There is one thing I want to make very clear here
today. If those leaders have worked out a future for
themselves, even if I do not like the-way in which
they have done so, I shall accept it, for it is their
land and their future.”

71. Mr. EL HASSEN (Mauritania) finteupretnrion
from French): The problem before the Council has,
been presented clearly, precisely and pertinently by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Zambia this afternoon. Thus, in speaking in this debate
I shall not be putting new facts or new clarifications

67. Too much is at stake for too many people in
southern Africa to let an oppdrtunity passfor achieving
8

before the Council. As Chairman of the Group of
African States in the United Nations, I should merely
like to demonstrate to the Council the concern of the
Organization
of African Unity over the aggression
committed by the racist regime of South Africa against
an African State.

Pretoria rdgime. All of those acts of aggression were
committed from Namibia, an international Territory
the occupation of which by South Africa has been
repeatedly condemned and deemed illegal by the
Council.
79. Under the pretext of the right of “hot pursuit”
which some States are trying t,o impose on the rest of
the international
community,
and particularly
on
Africa, the Pretoria regime is arrogating to itself the
right to administer justice by violating the territorial
integrity of neighbouring States and by sowing terror,
destruction and death in the countries bordering on
Namibia.

72. For the Security Council and the international
community
the month of July has been particularly
eventful., Africa, for its part, was unfortunately
not sheltered from these dramatic events, which
continue to threaten the very existence of its States.
73, The Council’s heated debates on these events
bear eloquent testimony to this. Scarcely two weeks
ago the Council was seized of a complaint regarding
the violation by Israel of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of an African State-Uganda.
Whatever the motivation for this aggression and the justifications given for it, it is quite obvious that it was
an extremely dangerous act which could have dramatic
repercussions on international
relations,

80. The assistance Zambia gives to SWAP0 and other
liberation movements-assistance
which South Africa
cites to justify its aggression-is
nevertheless in
accordance with the numerous decisions and recommendations
adopted by the United Nations, and
particularly
by the Security Council. The United
Nations decisions are clear on this subject: not ,only
have they recognized the legitimacy of the struggle
of the Namibian people, .but they have also called
upon all States to grant their material and moral
support to that people. The Republic of Zambia, an
African country which is especially concerned by
events and which is a Member of the United Nations’,
could not but subscribe to those decisions by giving
active support to the liberation movements that are
struggling against occupation and against a regime
whose inhuman policy is a continued affront to the
world’s conscience.

74. The Council adjourned or, rather, suspended its
deliberations
without any measure being taken to
prevent a repetition
of such acts of terrorism-a
terrorism which is particularly dangerous because it is
premeditated and carried out by an organized authority
which is a Member of the United Nations.
75. Today the Council has before it a practically
identical complaint. This time it has to do with a clear
act of aggression committed
on 11 July by South
Africa against the Republic of Zambia. True, the
representative of South Africa has just affirmed before
the Council that he had no knowledge of this event.
This is a tactic that is fairly well known to the
Council, a tactic practised by the supporters of trptrrtheid and by the Tel Aviv authorities,
which consists
either of purely and simply denying the existence of
events, or of diverting the attention of the Council
from its immediate and serious responsibilities.

81. By transforming the airports of Katima and
Pacha and the Caprivi Strip into permanent bases for
aggression against Zambia and neighbouring African
countries, South Africa has demonstrated once again
the contradictory policies that it pursues.
82. The occupation of Namibia and the segregation
that South Africa has established as a State system
can only be continued at the price of the annihilation
of the liberation movements, and that is what really
motivates South Africa’s policy of intimidation
and
aggression. Such behaviour on its part is contrary not
only to international law and morality but also to
decisions adopted by the Security Council. We believe
that the Council cannot give its endorsement to such
action.

76. We all know that a camp sheltering representatives of SWAP0 was attacked by helicopters, that
there were dead, that there was rnaterial damage and
destruction;
we can at least wonder where this
phantom which attacked SWAP0 came from, and
why it should bear any animosity to SWAP0 when the
latter is located in Zambia, an African territory and
country which is offering SWAP0 its hospitality.

83. On 12 October 1971, in deciding on the complaint
submitted by Zambia, the Council adopted resolution
300 (i971), in which it demanded that South Africa
cease all attacks against the Republic of Zambia; the
Council also decided to reconvene should another
act of aggression be committed by South Africa
&jnst Zambia. The I4 acts of violation of sovereignty
and territorial integrity commit’ted against Zambia by
South Africa bear witness, as if there were any further
need, to the lack of interest and respect which South
Africa has always had for Council decisions.

77. In any event, on II July the village of Sialola,
situated 30 kilometres within Zambian territory, was
attacked and bombed by the South African air force.
That attack alone led to more than 24 dead and
45 wounded, according to still provisional figures.
78. We should emphasize
that this violation Of
Zambian territory was preceded, as was recalled by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia, by I3 acts
of tiggression perpetrated since I January 1976 by the
9

Nations Council for Namibia,
I now call.

84. It would be superfluous, furthermore,
to enter
into a discussion of the developments concerning the
less-then-praiseworthy attitude which South Africa has
always taken towards decisions of the Security
Council,
the United Nations and the international
community.

Mr. Jaipal, on whom

91. Mr. JAIPAL (Acting President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia): Mr. President, on behalf
of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
may
I express to you and to the members of the Security
Council our gratitude for this opportunity to address
the Council.

85. South Africa’s presence in Namibia, the Soweto
and Sharpeville
massacres, and the many acts of
aggression committed against neighbouring States are
all acts which lay bare the true nature of the Pretoria
regime. Hence it ‘is not surprising that South Africa
should commit another act of aggression against
Zambia, sowing death and destruction in a country
which has done everything to ensure that the spirit
and letter of the Lusaka Declaration*
should be
respected, both by South Africa and by the African
States.

92. The item before the Council today has p;articular
relevance to Namibia and its people, since once again
the Territory has been used by South Africa as a
springboard for a military assault against a ,peaceful
village community in Zambia.
93. From what dtrection did these South African
forces come? South Africa has no common border
with Zambia. But it is well known that South African
troops have been sent to Namibia
in increasing
numbers, in flagrant defiance of the resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council. What
are these troops doing in Namibia? The rertolulions
of the Assembly and the Council have determined that
the South African presence in Namibia is illlegal and
have demanded the withdrawal of the South African
administration
from Namibia.
The forces of the
Pretoria regime are in Namibia evidently to carry out
attacks against the neighbouring African counltries and
to intimidate them in pursuance of its policy of racist
and colonialist exploitation.

86. In this connexion, Zambia has explored all
possible peaceful channels to ensure the peaceful
settlement of the problems of southern Africa, partictilarly
the Namibian
problem,
without useless
bloodshed. But the Pretoria racists and the Tel Aviv
Zionists, in order to survive, must constantly resort
to racism and the policy of depopulation
of the
African and Arab territories which they occupy. In
the face of this intransigent and obstructive attitude
on the part of South Africa, the Security Council
must take firm measures concerning the acts of
aggression committed
by the Pretoria authorities
against neighbouring African States.

94. The participation
n this debate of the Foreign
Minister of Zambia u derlines the gravity of the
situation.
His eloqueq I t statement
has profound
implications not only for Namibia. Zambia is in the
front line of a struggle which reverberates throughout
Africa. The threats to the territorial integrity ofZambia
cannot but intensify the concern of the international
community, because in fact they constitute also wider
threats to international peace and security.

87. If, as in the case of the Ugandan complaint,
Zambia’s
complaint were not to culminate
in an
unequivocal
decision of the Council, Africa would
rightly wonder whether recourse to violence may not
be the only possible way of solving international
conflicts. Such an attitude on the part of the Council
would, beyond a doubt, be contrary to the most
relevant
provisions of the Charter,
and would
eventually, or in the not-too-distant future, threaten
the ‘very existence of the United Nations.

95. For some time now the Council for Namibia has
been made aware of the increasing militarization
of
Namibia by South Africa, whose militaristic
policies
have been the source of ominous developments in that
region. In Namibia, the illegal South African administration has increasingly used its troops to perpetuate
acts of brutality and oppression against the Namibian
people. In southern Africa-first
in Angola and now ln
Zambia-the
forces of the Pretoria regime Irave
mounted acts of aggression from the internntiontil
Territory of Namibia.

But we are convinced that the Council cannot
and will not adopt such an attitude. Once again, the
attention of Africa and the international
community
is focused on the Council. Peace and security, not
only in Africa but elsewhere in the world, would be
endangered if the disappointment recorded during the
meetings of the Security Council on the Ugandan
complaint were once again to manifest itself at the
current meetings.

88.

89. We are convinced, however, that the wisdom
which has always animated the work of the Council
will ultimately prevail, in the interest of the United
Nations and in the interests of peace and justice in
the world.

96. The Council for Namibia was established by the
General Assembly as the legal administering authority’
of Namibia, and it is fully committed to the goal of
independence and self-determination
for the Namibian
people. The presence of the South African administnttion in Namibia and the militarisation
of that Territory
are incompatible
with the commitments
of South
Africa as a State Member of the United Nations.

90. The PRESIDENT:
The next name in my list of
speakers is that of the Acting President of the United
10

Furthermore,
they also contribute to the aggravation
of tensions and threats to international
peace and
security in that area.
97. The attack against a peaceful rural community,
30 kilometres
deep inside Zambian territory, is an
alarming intensification
of South Africa’s policy of
aggression.
98. The Security Council should not remain indifferent to the disclosures made by the Foreign
Minister of Zambia of South African acts of aggression which are in total violation of the Charter and the
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly.
99, In the light of the Pretoria regime’s ruthless
repression of the African people of Namibia and of its
acts of aggression against Zambia, it is clear to the
Council for Namibia that the so-called constitutional
talks are nothing but manoeuvres to perpetuate South
Africa’s illegal presence in Namibia and its racist
exploitation
of the people of Namibia.
100. The United Nations
Council for Namibia
vigorously condemns the aggression of South Africa
against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Zambia
and considers that the Security Council
should, among other things, demand the withdrawal
of the racist Pretoria rCgime from Namibia without
any further delay.
101. The PRESIDENT:
Since the list of speakers
has now been exhausted, I now call on the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Zambia to speak in exercise of
his right of reply.
102. Mr. MWALE
(Zambia): If my delegation has
asked to speak, it is merely to make a few observations. We do have the right, or rather we do ask for
the right, to speak at a later stage perhaps, if need be,
in detail. However, for the moment, I should like only
to make a few observations as follows.
103. First of all, the representative of South Africa
in his statement mentioned that there have been
border violations
by Zambia. I want to make it
abundantly clear that this is a gross fabrication. As
far as Zambia is concerned, Zambia has not violated
any space of South Africa. Technically,
Zambia
borders on Namibia;
technically,
the presence of
South Africa in Namibia is illegal, which means that
the acts of aggression by South Africa emanating
from Namibia are themselves illegal and deserving of
condemnation.
104. The representative of South Africa has denied
that South Africa had any knowledge of these attacks,

in particular the attack of 11 July. This comes to us
as a surprise. We did not expect them to say that
they had no knowledge, because if South Africa did
not know about these acts, then it is obvious that they
have lost control of their troops that are illegally in
Namibia.
105. I want to appeal to the Council not to take this
statement seriously and not to let it be used to dissuade
the Council from considering what is before it, namely
a case of a complaint from the Republic of Zambia,
fully documented and with specific dates.
106. The representative of South Africa has talked
about peaceful moves in southern Africa. Zambia
should be the one to point out that we have gone all
the way, we have left no stone unturned on the road
towards a peaceful solution in southern Africa. The
Council is fully aware of the Lusaka Manifestoz,
which is now a document of the United Nations. And
South Africa knows that. We ‘are the ones who have
gone all out to try to find a peaceful Solution, not South
Africa.
107. South Africa talks again about liberation
movements as if they were simply a group of terrorists.
They are not terrorists; these are people who are
fighting for their inalienable right to self-determination.
108. It is the diabolical system of apartheid in South
Africa which is behind all this trouble. Once apnrtheid
is removed from South Africa, the whole of southern
Africa will be a peaceful haven.
109. Finally, I would like again to refer to the
statement that the representative of South Africa has
made in his reference to Mushala. It is now abundantly
clear that South Africa knows about Mushala’s
activities. The representative here has admitted that
South Africa knows about these people. South Africa
received them. South Africa gave them facilities. And
he talks about Mushala having absconded. It is quite
clear that South Africa has been behind this. We have
evidence to that effect.
110. Those are the comments I wished to make. At
a later stage, with the indulgence of the Council, if
need be, Zambia will exercise the right to speak again
in detail.

I Declaration of the Third Conference of Heads of State OI
Government of Non-Aligned Countries,
held at Lusaka from 8 to

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,
New

SE PRbCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
auprbs
des ventes.
New York ou Gentve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in UnitedNations,

New' York

DES NATIONS

sont en vente dam les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Cons&e
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et les agences
a : Nations

dipositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Section
de Ventas,

83-60801-April

1985-2,2()0
