S/2020/721

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 July 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 17 July 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, Inger Andersen,
and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock, in connection with the video-teleconference
on the “The situation in the Middle East (Yemen)”, convened on Wednesday,
15 July 2020. Statements were also delivered by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Yemen, Mohammed Abdullah Al-Hadhrami, and the representatives of Egypt and
Saudi Arabia.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Christoph Heusgen
President of the Security Council

20-09693 (E) 220720 200820

*2009693*

S/2020/721

Annex I
Statement by the Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme, Inger Andersen
The Red Sea environment and its people are currently seriously exposed
to the risk of a massive oil leakage from the FSO SAFER, a floating storage and
offloading unit that is anchored 4.8 nautical miles off Ras Isa, Yemen. The FSO
SAFER contains an estimated 1,148,000 barrels of Marib Light crude oil. Should
the situation get out of control, it will directly affect millions of people in a country
that is already enduring the world’s largest humanitarian emergency. It will destroy
entire ecosystems for decades and extend beyond borders.
However, in this bleak picture, there is one bright spot. This disaster is entirely
preventable — if we act fast. The United Nations possesses the capacity to intervene
and resolve the problem.
Allow me to provide some background. The FSO SAFER has not been
maintained since 2015. Its condition is deteriorating daily, increasing the potential
for an oil spill. If that happens, it will cause an environmental catastrophe, with an
impact on ecosystems and the lives of, potentially, 28 million people who rely on
those ecosystems for their livelihoods. As a consequence, it is not unlikely that it
would also contribute to a deterioration of security in the region, as the resources
upon which the population relies would become polluted, scarce and contested.
The following two scenarios are considered increasingly likely. First, corrosion
and lack of maintenance of the FSO SAFER for an extended period of time leads to
some of the oil leaking into the sea. Secondly, an explosion and fire on board, caused
by accidental ignition of gas accumulated in the cargo tanks, results in a catastrophic
scenario, with massive leakage of most or all of the oil into the sea.
An oil spill or explosion in the Red Sea could have a serious, long-lasting
environmental impact. The Red Sea is one of the most important repositories of
biodiversity on the planet. Its waters support internationally important species,
including marine mammals, sea turtles, and seabirds. The coastal marine environments
of the region consist of arid coastal zones, coastal wetlands, mangroves, seagrass and
coral reefs, which constitute the basis of much of the region’s unique biodiversity,
its fisheries production and its conservation and recreational value. It is estimated
that a total of 28 million people rely on the natural resources of the Red Sea and the
coastal zone for their livelihoods. Beyond the impact on nature, therefore, an oil spill
or an explosion would have a massive impact on the livelihoods and the health of the
people relying on the area’s natural resources, including fisheries.
Independent experts were recently commissioned to model worst-case
scenarios involving an oil spill and explosion from the FSO SAFER. Among the
possible scenarios, the study found that an oil spill at any time of the year would
pose an immense threat to livelihoods. But the worst situation would occur if the oil
spill happened during the period of July to September, given prevailing currents and
winds. The key findings of the modelling project impacts along the following lines.
With regard to fisheries along the Red Sea coast of Yemen, 100 per cent would
be affected in the early days, and the cost could rise to $1.5 billion over the course
of 25 years.
The closure of Al-Hudaydah port for five to six months could result in a
200 per cent increase in fuel prices in Yemen for several months.
Food prices would likely double and traders currently based in Al-Hudaydah
port would need to partially shift their operations to Aden port, which would struggle
to accommodate the additional volume.
2/10

20-09693

S/2020/721

Further atmospheric dispersion modelling completed in 2020, whereby the
entire cargo is consumed by fire between July and September, projects that more than
8.4 million people would be exposed to harmful levels of air pollutants. That model
further projects that 500 square kilometres of agricultural land along the shore in
Yemen would be affected, resulting in a $70 million loss in production, 3.25 million
farmers hit by crop loss and over 8,000 water wells placed at risk of contamination.
The health impacts of hydrocarbons on humans have been well studied
and range from skin irritation to cancer. In the case of an oil spill situation, some
compounds of the hydrocarbons could bioaccumulate in living organisms, such as
shellfish, and could become more concentrated along the food chain. Humans may
become exposed to concentrations of those contaminants in food that could be orders
of magnitude higher than in the contaminated environment. That is particularly
problematic because people who live far away from the oil spill location could be
impacted by consuming food coming from the spill-affected area.
The Government of Yemen has published an assessment on the environmental
risks posed by the FSO SAFER. Modelling of a potential oil spill has also been
undertaken with the Mutual Aid Centre of the Regional Organization for the
Conservation of the Environment of the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden (PERSGA).
Although it is the west coast of Yemen that would be the worst affected by
far, the impact of any oil spill would also quickly extend to neighbouring Red Sea
countries, including Djibouti, Eritrea and Saudi Arabia. An oil spill in the Red Sea
would also affect demand for fish from the entire Red Sea. It would also impact the
movement of the more than 20,000 ships that pass through the Red Sea each year,
potentially crippling one of the busiest commercial routes in the world.
An operational response to any oil spill would need to include containment
and recovery of the oil at sea and a shoreline clean-up and subsequent disposal
of the resulting contaminated material. Even if the response activities were to be
initiated immediately after the oil spill event, it would nonetheless take years for the
ecosystems and the economies to recover. The conflict in Yemen would also impede
efforts to address an environmental emergency in a timely and effective manner.
Without assistance, neither the Government of Yemen nor the neighbouring
countries currently has the capacity to manage and mitigate the consequences of
a massive oil spill and the resulting environmental catastrophe. The international
actors, including those from the private sector, that would typically respond to
such incidents would be reluctant to deploy their personnel and resources to the
conflict zone.
Although PERSGA has prepared a draft regional contingency plan, in our
assessment that plan would need considerable additional support to be tested, and
further developed in order to be implemented in the event of an incident.
In addition, the coronavirus disease crisis has relegated the oil spill issue
to further down the priority list of the States of the region. Preventing the crisis
from intensifying is really the only option to avoid an environmental and human
catastrophe. Despite the difficult operational context, no effort should be spared
to first conduct a technical assessment and initial light repairs. That will provide
independent evidence of the appropriate next steps while gaining additional time.
Given the age and condition to the tanker, it is likely that the safest option will
be to remove the vessel. If this is confirmed by the assessment, it means we will need
to work with the parties to, first, offload the oil from the FSO SAFER; secondly,
tow away the FSO SAFER to a safe location for inspection; and, thirdly, assess and
possibly dismantle the FSO SAFER in an environmentally sound manner. These
20-096933/10

S/2020/721

elements are being discussed at different levels with the various shareholders. The
immediate priority remains the same: assessment and light repairs.
At the same time, we must nonetheless — in tandem with such prevention
efforts — continue to plan for an effective response should an oil spill occur.
The United Nations Environment Programme has been working with the
International Maritime Organization, the United Nations Office for Project Services,
the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and PERSGA to develop a response plan.
If the FSO SAFER leaks, potentially spilling four times more oil into the Red
Sea than the Exxon Valdez oil spill, which took place in Alaska in 1989, with 275,000
barrels of oil spilled, ecosystems and fisheries would be damaged for an extended
period into the future. People who have already been impoverished by conflict
would suffer further health and economic impacts. An environmental crisis could
also exacerbate regional divisions.
Time is running out for us to act in a coordinated manner to prevent a looming
environmental, economic and humanitarian catastrophe. It is therefore imperative
that access be granted to the FSO SAFER to assess and inspect the current state
of the vessel, so that evacuation of the oil can be safely done to prevent such an
environmental and human catastrophe.

4/10

20-09693

S/2020/721

Annex II
Statement by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock
I have briefed the Council 15 times on the FSO SAFER tanker in the last
15 months. Most of those 15 briefings have repeated the same information. With
little concrete progress, there was little new to say until quite recently.
But in May, a leak on the FSO SAFER brought us closer than ever to an
environmental catastrophe. Last week, Ansar Allah authorities confirmed in writing
that they would accept a long-planned United Nations mission to the tanker, which
we hope will take place within the next few weeks.
We understand that Member States are working to finalize funding to pay
for the United Nations mission, which in the first phase will include a technical
assessment and any initial repairs that prove possible. Member States have also been
helpful in using their good offices to advocate in favour of this work.
So this is a good moment to recap where we are with the FSO SAFER and
where, we hope, we are going. There are four issues I should like to update the
Council on today: first, the recent leak onboard; secondly, what a major spill would
mean for local communities; thirdly, what we have been doing about it; and, fourthly,
what will happen next.
Let us start with the incident beginning on 27 May, when seawater began
leaking into the FSO SAFER engine room. It is difficult to know precisely what
caused that leak, as no maintenance has been carried out on the FSO SAFER and
there have been no international visits to it since the conflict in Yemen escalated
nearly six years ago.
Water coming uncontrollably into the engine room could destabilize the FSO
SAFER and potentially sink the entire structure. That would almost certainly lead
to a severe oil spill. As the Council heard from Inger, the FSO SAFER is carrying
1.1 million barrels of oil. That is about four times as much oil as was discharged in
the Exxon Valdez disaster — a spill that the world still talks about 30 years later.
Fortunately, the engine room leak was relatively small, and divers from the
SAFER Exploration and Production Operations Company were able to contain it.
That dangerous work took five days, with divers spending a cumulative 28 hours
underwater. The world owes them a debt of gratitude, and I want to commend them
on their work. But the fix they applied is only temporary, and it is impossible to say
how long it might hold. The world might have a bit more time to solve the larger
problem, but not much.
This brings me to my second point — the impact of a spill. The Council has
just heard from Inger about the appalling environmental consequences for Yemen
and its neighbours. A spill would also be bad news for the Yemeni people, millions
of whom already depend on humanitarian aid after nearly six years of war and now
an unprecedented pandemic.
Independent experts have modelled what a major spill might look like
depending on seasonal conditions and other factors. In every scenario, coastal
communities would be severely affected in Taiz, Al-Hudaydah and Hajjah, mostly in
areas controlled by Ansar Allah authorities.
If a spill were to occur in the next two months, experts project that 1.6 million
Yemenis would be directly affected. Essentially every fishing community along
Yemen’s west coast would see their livelihoods collapse and would suffer substantial
20-096935/10

S/2020/721

economic losses. About 90 per cent of the people in those communities already need
humanitarian assistance.
Sea currents and seasonal conditions also mean that much of the oil would
likely remain near Yemen’s coast rather than dispersing widely. As a result, the port
in Al-Hudaydah could be forced to close for a period of weeks or even months.
Yemen imports nearly everything, and most imports come through
Al-Hudaydah or the port at nearby Saleef. Losing either of those ports for an extended
period would destabilize critical commercial and aid imports of food and other
essential commodities. That would inflict terrible additional suffering on millions
of Yemenis, including people who are already going hungry in Sana’a, Saada, Ibb
and other places located away from coastal areas.
It would also deliver another severe blow to Yemen’s already embattled
economy. The resulting disruption would substantially accelerate recent trends that
are already — once again — pushing the country towards famine. International
maritime routes and neighbouring States would also be affected.
So I want to be clear that the risk from the FSO SAFER is by no means strictly
environmental, dreadful though the environmental impact would be, as Inger has
described. It is also a direct and severe threat to the well-being — and potentially the
survival — of millions of Yemenis. We are deeply concerned about those people, and
we want to do everything we can to avoid this new blow falling upon them.
That brings me to my next point: the role of the United Nations. The
Government of Yemen and the Ansar Allah authorities formally requested United
Nations assistance with the FSO SAFER in March 2018, more than two years ago.
The first step was to be a technical assessment, in order to provide impartial evidence
to guide the next steps, which might potentially include the safe extraction of the oil
and removal of the FSO SAFER structure, were the parties to agree to that.
For much of 2018, a coalition-backed military offensive in Al-Hudaydah made
it too dangerous to visit the site. But with the Stockholm Agreement in December
of that year and the subsequent ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah, safe access again became
possible. Since then, the United Nations has been working closely with the parties to
secure the necessary clearances so that the United Nations technical team can deploy.
The Government of Yemen has agreed to the assessment and has actively
sought to facilitate access to the SAFER. The Ansar Allah authorities have also
consistently agreed — in principle. In fact, authorities in Sana’a have sent several
letters to the United Nations and to the Security Council confirming their agreement.
They have also made public statements to that effect.
But in the past, the Ansar Allah authorities have been unwilling to accept a
mission in practice. Instead, they imposed preconditions and linked the SAFER with
other issues.
I have provided the Council, in my previous 15 briefings, with a running
commentary on this protracted bureaucratic minuet of permissions to visit being
sought, apparently being granted and then turning out in fact not to have been granted.
The most frequent demand from the Ansar Allah authorities has been to
deploy the United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism (UNVIM) to AlHudaydah prior to any assessment of the FSO SAFER. That is a completely unrelated
issue to that of the tanker.
I must emphasize here that from a humanitarian perspective, we do not
take a position on where UNVIM is deployed. That is a political issue and is
subject to agreement by the parties. My only objective — with the FSO SAFER,
6/10

20-09693

S/2020/721

UNVIM and indeed all of our work — is to alleviate suffering and prevent a
humanitarian catastrophe.
The Ansar Allah authorities have also sought assurances that repair works
will occur simultaneously with the assessment. We would like to do that and so have
adjusted the mission plan to include both a technical assessment and whatever initial
repairs might be feasible. Obviously, though, you have to find out what the problem
is before you can fix it, and you cannot do either without visiting.
Initial repairs, insofar as they might be possible, may buy us a little more time
to find a sustainable solution, but they will not be enough to eliminate the risk of
a disaster. The assessment results will provide an impartial analysis of what needs
to happen next and of what kind of equipment and other resources will be required.
Without prejudging the outcome of the assessment, industry experts have told
us we should expect additional repairs to be necessary. But for the reason I have just
given about initial repairs, they do not know exactly what those required additional
repairs will be. Experts have also said that extracting the oil is probably the only way
to remove the threat of a spill from the 44-year-old tanker for good.
This brings me to my last point: where do we go from here?
Last week, we received encouraging news. Ansar Allah officials confirmed
to the United Nations in writing that they are ready to authorize the United Nations
mission to the FSO SAFER. They have also communicated their intention to issue
entry permits for mission personnel. I welcome that announcement.
We have, of course, been here before. In August 2019, we received similar
assurances and, on that basis, deployed the United Nations team and equipment to
Djibouti at significant expense. The Ansar Allah authorities cancelled that mission
the night before departure.
But it is not too late, and we remain eager to assist. The United Nations team
can deploy within three weeks of receiving all the necessary permits. We are in touch
with the Government of Yemen for their approvals. Yesterday we also submitted an
official request to the Ansar Allah authorities, which includes details on the mission
plan, personnel and technical equipment. We hope that these requests and other
logistical arrangements will be quickly approved, without preconditions.
The Ansar Allah authorities have an important opportunity here to take steps
that will spare millions of their fellow citizens from yet another tragedy. We are
eager to work with them to do this.

20-096937/10

S/2020/721

Annex III
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Yemen,
Mohammed Al-Hadhrami
[Original: English and Arabic]
Allow me at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, on behalf of the Government
and the people of Yemen, for having convened this important and timely meeting on
the issue of the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which, if left unaddressed, would imminently
result in an economic and environmental catastrophe that would affect not only
Yemen and Yemenis but also the region and the entire world.
The reason for calling for this special meeting was simple. We knew that the
only way to resolve this potential disaster, which has lingered on for years because
of the Houthis’ intransigence despite all our efforts, is to put pressure on them and
draw the world’s attention to this matter through the Security Council. The solution
to this devastating disaster is not a difficult one and starts with allowing the United
Nations technical team to access and assess the floating oil tanker. But that simple
procedure, however, never came to fruition because the Houthis have not allowed
it. And, as time went by, we realized that the Houthi militias saw the importance of
the FSO SAFER tanker to us and the international community and decided to use
it as a bargaining chip or leverage in the peace process negotiations, with complete
disregard for the potentially drastic consequences of that unethical behaviour.
Ever since early 2018, we have been trying, with the help of the United Nations,
to convince the Houthi militias to grant the United Nations team access, and we
have failed. Under pressure, however, the Houthis always make empty promises,
and, when the pressure is off, they renege on their commitments. We have seen it
happen on this issue before and on other issues as well. That is also why we need
this meeting — to send the Houthis a strong signal that this time they must comply.
When we look at the alarming consequences of this disaster — which will,
among other things, result in an oil spill of more than 1 million barrel of crude
oil into the Red Sea and the closure of the vital port of Al-Hudaydah for months;
endanger marine life and biodiversity; and expose millions of people in Yemen to
toxic gases in the event of a fire — we realize that we have to act now.
We believe that the best course of action is to support the latest stand-alone
detailed proposal on the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which we received last month from
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths (see
S/PV.8753) . We agreed to it on the condition that it would not be linked to any other
issues or processes under discussion.
The proposal consists of three stages: first, assessment and necessary repairs;
secondly, basic maintenance to facilitate oil extraction; and thirdly, disposal of the
tanker. All potential revenue from the sale of oil is to contribute to paying the salaries
of civil servants in Yemen.
The Government of Yemen has agreed to this and the Houthis have not. I am
afraid that settling for the Houthis merely granting access to the tanker at this stage
will not solve the problem. Instead, it would enable them yet again to hijack the issue
in the future when the pressure is lifted.
In conclusion, allow me once again to express our gratitude to the members
of the Council for answering the call to put an end to this looming catastrophe. I
truly hope that today will be the last time the Council hears about the ongoing issue
regarding the FSO SAFER oil tanker and that it will be resolved before it is too late.

8/10

20-09693

S/2020/721

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations
Allow me at the outset to commend you, Sir, on the efficient manner in which
you have been steering the work of the Security Council during the month of July,
and to express my delegation’s appreciation to you and the other Members of the
Council for giving us this opportunity to address the alarming deterioration in the
condition of the FSO SAFER oil tanker.
I also wish to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme for their
valuable briefings.
The crisis in Yemen continues to be one of the most pressing threats to
international peace and security and one of the world’s worst humanitarian
catastrophes. Egypt continues to call for a comprehensive Yemeni-led and-owned
political process leading to a peaceful settlement of the conflict in a manner that
restores legitimacy and stability in accordance with the relevant Council resolutions,
the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative, and the outcomes of the comprehensive
National Dialogue Conference.
In that regard, Egypt urges all parties to constructively engage with the ongoing
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen on a ceasefire
agreement, accompanied by the urgently needed humanitarian and economic
measures. Egypt also calls on all parties to implement the previous agreements
reached in Stockholm, without further delay, in a manner that preserves the unity,
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Yemen.
We also continue to condemn in the strongest terms the attacks against
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and all actions that continue to fuel the conflict in
Yemen and violate the relevant Council resolutions by providing the Houthis with
weaponry, as has been alarmingly underscored in the Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2020/531), on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
The deteriorating condition of the 44-year old FSO SAFER oil tanker
represents a clear and imminent threat that could, at any moment, cause a massive
environmental and economic catastrophe that would add to the tremendous suffering
of the people of Yemen, as well as cause irreversible damage to the coastal States of
the Red Sea, including Egypt. It would also undermine the safety of international
maritime transportation through the strategic Strait of Bab El-Mandab, which is the
southern gate to the Suez Canal.
In that regard, Egypt joined five other States in bringing the expected
environmental, humanitarian and economic damage to the attention of the Security
Council in a detailed joint letter dated 11 March 2020 (S/2020/200).
The transactional and opportunistic approach that the Houthis have been
following by politicizing humanitarian issues and risking environmental disaster for
political gains is morally unacceptable and unjustifiable regardless of its motivations,
especially at a time when the ramifications of the coronavirus disease pandemic are
sweeping across the world and the region.
We call on all parties to take the necessary measures to cooperate with the
relevant agencies of the United Nations to ensure that the FSO SAFER oil tanker is
properly maintained and secured without further delay or conditions. In that regard,
we stand ready to provide any needed technical assistance.
In that regard, we stress the urgent need for the Security Council to take
immediate measures to redress this situation in parallel with the ongoing efforts
aimed at a political solution.
20-096939/10

S/2020/721

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia to the
United Nations, Abdallah Y. Al-Mouallimi
Allow me to begin by personally congratulating you, Sir, and the Federal
Republic of Germany on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. We are confident that your leadership and expertise will guide the Council
towards efficiency and success. I would like to express our appreciation for convening
this session to discuss the hazardous situation of the FSO SAFER oil tanker and the
dangers it poses to the environment and maritime navigation in the Red Sea.
The grave risks associated with this floating oil tanker threaten to cause
harm to the southern part of the Red Sea and to the world at large, as it is situated
in the proximity of Bab El-Mandab, through which vital international maritime
navigation passes between Asia and Europe. This dangerous situation must not be
left unaddressed and the Security Council bears primary responsibility for securing
the safety and security of the area.
The dangers emanating from the current situation include the possibility of
an oil spill of millions of litres, which is far larger than the volume of the infamous
Exxon Valdez disaster that took place in Alaska in 1989. In addition, the port of
Al-Hudaydah could be closed for several months, leading to severe shortages in
the supply of fuel and other essential needs to the people of Yemen. The fishing
industry in the region would also be gravely harmed and would take years to recover.
Moreover, marine life, the environment and the shores of my country would be
seriously and adversely affected. Finally, toxic gases and black clouds emanating
from the spill would cause damage to agricultural lands and farms in the vast area of
both Yemen and Saudi Arabia — irreversibly damaging fruits, grains and vegetables
and causing a massive internal displacement of people throughout the affected areas.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia condemns the irresponsible actions of the Houthi
militia, who have caused this situation in the first place. The Houthis continue to use
this potential disaster to blackmail the world into fulfilling their political ambitions
without regard to the well-being and safety of the Yemeni people and the region as
a whole.
The Security Council has already asserted the need to confront the risks
associated with this situation and has warned against the catastrophic consequences
that would result if it remains unresolved. The Council did so in resolution 2511
(2020) and in its press statement issued on 29 June (SC/14233).
We took notice of the announcement made recently by the Spokesperson for
the Secretary-General that the Houthi rebels have agreed to allow access to the
tanker. We remain suspicious of their plans and intentions, and request that the
Council remain vigilant and stand ready to enact strong and decisive measures to
deal with this situation and mitigate its risks.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia stands ready to take all steps that the Council
may deem necessary to handle the situation. We wish to draw the Council’s attention
to the Houthis’ record of procrastination and non-compliance with United Nations
resolutions. The Council must not allow such reckless and irresponsible behaviour
to stand. The Council must ensure that a political solution to the conflict in Yemen is
found on the basis of resolution 2216 (2015), the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference — all recognized by the
international community as the elements of international legitimacy.

10/10

20-09693
