I

TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR
st

MEETING: 28 JULY 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l491)
Adoption

..... .. . ..., . .... ... . .. .. .. .. .

of the agenda . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . .

dated 15 July 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/933 1) + . . . . . . . . . . . .

Letter

SlPV.1491

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Guncil.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND NINETY-FIRST MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 28 July 1969, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Ibrahima BOYE (Senegal).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet SOcialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l491)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 15 July 1969 from the Permanent Repre.
sentative of Zambia addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/933 1).

to its territorial integrity posed by actions of colonial
Portuguese authorities,
3. These consultations could not but have as their background the large number of relevant General Assembly
resolutions, most pertinently resolution 2395 (XXIII),
which stated that the grave situation in the Territories
under Portuguese domination had aggravated the explosive
situation in southern Africa and which condemned the
violations by the Government of Portugal of the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of independent African States. We
also had to bear in mind resolution 180 (1963) and
resolution 218 (1965) of the Security Council, by which
the Council made the determination that the situation in
these Territories was seriouslydisturbingthe peaceand
securityin Africa.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 15 July 1969 from the Permanent Represew
tative of Zambia addressed to the President of the
Security Counkil (S/9331)
I. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the decisions taken at previous meetings, I invite
the representatives of Portugal, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Somalia, Kenya, the United Arab Republic,
Liberia, Madagascar, Sierra Leone, Tunisia, Gabon and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to participate in the
debate of the Council, without the right to vote,
At the invitation of the President, Mr. B. de Miranda
(Portugal) took a place at the Council table, and Mr. M. A.
Foum (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. H. K. Abdulleh
(Somalia), Mr. R. J. Ombere (Kenya), Mr. A. El-Erian
(United Arab Republic), Mr. L. H. Diggs (Liberia), Mr. B.
Rabetafika (Madagascar), Mr. F. B. Savage (Sierra Leone),
Mr. M. L. Fayache (Tunisia), Mr. J. M. Aubame (Gabon)
and Mr. J. K. Nguza (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
table.
2. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): On 23 July, when I made my
statement on the question before us, I said that “an
imperative for the Council in this debate is to ensure that
its result will not cause a further disappointment to Zambia
and thereby to the African States” [1#88th meeting,
wra. 811. I am happy to say that this view has proved to be
independently held by alI members of the Council, and
consultations which have taken place have been devoted to
the object of how best to fortify Zambia against the threat

4. In view of that determinationby the Security Council,
andin view of the fact that the Governmentof Portugalhas
persistedin total disregardof all the resolutionsof both the
Security Council and the GeneralAssembly,it is evident
that the presentsituation calls for a more categorical
resolution.Most of uswere clear-mindedon the issue,but,
aswe are all know, the resolutionsof the Councilhave to
accommodateas much the views as the doubts and
hesitancies
of its members.In that spirit, a draft resolution
has been evolved which has already been circulated in
document S/9360 of 25 July 1969. On behalf of the
delegationsof Algeria, Nepal and Senegaland my own, I
have the hcnour now formally to introduce it in the
Security Council.To those of our colleagueswho do not
seemyet to havedecidedto supportthistext, I cangive the
assurance
that it is not animusagainstPortugalbut grave
concernat the situationon the Zambia-Mozambique
border
that hasinspiredthis draft resolution.
5. Portugalhasmadegreat contributionsto humancivihzation in the age of exploration, and its people are
remarkablyuntaintedby colourprejudice.It is thereforeall
the more tragic that a country of such great traditions
should be made to participate in a conspiracy against
freedomand,assuch,shouldbe alliedwith the Pretoriaand
Salisburyregimes,
6. One of the inspiringthemesof the statementsmadebl
African representatives
during this debateis that Portugal
could enter into a partnership of mutual benefit with
African peoplesif only it released
itself from the burdenof
obstructing the independenceof the peoplesof Angola,
Mozambiqueand Guinea (Bissau).It could then, it was
remarked,look forward to the samerelationshipwith those
peoples as it enjoys with Brazil. In moving the draft

regret that there should have been any such incidents and
we stress the importance of adequate measuresbeing taken
to prevent any recurrence. Whether the incidents ccmplained of in this draft resolution fall into that category has
been neither proven nor disproven. Only a proper investigation could establish the facts. We may all have very strong
presumptions, but without a joint or impartial investigation
of some kind my delegation does not believe that the
Council should proceed to assessmentsor findings. For that
reason we shall not be able to support the draft resolution
contained in document S/9360. I should make clear,
however, that our abstention does not in any way imply
either condonation or, still less, support of any Portuguese
infringement of Zambian territory, but relates simply to the
draft resolution before us in which the material facts are in
dispute and have not been established in any independent
investigation.

resolution contained in document S/9360, we endorse this
message to Portugal. I commend the draft resolution for the
Council’s unanimous adoption.
7. Mr. HILDYARD (United Kingdom): Mr. President, a&
was altogether right and fitting, you spoke on 22 July
(1487th meeting/ on behalf of the whole Council to pay a
tribute to the three astronauts of Apollo I1 on their epic
voyage of discovery and to the United States of America on
this momentous achievement for all mankind. As this is the
first time 1 have spoken in this debate, I should like, even if
a little belatedly, to associate my delegation with your
expressions of admiration for and pride in the astronauts,
who have now fulfilled their mission so splendidly and
happily, and of congratulations to the United States
delegation and, through it to the Government and people of
the United States. I should also like to join with you and a
number of other speakers in formulating the hope that this
remarkable technological achievement will be accompanied
by a comparable advance in social and individual attitudes
and understandings, that with the narrowing of the distances between the bodies in the universe will come a
narrowing in the distances between men.

12. My delegation understands the apprehensions on both
sides. We appreciate the Zambian feeling that its protection
should lie with the United Nations. We welcome the
Zambian decision to have recourse to the Council rather
than exercise the right of self-defence.
13. We believe that it is for the Council to give all the
assistance it can to the two parties to prevent incidents and
to maintain peace in the area; it should also help the two
parties to try to find a peaceful solution between them.
selves, Several speakers have referred to the provisiorls of
Article 33 of the Charter; that Article indeed lists a wide
range of ways in which peaceful solutions can be sought.
While fully understanding Zambian preoccupations, we
hope that the fact that the Council is now seized of the
matter, and that Portugal has given new assurancesbefore
this Council as well as to Zambia itself, will give a greater
measure of confidence and encouragement in the searchfor
peaceful solutions.

8. Turning to the item on our agenda, my delegation has
listened with great attention to the statements by the
representatives of Zambia and Portugal. Much has been
said, particularly by the speakers who followed them, about
Portuguese colonial policy. Portuguese colonial policy is
certainly an important part of the background of this
debate. My own Government has repeatedly made clear
that it cannot share the views of the Portuguese Government on colonial issues; also, that it believes that a decision
by Portugal.to accept or even move towards the principle of
self-determination as it is understood in the United Nations
could change both the present situation and the whole
outlook for the future. My Government regrets that
Portugal continues to deny this basic right of selfdetermination to its African Territories.

14. Mr. CARADAS (Spain) (translated from Spanish):
First of all I should like to convey to the representativeof
the United States the sincere and whole-hearted congratulations of my delegation on the example the three
American astronauts have given of the vast possibilities
open to man when he labours with faith, intelligence,
discipline and courage. The people of the United States
certainly have a right to take pride in their collective
exploit. We, all other men on earth, can also procIaim our
joint satisfaction at the triumph of man over his environ.
merit. The feat of the three heroic discoverersmay thus
serve as an example to all mankind which eagerly seeksits
path to the future.

9. As various speakers have mentioned Security Council
resolution 180 (1963) and the question of the supply of
arms from Portugal’s NATO allies, I should like to
emphasize again that my Government has not, since the
adoption of that resolution, supplied arms or military
equipment for use in Portuguese OverseasTerritories.
10. Important as these general issues are, however, the
item on our agenda is a specific one and there is now a draft
resolution (S/9366’/ directed at it; that draft resolution has
just been ably introduced by the representative of Pakistan,
and we are shortly going to vote on it. Zambia has
formulated specific complaints of Portuguese violations of
the territorial integrity of Zambia, in particular the bombings of the village of Lote. Not for the first time are we
confronted in this Council by a series of accusations and
counter-accusations. I should say at once that my Government deeply deplores the continuation of all these incidents, the loss of life and damage caused and the
heightening of tensions on the frontiers to which they
inevitably lead.

15. The Council now has before it a draft resolution
reIating to the complaint lodged by Zambia. We also have
the formal objections of Portugal. We have listened closely
to both parties and have followed the other statements
made here with equal attention, since we wished to havea
clear picture of a situation which seems singularly unclear
to my delegation,
16. Actually, the debate has been conducted within two
different spheres which bear no relation to eachother: the
sphere of principles and the sphere of the specific case
before us. They are undeniably separate and from the

11. Portugal has admitted that there have been incidents
in the past in which the fault lay on the Portuguese side. We
2

procedural standpoint it is only the second one which really
concerns us. So far as the first sphere is concerned, the
policy pursued by my country and the repeated statements
of my delegation on the appropriate occasions can leave no
doubts whatever: Spain scrupulously applies those principles to the problems which concern it.

region of Casamance in contempt of my country’s sovereignty. It will be recalled that my Government brought
these facts to the Council’s attentjon at the time, as Zambia
is doing now. It should be pointed out, however, that all
these acts which the international community has condemned are but the result of Portugal’s obstinate refusal to
transform the former relations between colonizers and
colonized into new ones based on friendship and cooperation.

17. Now, with regard to the specific case raised in the
letter from the representative of Zambia [S/9331], which is
the reason for this meeting of the Council, it is the opinion
of my delegation that the facts have not been sufficiently
clarified. On the other hand, we realize that the situation is
a fluid one, which would have to be pin-pointed with
greater accuracy before a decision could be taken.

24. Portugal must understand that it is futile to try to
keep under its yoke peoples who aspire to freedom. Yet the
historic blindness which seems to afflict it prevents it from
realizing that the winds of freedom blowing in our time will
in the end inevitably sweep away the spirit of domidation
which prevails in those parts of Africa. Portugal should take
example by the former colonial Powers which agreed,
without qualm, to lead colonial peoples to independence in
friendship.

18. We believe that the Charter of this Organization, as
well as the experience of the parties concerned, provide a
starting point and that, by encouraging the initial goodwill
professed, reasonable solutions could have been found
which could have been mutually acceptable to the parties,
thereby avoiding human suffering and material loss.

25. Actually, the real problem here is the granting of the
right to self-determination to the peoples who are still
under Portuguese colonial domination, One need only look
at the history of the world to see that, when men are under
occupation and dominated by foreigners, they resort
perforce to all possible acts of resistance to free themselves
and cast off the foreign domination. That is what the
freedom fighters are doing in their struggle to recover their
dignity and freedom, in this century when man is surpassing
himself and embarking on the conquest of other planets.

.19. The draft resolution now before us is based on
different premises and, logically, arrives at conclusions
inferred from those premises. My delegation, which has not
managed to resolve the conflict of evidence apparent here,
will therefore be unable to cast its vote in support of this
draft resolution.
20. The PRESIDENT (translated porn French): Speaking
in my capacity as representative of Senegal, I should now
like to state the views of my Government on the problem
before us.

26. Speaking as PRESIDENT, I would say that if no
representative wishes to speak now, I shall invite the
Council to vote on the draft resolution submitted by the
delegations of Algeria, Nepal, Pakistan and Senegal
[S/9360/.

21. In his statement, the representative of Zambia gave the
Councii a complete picture of the situation at the frontier
between Mozambique and his country. He drew attention,
in particular, to the numerous incidents which have
occurred in his country for several years now. The lives and
property of peaceful rural populations are threatened by
heavy and repeated bombings carried out by Portuguese
aircraft. We also know that Zambia’s territorial integrity is
being violated by Portuguese soldiers, who make almost
daily raids into Zambian territory, destroying everything in
their path.

A vote wastaken by showof hands.

In favour: Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, Hungary,
Nepal, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal,Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,Zambia.
Against:

None.

Abstaining:
France, Spain, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Statesof America.

22, The representative of Zambia has informed us that,
quite recently, Portuguese aircraft flew over Zambia and
dropped incendiary bombs which left many dead and
wounded
among the civilian population and destroyed
whole villages, leaving families homeless. My delegation
understands the feelings aroused by such acts all too well
because my country, like the Republic of Guinea in West
Africa, suffered in the past and continues to suffer
deliberate violations of its territorial integrity on its own
soil. My country makes no secret of the fact that it
materially and morally supports the African national
liberation movements.

The draft resolution wasadopted by 1I votes to none,
with 4 abstentions.1

27. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I shall
now call on the speakerswho have askedto explain their
vote after the vote.
28. Mr. BUFFUM (United States of America): I should
like very briefly to explain the reasonswhy my delegation
abstained from the vote on the draft resolution [S/9360]
which has just been adopted. We have been faced in this
debate with an unhappy dilemma. Both Zambia and
Portugal are friends of the United States. Zambia has
brought a seriouschargeagainstPortugal and haspresented

23. My country recently reaffirmed this position at the
last meeting of the Liberation Committee of the Organization of African Unity, held at Dakar. As a result, we are
experiencing looting and sabotage, and repeated violations
by foreign elements which are infntrating the Senegalese

1 Seeresolution268 (1969).
3

a full account of serious incidents which it is convinced
have occurred on its territory. Portugal, for its part, has
denied culpability.
29. Without wishing to cast doubt on the credibility of
either party, I can merely say that my Government would
be much readier to take a position on the merits of the case
if we were in possession of some impartial account of the
recent developments along the borders between Zambia and
Mozambique and Angola. But unfortunately we do not
have the type of report that we rely on so heavily; for
example, from the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization when it comes to complaints about the
situation in the Middle East. Despite this, the resolution
just adopted does make a specilic finding against Portugal
which we are unable to support under the circumstances
described.
30. May I emphasize, however, that our position on the
resolution just adopted has notking to do with our attitude
toward
the more fundamental
question
of selfdetermination for the Portuguese Territories. We are concerned with the continuing tension in the area and strongly
hope that the Council will not be faced with a repetition of
the unhappy situation in which we have found ourselves in
connexion with Zambia’s current complaint.
31. Finally, with your permission, Mr. President, since I
have the floor I should like to take this opportunity to
convey the deep appreciation of my Government to those
delegations that I have not already thanked for their kind
and warm congratulations on the Right of Apollo 11,
32. Mr. PASTINEN (Finland): In the statement I made at
the 1488th meeting on behalf of the Finnish delegation I
said that incidents of the kind of which the Council is at
present seized could not, in our view, be considered in
isolation. I pointed out that in the opinion of my
delegation they were but symptoms of the underlying
serious tension in the area, for which the policies pursued
by Portugal in contravention of the pertinent resolutions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly were the
main cause. It is in the context of this general situation
rather than on the basis of any particular incident that my
delegation has voted for the resolution just adopted.
33. The Finnish delegation has voted in favour of the
resolution despite our reservations about certain of its
formulations. These reservations, which my delegation

expressed during the consultations that preceded the
submission of the final draft, refer particularly to the
second paragraph of the preamble, or rather to that
paragraph in conjunction with paragraph 5. It is the view of
my delegation that the Council has considered the complaint presentedby Zambia againstPortugal within the
purviewof ChapterVI of the Charter rather thanwithin the
context of ChapterVII, to which the formulation of these
two paragraphs
seems
to point.
34. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom French): The next
speakeron my list is the representativeof Portugal,on
whomI now call.
35. Mr. MIRANDA (Portugal): My delegationwishesto
thank the representativesof Spain, the United States,the
United Kingdom and France for the position they have
taken on the draft resolution which hasjust beenvoted
upon. My delegation holds that that resolutionhasno
relation to any reality, and placeson record its formal
reservationsin regardto it.
36. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): At the successfulconclusionof this debate, which was calledat the requestof
my delegationto discussPortugueseaggression,
I wishto
take this opportunity to thank all our friendswho have
given us unwaveringsupport throughout this debate,1also
wish to thank thoseof our friends who havenot foundit
possibleto support our position on this matter.
37. With regard to the resolution just adopted beinga
seriouswarning to Portugal to stop committing acts of
vandalismagainstmy country, it is the understanding
of my
delegationthat paragraph5 of that resolutionmeansthat,
should Portugal continue with its criminal war against
Zambia,the Security Council will meet to considerfurther
measures
which we hope will be much moreseverethanthe
penalty just imposed.We sincerely hope that the Council
will no longer permit Portugal to enjoy the fruits Of its
aggression.
38. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom French): Sinceno
other representativewishesto speak,the Security Council
has concluded this phase of its considerationof the
question on the agenda,The questionwill remainbefore
the Council.
The meetingroseat 11.55a.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS
may
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles Section,

throughout
New York

or’Genevo.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publicolions
der
d6positoires
du monde
Nations
Unies,
Section

COMO
tar

CONSEGUIR

publicocioner

LES PUBLICATIONS

lor

Nociones

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S

DE LAS NACIONES
Unidar

en todar
partes
del mundo.
Conrulle
Ventor,
Nueva
York o Ginebro.

Litho

UNIES

Notions
Unier
sent en venle
dons
les librairiet
entier.
Informer-vour
oupr.9
de votre libroirie
ou
der ventes,
New York ou Gen&ve.

PUBLICACIONES
de

DES NATI,ONS

esfdn

en venlo

o su librero

o dirljore

0.50 (or equivalent

et

les

ogences

q drersez-vous

6:

UNIDAS
en librerior

in other

y coror

o: Nociones

currencies)

Unidos,

dirfribuidorar
Secci6n

de

82140-November

1972-2,050
