United Nations

A/RES/69/210

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 January 2015

Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 19

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2014
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/69/468 and Corr.1)]

69/210. Entrepreneurship for development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/202 of 21 December 2012,
Reaffirming the commitments to development and poverty eradication
emanating from the United Nations Millennium Declaration1 and the commitments
made at the 2005 World Summit, 2 the 2010 high-level plenary meeting of the
General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals3 and other major United
Nations summits, conferences and special sessions,
Recalling the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the
Millennium Development Goals, held on 25 September 2013, and its outcome
document,4
Recalling also the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The
future we want”,5 and recognizing the potential of entrepreneurship to contribute to
specific sustainable development objectives,
Reaffirming the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on
Financing for Development6 in its holistic approach and the Doha Declaration on
Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up International
Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the
Monterrey Consensus,7

_______________
1

Resolution 55/2.
Resolution 60/1.
3
Resolution 65/1.
4
Resolution 68/6.
5
Resolution 66/288, annex.
6
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
7
Resolution 63/239, annex.
2

14-67772 (E)

*1467772*

Please recycle

A/RES/69/210

Entrepreneurship for development

Recalling the Istanbul Declaration and Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020,8
Recalling also the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action9 and the agreed
conclusions adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women at its fifty-eighth
session, 10 and stressing that women, particularly in developing countries, are
important drivers of entrepreneurship,
Taking note of the ministerial declaration adopted at the high-level segment of
the substantive session of 2012 of the Economic and Social Council, entitled
“Promoting productive capacity, employment and decent work to eradicate poverty
in the context of inclusive, sustainable and equitable economic growth at all levels
for achieving the Millennium Development Goals”,11
Welcoming the contribution of all relevant stakeholders, including the private
sector, non-governmental organizations and civil society, to the implementation of
the outcomes of the United Nations conferences and summits and their reviews in
the economic, social, environmental and related fields, as well as the realization of
the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals,
Recognizing the important contribution entrepreneurship can make to
sustainable development by creating jobs and driving economic growth and
innovation, improving social conditions and contributing to addressing
environmental challenges, and stressing the importance of giving appropriate
consideration to the promotion of entrepreneurship in the context of the discussions
on the post-2015 development agenda,
Recognizing also the importance of developing comprehensive and comparable
data to monitor progress in the implementation of entrepreneurship policies,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;12

2.
Emphasizes the need for improved regulatory environments and policy
initiatives that promote entrepreneurship and foster small and medium-sized
enterprises, as well as microenterprises, and stresses the positive role
entrepreneurship plays in driving job creation and expanding opportunities for all,
including for women and youth;
3.
Encourages Governments to take a coordinated and inclusive approach to
promoting entrepreneurship involving all stakeholders, while noting initiatives of
civil society, academia and the private sector as important entrepreneurship drivers,
and to develop policies, taking into account national priorities and circumstances,
that address the legal, social and regulatory barriers to equal, effective economic
participation, and stresses the need for a comprehensive approach to
entrepreneurship that includes support from development partners in the areas of
technology transfer on favourable terms, including on concessional and preferential
_______________
8

Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–
13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7), chap. I and II.
9
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
10
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2014, Supplement No. 7 (E/2014/27), chap. I,
sect. A.
11
E/HLS/2012/1.
12
A/69/320.

2/4

Entrepreneurship for development

A/RES/69/210

terms, as mutually agreed, finance and capacity-building, with a focus on education
and skills development;
4.
Acknowledges the important role trade plays in enhancing the capacity of
enterprises, and reaffirms in this regard the critical role that a universal, rules-based,
open, non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system can play in
stimulating economic growth and development worldwide, thereby benefiting all
countries at all stages of development as they advance towards sustainable
development;
5.
Emphasizes that partnerships with the private sector play an important
role in promoting entrepreneurship, generating employment and investment,
increasing revenue potential, developing new technologies and innovative business
models and enabling high, sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth
while protecting workers’ rights;
6.
Invites Member States to strengthen the capacity of national financial
institutions to reach out to those who have no access to banking, insurance and other
financial services, and encourages them to adopt regulatory and supervisory
frameworks that facilitate the safe and sound provision of services to such
populations, increase access to information and promote financial literacy,
particularly for women;
7.
Encourages Member States to expand alternative sources of financing
and diversify the retail financial service system to include non-traditional providers
of financial services, such as microcredit and microfinance, stresses the value of a
sound regulatory framework in this regard, and also encourages the provision of
incentives to microfinance institutions that meet national standards for delivering
sound financial services to the poor, with a particular emphasis on women;
8.
Emphasizes the important role of national efforts aimed at bringing
informal workers into the formal economy and integrating them into national social
security systems;
9.
Recognizes that technological improvement, particularly through the
diffusion of technology, can provide new opportunities for businesses to improve
their competitiveness, and in this regard encourages Member States to increase
cooperation in support of technology exchange and transfer, innovation and
capacity-building programmes for promoting entrepreneurship;
10. Also recognizes the value of teaching entrepreneurial skills at all levels
of education, ensuring the full and equal participation of women and girls, and
encourages entrepreneurship education through skills development, capacitybuilding, training programmes and business incubators;
11. Acknowledges the role of entrepreneurship in enabling youth to turn their
creativity, energy and ideas into business opportunities by helping to facilitate their
entry into the labour market;
12. Encourages the United Nations system, in cooperation with Member
States, to identify indicators that can be used to evaluate the success of
entrepreneurship policies;
13. Recognizes that democratic political institutions, transparent and
accountable public and private entities, effective anti-corruption measures and
responsible corporate governance are key conditions for making market economies
and enterprises more responsive to the values and long-term goals of society;

3/4

A/RES/69/210

Entrepreneurship for development

14. Acknowledges that the private sector can contribute to the achievement of
sustainable development and support national regulatory and policy frameworks that
enable business and industry to advance sustainable development initiatives, taking
into account the importance of responsible business practices and corporate social
responsibility;
15. Encourages the international community to support the efforts of
countries in promoting entrepreneurship and fostering the development of small and
medium-sized enterprises, as well as microenterprises, taking into account the
challenges and opportunities of increased trade liberalization;
16. Encourages countries to consider establishing or strengthening national
centres of excellence in entrepreneurship and similar bodies, and also encourages
cooperation and networking and the sharing of best practices between them;
17. Calls upon the relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system to further recognize and integrate entrepreneurship in its various forms into
their policies, programmes and reports and to support national efforts in this regard,
as appropriate;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session a report on the progress made in implementing the present
resolution, highlighting indicators based on existing work, as well as identifying
best practices and possible measures that could be taken at all levels in support of
entrepreneurship.
75th plenary meeting
19 December 2014

4/4
