United Nations

S/PV.6091

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6091st meeting
Tuesday, 10 March 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dabbashi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Heller
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Quarrey
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Letter dated 3 March 2009 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2009/128)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-26011 (E)

*0926011*

S/PV.6091

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Letter dated 3 March 2009 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2009/128)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Central African Republic, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. PoukréKono (Central African Republic) took a seat at
the Council table.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. François Lonseny
Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support
Office in the Central African Republic.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Fall to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Jan Grauls, Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Belgium.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Grauls to take a seat at the Council
table.

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/128, which contains a letter dated
3 March 2009 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. François Lonseny Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the
Central African Republic, as well as His Excellency
Mr. Jan Grauls, Chair of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Belgium.
As this is Mr. Fall’s last briefing to the Council in
his current capacity as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic, I
wish, on behalf of Council members, to thank him for
his tireless efforts in helping to stabilize the situation
in the Central African Republic. In doing so, Mr. Fall
played an important role in bringing the Government of
the Central African Republic and the rebels to the
December 2008 inclusive political dialogue, which led
to the signing of the peace agreements. May I, together
with the other members of the Council, wish him
continued success in his future undertakings.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fall.
Mr. Fall: As members know, since my last
briefing to the Security Council on the Central African
Republic on 2 December 2008 (see S/PV.6027), an
inclusive political dialogue was successfully held, from
8 to 20 December 2008.
The dialogue was the result of tremendous efforts
over the past two years by national stakeholders,
supported by their international partners, including the
United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community, the
International Organization of la Francophonie and the
Community of Sahelo-Saharan States. The dialogue
brought together around 150 participants from the
Government, pro-President political parties, opposition
and moderate political parties, rebel movements and
civil society. Former President Ange-Félix Patassé, as
well as a number of other exiled political actors,

09-26011

S/PV.6091

participated in the dialogue. It was chaired by the
former President of Burundi, Pierre Buyoya.

resources; and the development of national human
resources.

Three committees were established, which covered
political and governance questions; security and
politico-military movements, including rebel groups;
and socio-economic questions. While the security and
socio-economic committees worked according to
developed blueprints — which came in the form of a
national security-sector-reform plan of action, developed
approximately eight months earlier, and a Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper, finalized a year before —
the political and governance committee had to deal
with the most contentious issues. These included the
legitimacy of the current regime, which came to power
through a coup d’état in 2003 and was legitimized in
the contested elections of 2005, as well as ways to
include in the governance of the country all political
actors who had influence there.

(spoke in French)

At the end of the 12-day-long discussions, a
number of important agreements were reached. In the
political and governance area, they included: the
establishment of a broad-based Government, including
all the entities that participated in the inclusive
political dialogue, to implement the outcomes of the
dialogue and prepare for the 2009 and 2010 municipal,
legislative and presidential elections; the commitment
to hold municipal, legislative and presidential elections
in 2009 and 2010; the revision of the electoral code
and the establishment of an independent electoral
commission; the conducting of independent audits of
revenue-generating State institutions; and the
establishment of mechanisms to promote permanent
dialogue among the country’s political and social actors.
In the area of security and armed groups, the
agreements reached during the dialogue included: the
implementation of security sector reform in accordance
with the plan of action developed during the national
security sector reform seminar in April 2008; the
restructuring of the national armed forces; an immediate
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme; combating the proliferation of small arms;
and the introduction of measures to identify and
indemnify victims of past conflicts.
In the socio-economic area, the agreements
included: the implementation of the poverty reduction
strategy for the period 2008-2011; the reform of public
finances; the reform of the management of natural

09-26011

As members can see, the recommendations of the
dialogue cover a broad range of issues. That reflects
the national vision of putting an end to conflict in the
Central African Republic. I am pleased to see that the
dialogue’s conclusions are at the centre of an integrated
peacebuilding framework such as that being developed
by the Peacebuilding Commission.
I wish to emphasize that there have been other
positive developments since the conclusion of the
dialogue. A new, inclusive Government was established
in January. The steering committee responsible for
DDR, which is currently operational, has already
engaged the rebel movements with a view to the
possible implementation of a DDR programme. It is
envisaged that rebel groups will submit their respective
combatant lists by 15 March. A dialogue follow-up
committee has been established and is scheduled to
begin its work, with the participation of a number of
international organizations, including the United
Nations, the African Union, the European Commission,
the Economic Community of Central African States,
the International Organization of la Francophonie, the
Community of Sahelo-Saharan States and the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC).
However, the progress made thus far is precarious
owing to the deterioration in the security situation in
various localities in the Nana-Gribizi and BaminguiBangoran prefectures, in the north of the country.
Those localities recently saw intensive fighting and
some very bold attacks against governmental
institutions and military facilities in Ndélé, Markunda,
Bossembélé and Batangafo. Last week, riots erupted in
several neighbourhoods of Bangui following an attack
carried out against a chief of police by elements of the
presidential guard.
The increase in the number of security incidents
in the north of the country has been attributed to a
rebel group unknown until now, called the Convergence
des patriots centrafricains pour la Justice et la Paix
(CPJP), and Abdoulaye Miskine’s rebel group, the
Front démocratique du peuple centrafricain. Both
movements have issued press releases claiming
responsibility for these attacks. They have also accused
the Central African Government of reneging on its
commitments concerning the implementation of the

3

S/PV.6091

dialogue’s recommendations and have threatened to
join their forces to resume armed combat. It is
important to note that former Minister Charles Massi
has resurfaced as Assistant Coordinator General of the
Political Council of the CPJP.
Despite those setbacks, the prospects for
stabilization of the Central African Republic offered by
the dialogue remain solid. The dialogue provides a new
opportunity to take significant steps towards sustainable
peacebuilding in the Central African Republic. Here, it
should be noted that Central African actors have stressed
the need for support from the international community
as they try to implement the recommendations of the
dialogue. In that connection, it is encouraging to note
that a number of the Central African Republic’s bilateral
and multilateral partners have already responded
positively to that request for support. I welcomed
CEMAC’s decision to contribute 8 billion Central
African francs — approximately $16 million — towards
the DDR process in the Central African Republic.
In that context, and as members will have noted
in the letter of the Secretary-General dated 3 March
2009 addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2009/128), the United Nations intends to review its
presence on the ground in order to provide more
consistent and better coordinated support for the
implementation of the dialogue’s recommendations.
Such a coordinated presence will undoubtedly help to
strengthen the efforts to stabilize the Central African
Republic.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Fall
for his briefing.
I now give the
Ambassador Jan Grauls.

floor

to

His

Excellency

Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having given me the opportunity to address the Council
in my capacity as Chair of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Central African Republic was included in the
Commission’s agenda in June 2008, at a very
appropriate time. Since then, over the past eight
months, the configuration has systematically
encouraged and supported the considerable progress
that the Central African Republic has made in the area
of peacebuilding and stabilization. The inclusive
political dialogue, which was held in Bangui last

4

December and which brought together representatives
of the entire political class and all of Central African
society, as well as the positive results achieved, had
been virtually inconceivable last June.
The recommendations of the inclusive political
dialogue have begun to be implemented. Indeed, a
broad-based Government has been established, including
members of the political opposition and former rebels.
A steering committee has been formed for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process, and an Independent Electoral Commission has
been created to prepare the 2009 and 2010 municipal,
legislative and presidential elections. Those steps attest
to the genuine desire of all parties concerned to work
in a new atmosphere of peace and understanding. After
decades of internal tension and a dramatic deterioration
in living conditions, the population of the Central
African Republic yearned for such developments.
The Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in the
Central African Republic will very soon be finalized
and will serve as the basis for long-term engagement
between the Central African Republic and the
international community. That framework was
formulated in close cooperation with all national
parties in the Central African Republic and thus enjoys
broad national ownership.
However, several major challenges remain, and the
Peacebuilding Commission recalled them in a statement
that was made public today. The first challenge is
security. The resurgence of violence in the north of the
country has led in recent weeks to a new displacement
of thousands of civilians and gives rise to great concern.
That is why it is important to ask all parties to show
restraint and avoid reprisals. That is why it is also
important to urgently meet the needs of the thousands
of civilians displaced and affected by this conflict.
While the first challenge lies in the field of
security, the second is political. Given these alarming
developments,
the
Peacebuilding
Commission
encourages all parties that participated in the inclusive
political dialogue to implement as quickly as possible
and in a spirit of reconciliation the recommendations
resulting from that dialogue. The Commission calls on
all political-military groups, in particular the Front
démocratique du peuple centrafricain, to adhere to the
Libreville Comprehensive Peace Agreement and to
become involved in implementing the recommendations
of the inclusive political dialogue.

09-26011

S/PV.6091

The Peacebuilding Commission believes that the
most critical step to preserve the momentum of the
inclusive political dialogue is the finalization and
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programme. However, the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
which is responsible for drawing up that programme,
cannot finalize the programme document within every
political-military group provides a complete list of its
combatants. The initial deadline for submitting those
lists was 25 February. It has already been postponed to
16 March. At this stage, no further reports can or
should be accepted. We cannot waste any more time.
With regard to the financing of the disarmament,
DDR process, it is necessary to raise the awareness of
the international partners to the urgency of pledging
funds to the trust fund that will be set up by the UNDP.
Once the DDR programme document has been
finalized, the remaining balance of the funds already
allocated to the Central African Republic by the
Peacebuilding Fund could quickly be available for
DDR. On 30 January in Libreville, 8 billion CFA francs
were also pledged by the Economic and Monetary
Community of Central Africa to finance DDR activities
in the Central African Republic. We call on the
Government of the Central African Republic and
UNDP to finalize arrangements to transfer those funds
to the UNDP trust fund as soon as possible.
The third challenge is economic. Like other
countries in the region, the Central African Republic is
particularly affected by the consequences of the world
economic crisis. The Peacebuilding Commission is
committed, together with the international financial
institutions, to seeking mechanisms to respond to those
impacts that affect a Central African population that is
already very weak.
As Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
country-specific configuration, I advocate the
establishment of an United Nations integrated mission
in the Central African Republic. Moreover, I welcome
the recommendations to that end made by the
Secretary-General in his letter of 3 March addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/2009/128). A
rapid implementation of those recommendations is
necessary given the urgent need for a consolidated
approach by the United Nations during this crucial
phase in the political history of the Central African
Republic, which the Secretary-General described as
“perhaps the most genuinely inclusive attempt to foster

09-26011

national reconciliation in the Central African Republic
to date” (S/2009/128, p. 2).
Before concluding, I would like very warmly to
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ambassador François Lonseny Fall, for the
outstanding work that he has carried out within the
framework of his mandate in the Central African
Republic. I wish him success in his future projects. I
cherish the hope that his successor be appointed as
soon as possible so as to ensure a strong United
Nations presence in the field during this pivotal time.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the commitment
of the Peacebuilding Commission to support the
Central African Republic’s efforts in national
reconciliation and reconstruction.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ambassador Grauls for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Central African Republic.
Mr. Poukré-Kono (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): As this is the first time that the
Central African Republic has taken the floor before the
Security Council in this month of March, allow me,
Sir, to convey to you the most heartfelt brotherly
congratulations of the delegation of the Central African
Republic. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is an integral
part of the peace process in the Central African
Republic. We welcome that country’s enlightened
mediation in that process. This meeting, held under
your stewardship, will, I am sure, be successful.
We would like to pay well-deserved tribute to the
Secretary-General for his efforts with regard to the
Central African Republic. Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon is following very closely the developing
situation in our country. In these past six months, he
has not ceased to step up contacts with the highest
Central African authorities. His commitment to the full
restoration of peace in the Central African Republic is
clear to all. Less than four months after the appearance
of his report contained in document S/2008/733 of
26 November 2008, where the idea of an integrated
office was born, the Council is called on to carry
forward that recommendation, which is now before it.
The complexity of the solutions needed to resolve
the problem of the Central African Republic following
the convening of the inclusive political dialogue can
only be organized within the context of an integrated

5

S/PV.6091

process, as proposed by the Secretary-General in his
letter of 3 March (S/2009/128). The Government of the
Central African Republic welcomes the recommendation
for the establishment of a United Nations integrated
Peacebuilding Office to succeed the current United
Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central
African Republic until 31 December 2009. We endorse
the establishment of that Integrated Office, which is
innovative in its integration of the Peacebuilding
Support Office into the strategic planning and
coordination unit.
The placing of the Central African Republic on
the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission has
greatly raised the profile of issues related to our
country within international bodies: the United Nations,
the African Union, the World Bank, the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community and others.
The cooperation between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Government is one of the most
exemplary. Once the Strategic Framework for
Peacebuilding has been finalized by common agreement,
we cherish the hope that efforts towards stabilization
and genuine national reconciliation will be achieved.
The Integrated Office should play a major role in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process,

6

which remains the cornerstone on which true political
momentum rests. With this new body, the United
Nations will be able to speak with a single voice.
We reiterate how pleased we shall be to see the
Integrated Office becoming operational as soon as
possible in accordance with the recommendation. The
Government of the Central African Republic will be
happy to work closely with the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who will lead
this integrated office, as well as with all the agencies of
the United Nations system.
I cannot conclude without sympathizing with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, who
is leaving his post at a very crucial time in the peace
process in the Central African Republic. I wish him
every success in his future endeavours.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. In accordance
with the understanding reached in the course of the
Council’s prior consultations, I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

09-26011
