S/PRST/2011/19

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 October 2011
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6630th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 October 2011, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Maintenance of
international peace and security”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls the statements by its President of
21 February 2007 (S/PRST/2007/3) and 12 May 2008 (S/PRST/2008/14), and
the report of the Secretary-General entitled ‘Securing Peace and Development:
the role of the United Nations in supporting security sector reform’ of
23 January 2008 (S/2008/39), and emphasizes that the establishment of an
effective, professional and accountable security sector is at the cornerstone of
peace and sustainable development. Equally, security sector reform
underscores that effectiveness, accountability and good governance are
mutually reinforcing elements of security.
“The Security Council notes that the bulk of the international
community’s assistance in the area of security sector reform takes place in, and
is directed to countries in Africa. At the same time, a number of African
countries are becoming important providers of such assistance. The Security
Council welcomes this intra-African collaboration and emphasizes that there is
a need to expand the consideration given to African perspectives on security
sector reform. This includes enhancing cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, as well as sharing knowledge and experience with
women and members of civil society. Focusing security sector reform efforts
on the needs and priorities of populations in post-conflict countries will
considerably enhance the legitimacy, viability and sustainability of such
support.
“The Security Council recognizes that security sector reform is a longterm process and reiterates the sovereign right and primary responsibility of
the country concerned to determine its national approach and priorities for
security sector reform. It should be a nationally owned process that is rooted in
the particular needs and conditions of the country in question. The successful
coordination of security sector reform efforts must be based on national
consensus and driven by political leadership and political will to progress
reform. In this regard, the Security Council underlines the responsibility of
States to coordinate security sector reform support, including, but not limited
to, establishing a strategic vision and the parameters for reform, identifying

11-54242 (E) 121011

*1154242*

S/PRST/2011/19

gaps and needs, prioritizing areas for technical support, and avoiding
duplication of donor efforts.
“The Security Council encourages reforming States, while taking into
account their capacity constraints, to strive to allocate national resources to
security sector reform efforts to ensure long-term sustainability and viability
of such reform. In this context, the Security Council emphasizes the
importance of improving women’s participation in discussions pertinent to
prevention and resolution of conflict, the maintenance of peace and security
and encourages women to participate in the national armed and security forces
in accordance with relevant international law. In this regard, the Security
Council encourages the development of a security sector that is accessible and
responsive to all, including women and other vulnerable groups.
“The Security Council recognizes the importance of regional frameworks
as a foundation for multilateral security sector reform efforts. In this regard,
the Security Council welcomes the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union in developing a continental security sector reform
policy framework, for its implementation. The Security Council encourages
other regions to consider establishing such partnerships in order to better
facilitate the exchange of lessons learned and best practices, as well as develop
regional frameworks for security sector reform support, reflecting the
participation of regional and subregional organizations. The Security Council
also recognizes the support provided by bilateral actors, as well as regional
actors, including the European Union, to security sector reform efforts in
Africa and other initiatives in the area of security sector reform in Africa
carried out by organizations such as the Economic Community of West African
States and the Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries.
“The Security Council recalls its previous Presidential Statements
concerning the need for early and adequate support in priority areas of
peacebuilding, including reform of the security sector, as well as the
importance of security sector reform programs for conflict prevention. In light
of ongoing conflict in Africa, the Security Council reiterates the link between
security sector reform and socio-economic development, and underlines that
such reform efforts should be situated within the broader and more
comprehensive spectrum of peacebuilding. In this regard, the Security Council
emphasizes the important role of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund in supporting SSR, including in African countries. The
Security Council encourages the Peacebuilding Commission to continue to
promote coordination among and between national and external actors
involved in security sector reform in the countries on its agenda.
“The Security Council underlines that United Nations support to security
sector reform must take place within a broad framework of the rule of law and
should contribute to the overall strengthening of the United Nations rule of law
activities as well as wider reconstruction and development efforts. This will
require continued coordination with relevant United Nations actors to ensure
an increasingly coherent approach. In this context, the Security Council
stresses the need for security sector reform efforts to be cognizant of the issue
of impunity.

2

11-54242

S/PRST/2011/19

“The Security Council notes that peacekeeping has evolved significantly
over the past decades from primarily monitoring ceasefires to complex
multi-dimensional operations which seek to undertake peacebuilding tasks and
underlying causes of conflict. In this regard, the Security Council notes that an
increasing number of peacekeeping and special political missions are
mandated to support national security sector reform programs, including those
in Africa, through strategic assistance to develop security sector frameworks
and capacity building of the security and law enforcement institutions in key
areas, including training in human rights, child protection and protection from
sexual- and gender-based violence. The Security Council stresses the need to
continue to include, as appropriate, security sector reform aspects as an
integral part of planning of United Nations operations.
“The Security Council recognizes the important role that the United
Nations has played in supporting national efforts to build sustainable security
institutions, and commends the efforts of the United Nations, in particular the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, including the Security Sector Reform
Unit and the United Nations Inter-Agency Security Sector Reform Task Force,
in further strengthening a comprehensive United Nations approach to security
sector reform, through the development of guidance and civilian capacities,
coordination mechanisms, and collaboration with regional and subregional
organizations, in particular the African Union.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to submit, by early
2013, an assessment of the United Nations support for SSR, including those
efforts in Africa, and make recommendations on how best to strengthen the
United Nations comprehensive approach to SSR, taking into account the
linkages between United Nations assistance and conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, and also taking into consideration the views of relevant United
Nations organs and actors.”

11-54242

3
