S/PV.7146

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7146th meeting

Thursday, 20 March 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Lucas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Luxembourg)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Gálvez
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Omaish
Mrs. Kazragienė
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)

14-27015 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1427015*

S/PV.7146

Non-proliferation

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ambassador Gary Quinlan, Permanent
Representative of Australia, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Quinlan.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I have the honour to
present the report of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), in accordance with
paragraph 18 (h) of that resolution. The present report
covers the period from 13 December 2013 to 19 March
2014, during which time the Committee held two
informal meetings and one informal informal meeting,
and conducted additional work using the no-objection
procedure envisaged in paragraph 15 of the guidelines
for the conduct of the Committee’s work.
The Committee presented its annual report to the
President of the Council on 27 December last year. The
annual report provides a useful snapshot of the range
of activities pursued by the Committee in accordance
with its mandate over that year.I would particularly
like to highlight the Committee’s communications
with Member States and international organizations on
matters of implementation and compliance. Providing
guidance to Member States that request assistance with
their implementation of the relevant provisions of the
key resolutions is obviously a critical dimension of
the Committee’s programme of work. I encourage all
Member States to take us up on our offer.
Another aspect of our work, highlighted in the
2013 annual report, is the reports from Member
States themselves of action they have taken to enforce
the sanctions measures. Some of the cases related
to violations of national implementation measures

2/13

20/03/2014

investigated by local enforcement authorities; for
others, the Member State concerned invited the Panel of
Experts to investigate the incident, in particular those
that appeared to be a breach by Iran of its obligations
under the resolutions. I cannot overstate the importance
to the Committee’s work of these incident reports and
the willingness of Member States to invite the Panel
of Experts to participate in the investigation of such
incidents.
The Committee twice reached out to Iran last year
in relation to incidents investigated by the Panel of
Experts. We wrote on 12 April 2013 in relation to the
Panel’s unanimous conclusion that Iran’s launches of
the Shahab-1 and Shahab-3 missiles during the Great
Prophet VII exercises contravened paragraph 9 of
resolution 1929 (2010), and on 21 May 2013 in relation
to the Panel’s conclusion that an intercepted arms
shipment in Yemen was at the very least a probable
violation by Iran of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747
(2007). Iran has still not replied, and the Committee
continues to call on Iran to do so.
Although the Committee remains mindful of
ongoing talks between the P5+1 and Iran following the
joint plan of action agreed in Geneva on 24 November
2013, the work of both the Committee and the Panel of
Experts remains unchanged for 2014. As I mentioned
during my last report in December 2013 (see S/PV.7082),
the Security Council measures imposed by resolutions
1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010)
remain in effect, and Member States continue to have
an obligation to implement them duly.
The Committee adopted its programme of work for
the period 1 January to 30 June 2014 on 24 January and
has already been actively engaged with Member States.
The Committee received multiple communications
from several Member States, updating the Committee
on the outcome of enforcement actions they had taken.
One Member State reported on the steps it had taken to
prevent multiple attempts in 2011 and 2012 by Iran to
procure carbon fibre, suspected of being in violation of
relevant Security Council resolutions. Another Member
State informed the Committee of the confirmation of
the judgement against a person found guilty of violating
its laws implementing the Council’s sanctions on Iran.
The Committee continued to consider its response to
the report by the Panel of Experts, which had concluded
that Iran’s attempted procurement of carbon fibre
in December 2012 — those goods were intercepted

14-27015

20/03/2014

Non-proliferation

and seized by a Member State — contravened the
resolutions.
The Permanent Representative of a Member State,
named in media reports as having contracted to procure
arms from Iran, in contravention of paragraph 5 of
resolution 1747 (2007) , called on me in my capacity
as Chair of the Committee to deny the reports. The
Permanent Mission also sent a note verbale to the
Committee in similar terms. The Panel of Experts is
separately engaging with the Member State concerned
on those reports.
During the reporting period, the Committee
responded to requests for guidance from Member States
covering a range of issues, ranging from notification
requirements and engagement with the originating
State of seized items to the supply of target-shooting
ammunition to Iran for sport shooting purposes, and
updated lists of designated individuals, entities and
goods to which the sanctions apply. The Committee
is also working with an international organization on
clarifying whether a particular proposal for technical
assistance to Iran is compatible with the sanctions
regime.
The Committee has also engaged with a number
of Member States over the past three months on the
implementation of the targeted financial sanctions
regime. The Committee provided additional identifying
information of a listed individual from publicly available
sources, including photographs, to assist a Member
State in clarifying a possible match. The Committee
similarly responded to another State’s request for
assistance in determining whether particular entities
were included in the Committee’s consolidated list.
The Committee itself received assistance from a
Member State, which transmitted to us a list of persons
who had travelled through the country with names similar
to those of listed individuals and provided additional
identifying information for those possible matches
that was missing from the Committee’s consolidated
list, such as birth dates and passport numbers. That
data will allow the Committee to determine whether
any of the individuals were indeed listed individuals
travelling in contravention of the travel ban and, in that
case, to strengthen the effectiveness of both the ban
and targeted financial sanctions by including the new
identifying data in the consolidated list.
As we are approaching the end of the current
mandate of the Panel of Experts and the submission of

S/PV.7146

its final report in May, I thought it would be timely to
inform the Council of the outcome of the Committee’s
deliberations on the Panel’s recommendations to the
Committee from its report of May 2013.
The Panel’s first recommendation was to designate
an entity the Panel found to be in violation of paragraph
12 of resolution 1929 (2010) for procuring valves for
use in the Arak heavy water reactor. The Committee
stands ready to consider such a designation if and when
a Member State puts the designation to the Committee,
as required by the Committee’s guidelines.
Secondly, the Panel recommended that the
Committee encourage States to be alert to attempted
procurement of any items destined for an end use
prohibited by the resolutions. That is a reference to the
fact that the obligation to prevent the supply to Iran
of all items that could contribute to Iran’s prohibited
nuclear and missile-related activities applies not only to
items included in the lists named in the resolutions and
updated by the Committee, but to any further items if
the Member State determines that they could contribute
to those prohibited activities. The Committee continues
to discuss whether some form of written guidance
for Member States on that obligation is necessary. In
the meantime, we encourage any Member State with
questions concerning the scope of the obligation to
contact the Committee.
The Panel’s third recommendation related to vessels
under the control of the Irano Hind Shipping Company,
which is a designated entity under sanctions. The
company was dissolved by its joint venture partners in
the first part of 2013, preventing the Committee from
taking up the recommendation.
Fourthly, the Panel recommended that the
Committee consider providing guidance to States on
how to implement aspects of the targeted financial
sanctions that extend the application of the measures
to agents and affiliates of designated persons and
entities. Noting that the language identified in the
recommendation is used in targeted financial sanctions
under other Council resolutions, the Committee has
been reluctant to consider the question unilaterally.
However, we have begun a process of consultation with
other relevant sanctions committees to consider the
issue collectively.
The Panel’s fifth recommendation was for the
Committee to provide guidance on the modalities
surrounding a State’s inspection of cargoes and possible

14-270153/13

S/PV.7146

Non-proliferation

seizing of goods suspected to be in contravention
of the resolutions, including such matters as timing
and content of reports to the Committee and inviting
inspection by the Panel. The Committee is developing
text to include in the Committee’s Fact Sheet and other
relevant Committee documents.
Finally, the Panel recommended that the Committee
address discrepancies in the list where designated
individuals no longer hold the positions identified
in those designations. The Committee is taking that
forward as part of the comprehensive review of the
Committee’s list mentioned in part 1 of the Committee’s
work programme.
Just before concluding, I would like to turn now to
conditional exceptions to the ban on supplying nuclearrelated items to Iran, notably in relation to items for light
water reactors, which the Council considers to be less
proliferation-sensitive than heavy water reactors. The
Committee must be notified of supplies to Iran of items
falling under the exception and, during the reporting
period, the Committee received one such notification
by a Member State concerning the delivery of items for
reactor unit 1 of the Bushehr nuclear power plant.
With regard to the obligation of Member States
to freeze assets on their territory that are owned or
controlled by a person or entity listed by the Council
or the Committee and to prevent any assets being made
available to such persons or entities, the Committee
received one notification from a Member State pursuant
to paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006) and paragraph
4 of resolution 1747 (2007), which allow for payments
owed by a listed person or entity under a contract
entered into prior to the listing to be made from that
person or entity’s frozen funds, subject to notification
to the Committee.
I should note, in concluding, that a slightly more
detailed version of this report will be available online.
I might also note that we will continue to make efforts
to try to “de-dry” these reports in the future, but there
are certain legal obligations according to which the
Committee is required to transmit certain information
to the public in an ordinary meeting of the Security
Council.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing and for his efforts
to “de-dry”, as he says, the report.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
4/13

20/03/2014

Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), under the chairmanship of Ambassador Gary
Quinlan, and the Panel of Experts for their continued
to work in supporting implementation of the Security
Council’s resolutions on Iran. The report may be dry,
but the work that the Committee does is very important.
On 24 November 2013, the E3+3 and Iran reached
an important and encouraging milestone, when a first
stage agreement was reached on the nuclear issue.
Since then, a first round of talks on a comprehensive
agreement was held in Vienna in February, where there
was a willingness and a commitment from all sides
to negotiate in good faith. Those talks continued in a
positive atmosphere earlier this week.
The interim agreement was a significant step
forward and allows for time to negotiate a comprehensive
solution. In January, the United States and the
European Union delivered the sanctions relief, and
we welcome the latest report by the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, dated
20 February, which confirms that Iran has continued to
implement the nuclear measures agreed under the joint
plan of action.
Meanwhile and importantly, the bulk of sanctions
remain in place, including all United Nations sanctions.
We should continue to robustly enforce those sanctions
to ensure that economic pressure continues to act as a
peaceful incentive for Iran to negotiate a comprehensive
solution.
Turning to the work of the Committee, we are
concerned by breaches and possible breaches by Iran
of its international obligations. Reports that a cargo
ship, the Klos C, was found to have dozens of Iraniansupplied rockets on board in hidden containers, are
deeply worrying, including the fact that the final
destination appears to have been the Gaza Strip. That
not the first time that we have seen reports of potential
arms transfers to Gaza involving Iran. We would like
to the Panel of Experts investigate the circumstances of
the case, identify individuals and entities responsible,
and make recommendations to the Committee, as
appropriate.
In January 2013, the report of the Panel of Experts
clearly and unanimously concluded that Iran’s ballistic
missile launched last year constituted a violation of
resolution 1929 (2010). The Committee contacted
Iran twice on the issue, but Iran has yet to respond.

14-27015

20/03/2014

Non-proliferation

As that report recalls, Iran has also not replied to the
Committee regarding a request for information on an
intercepted arms shipment to Yemen. We call on Iran to
engage with the Committee on such incidents.
We are concerned that Iran continues to provide
substantial military and financial support to Hizbollah
and the Syrian regime, in contravention of the United
Nations embargo on the export of weapons by Iran. We
urge Member States to continue to enforce the sanctions
regime and encourage Member States to act on and
report all suspected violations of those sanctions.
We look forward to the Panel of Experts’ final
report in May.
The United Kingdom is committed to finding a
peaceful, negotiated solution with Iran on the nuclear
issue. That will be a long-term process. We do not
expect instant results, but we remain fully committed
to finding a diplomatic solution. The Geneva agreement
and ongoing negotiations are the best opportunity we
have for real and sustainable progress. All sides must
continue to make every effort to succeed.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Quinlan and his team for the quarterly
activity report that has just been presented to us.
For over 10 years now, the Iranian nuclear
programme and the uncertainties about its exclusively
peaceful purposes have been a matter of concern to
the international community and a threat to peace
and international security. For 10 years, the Council
has in vain called on Iran to negotiate. Each time,
we have been confronted with their refusal to engage
in dialogue and a jump forward in their nuclear and
missile programmes. That led the Council to establish
a sanctions regime while continuing to call on Iran to
negotiate. That so-called dual approach and the new
attitude of the authorities in Tehran finally brought
about a substantive discussion with Iran on the nuclear
issue.
The adoption of the joint action plan on 24 November
2013, the implementation of which began in January,
was a step forward for peace and security. For the first
time, the E3+3 got Iran to suspend the most sensitive
activities of its nuclear programme for six months. The
negotiations were thus given more time. The dialogue is
just beginning. The joint action plan is only an interim
agreement. The mandate that was given to the P5+1
by the Council is to find a long-term solution to the
Iranian nuclear programme with a view to restoring

S/PV.7146

confidence in its exclusively peaceful purpose. That is
the direction and purpose of talks between Iran and the
P5+1 that were just held in Vienna and will continue at
the beginning of April. We approach them with an open
mind, but also with vigilance.
Progress has finally been made in the dialogue
between Iran and the International Atomic Energy
Agency. The Director General has stated, in his report
of 20 February and in the report published just today
in Vienna, that Iran has met its commitments under the
joint action plan with the P5+1. He also stated that Iran
has implemented the confidence-building measures
contained in the former agreement with the Agency
on 11 November. That is a positive development, but
not all the issues have been resolved — far from it. To
achieve a long-term solution, it remains essential that
Iran clarify all outstanding issues related to the possible
military dimensions of Iran’s nuclear programme. Iran
knows that and will need to provide answers.
Finally, I would recall that the joint action plan
does not in any way do away with the sanctions
regime against Iran imposed by the Security Council,
which must be fully implemented while awaiting a
comprehensive settlement of the crisis. It is therefore
with concern that we read the reports that, on 5 March,
the Israeli navy intercepted a large shipment of arms,
probably of Iranian origin, destined for Gaza. The
Panel will have to confirm the origin of those weapons,
but if that is indeed the case, it would be a violation
of the arms embargo imposed under resolution 1747
(2007), which might call into question Iran’s good faith
in its stated willingness to address the concerns of the
Security Council. We hope that the Committee’s Panel
of Experts will be able to quickly engage in a dialogue
with Israel and Iran in order to shed light on this matter.
On the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), which
Ambassador Quinlan has just briefed us on, I regret
that the experts’ recommendations that are contained
in last year’s final report (S/2013/331, annex) have not
been fully implemented. They are nonetheless simple
and operational recommendations aimed at making
the sanctions system more effective. We will have
to redouble our efforts so that, by our next meeting,
progress can made in this area.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing and
commend him for the enormous efforts he has made
to push forward the work of the Security Council

14-270155/13

S/PV.7146

Non-proliferation

Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) .
China has always attached great importance to
the work of the Committee and stands ready to work
with the Chair in implementing the various activities
of the Committee in a balanced, orderly and prudent
manner. It has been China’s consistent view that all
parties are duty-bound to implement the Security
Council’s resolutions on sanctions against Iran in an
accurate, comprehensive and faithful manner. But
sanctions are not an end in themselves. The work of
both the Committee and the Council is to serve the goal
of achieving diplomatic solutions. It is hoped that the
Committee will follow the resolution’s mandate, apply
the principles of objectivity, fairness and pragmatism
and, on the basis of clear facts, solid evidence and
extensive consultations, properly deal with the
individual cases of suspected sanctions violations.
China will act on the basis of the aforementioned
principles and participate in the work of the Committee
in a responsible manner.
China recognizes the positive momentum
demonstrated by the latest diplomatic efforts and
welcomes the fact that the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) has maintained consultations with
Iran on outstanding issues concerning Iran’s nuclear
programme and reached agreement on the steps to be
taken in the future. As the first stage agreements between
the P5+1 and Iran have been successfully implemented,
the negotiations on a comprehensive agreement have
unfolded and the dialogue with Iran has entered a new
stage. Following the recently concluded first round of
dialogue, the P5+1 and Iran have conducted interactive
and frank exchanges on questions of mutual concern
and have reached consensus. In spite of remaining
differences on some issues, all parties concerned have
demonstrated the will to address the concerns of the
other side. That will help them to continue to seek
common ground and resolve their differences.
With the deepeneing of negotiations, however,
the dialogue process will face increasing challenges
ahead. Therefore, China proposes the following: first,
to continue the process of the P5+1 dialogue with Iran
and bring that mechanism into full play through joint
commitment and consultations on an equal footing
in order to resolve the issue peacefully; secondly, to
reach a comprehensive, fair and reasonable long-term
solution that accommodates the concerns of all parties;
thirdly, to try to follow the principle of step-by-step

6/13

20/03/2014

reciprocity and enhnace mutual trust by meeting each
other half way, in order to create favourable conditions
for achieving a breakgrhough; fourthly, to create a
viable atmosphere for dialogue and negotiations by
demonstrating good faith and maintaining confidence
and patience; and, fifthly, while focusing on addressing
the Iranian nuclear issue itself, we should adopt a new
security concept featuring mutual trust, mutual benefit,
equality and coordination, engage in constructive
multilateral and bilateral cooperation and find a
comprehensive solution that addresses the issue by
looking into both the root causes and the symptoms.
China has always endeavoured to promote dialogue
in an impartial and responsible manner. It will
participate in the dialogue in a constructive manner and
wor tirelessly for the comprehensive implementation of
the resolution.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his
briefing on the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), which he
chairs. In our view, the very dry nature of his briefing
is what makes it stand out.
Russian diplomacy has, over many years, worked
very actively to achieve fair agreements on the Iranian
nuclear programme on the basis of the step-by-step
reciprocity spelled out by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Russian Federation, Sergey V. Lavrov. We are
satisfied that those efforts have yielded results and that
on 24 November 2013, a breakthrough agreement ­— and
that is not an exaggeration — was reached between
the P5+1, the international mediators and Iran. That
agreement recognized the unquestionable right of Iran
to develop a peaceful nuclear programme, including
uranium enrichment, subject to the understanding that
outstanding issues around it will be resolved and that
the programme itself will be placed under International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards.
It is also important that the aforementioned
agreement presupposes a weakening of the sanctions
regime against Iran. It is gratifying that the suspension
of unilateral sanctions, the legitimacy of which were
never recognized, and which have had a long-standing
negative impact on the socioeconomic position of the
Iranian people, has already started.
In that context, the ultimate goal is of course the
lifting of all sanctions — those imposed both by the
Security Council resolutions and unilaterally — once a

14-27015

20/03/2014

Non-proliferation

basic agreement on the final settlement of the Iranian
nuclear programme has been achieved. All sides must
implement the Geneva plan of action in good faith and
actively work to draft, by 20 July, a final package that
would allow for an early and comprehensive settlement
of issues surrounding the Iranian nuclear programme
on the basis of compromises in all areas.
In that regard, we welcome the second comprehensive
round of negotiations between the P5+1 and the Islamic
Republic of Iran, held in Vienna from 17 to 19 March.
It was useful and affirmed the mutual readiness to
continue contructive cooperation and comprehensive
talks. There was an in-depth discussion of the sanctions
issues, Iranian enrichment activities and international
cooperation with Iran on peaceful nuclear energy,
and on how to allay concerns over the heavy water
reactor in Arak. The P5+1 and Iran agreed to continue
comprehensive talks at the political and technical levels.
The next round of expert consultations will be held
at the beginning of April, following which another
comprehensive round of negotiations will be held in
Vienna from 7 to 9 April. Such a tight schedule gives
the necessary positive momentum to the process for
us to focus our work on those aspects where there are
the greatest differences exist and to move towards
resolving them.
The increased cooperation between Iran and the
IAEA is promising. That cooperation has reached a
new stage and provides for Iran’s implementation of
good-faith transparency measures that go beyond its
commitments in the framework of the IAEA guarantees.
We hope that the IAEA will close the Iranian dossier in
the near future and cooperate with that country in the
normal way.
We are convinced that the current sensitive stage
of the international community’s work must be tailored
to promoting a positive negotiation process between
the P5+1 and Iran. That is what guides our work in
the 1737 Committee. In the current critical stage, it is
particularly important that the Committee and its Panel
of Experts continue to act in an unbiased, balanced
and objective way in order to promote a political and
diplomatic settlement with regard to the Iranian nuclear
programme.
We are convinced that progress on the Iranian issue
will have a positive impact on the situation throughout
the Middle East and help to overcome the dangerous
trend of recent years, when there were attempts to

S/PV.7146

resolve a number of crisis situations by using force. For
our part, we will continue to spare no effort to achieve
a final comprehensive solution to issues related to the
Iranian nuclear programme. We hope that hasty actions
by some partners of the P5+1 will not lead to a loss of
coordination in that very important mechanism.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing and for his able
leadership of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). His work on the issue under
consideration has particular value at this time. Today,
I would like to touch on three reasons why. The first
reason relates to the ongoing P5+1 talks, the second to
troubling signs of sanctions violations, and the third to
the important roles of the Committee and the Panel of
Experts, which is set to begin work on its next report,
the details of which will be essential.
On the nuclear talks with the Islamic Republic
of Iran, the Security Council has a clear stake in the
outcome. The Council has imposed four rounds of
sanctions in response to Iran’s failure to adhere to its
nuclear obligations. Any deal with Iran must squarely
address the many Security Council resolutions on
that matter. That is a key principle of the joint plan of
action. It is critical that all Member States continue
to fully implement the sanctions on Iran. The full
implementation of the sanction regime will support the
diplomacy and limit Iran’s illicit smuggling of arms,
funds and technology.
In that regard, we find the recent indications
of serious violations of United Nations sanctions
troubling. Earlier this month, Israel announced that it
had stopped a massive shipment of rockets, mortars
and ammunition that Iran was smuggling to Gaza
militants. We call on the Committee, with the support
of the Panel, to investigate all aspects of that incident.
The Committee should also be prepared to impose real
consequences, such as possible sanctions designations,
on those responsible.
At the same time, reports that Iran sought to
transfer arms to Iraq, in violation of resolution 1737
(2006), are alarming. We note that the Iraqi authorities
have committed publicly to fully respecting all relevant
resolutions, which is welcome. In that connection, we
encourage the Committee and the Panel, in cooperation
with the Iraqi authorities, to investigate those reports
and affirm full compliance with resolution 1737 (2006).

14-270157/13

S/PV.7146

Non-proliferation

That leads me to my last point on the important
roles of the Committee and the Panel. As a rule, if
and when violations such as those mentioned above
occur, the Council’s Iran Sanctions Committee has the
responsibility to tighten enforcement. We look to the
Committee to step up efforts to help States implement
the sanctions and to be ready to respond to all reports of
sanctions non-compliance. In addition, it is essential the
the Panel continue its full travel schedule and continue
to raise awareness about the sanctions.
In that context, as the Panel begins its work to draft
its next annual report, we encourage it to present as
much information as possible on sanctions compliance.
We commend the Panel for its independent reporting
and urge it to continue its cooperation with Member
States and the Committee. The Committee needs to
know the names of violators and their methods. We
also encourage the Panel to ensure that its report has
specific and implementable recommendations that
can tangibly improve sanctions implementation. The
Panel’s recent recommendations, which were specific in
nature, enabled the Committee to engage in productive
discussions and assess how best to move forward.
The United States looks forward to continung its
work with the Committee as we address the challenges
and issues raised here today. Monitoring implementation,
a quick response to violations and cooperation with the
Panel are fundamental to the success of the sanctions
and to supporting our negotiators as they seek a
comprehensive solution.
Mr. Gálvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
Ambassador Quinlan for presenting the quarterly
report on the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). We
value the work of Ambassador Quinlan as Chair of that
Committee.
Given that this is our first opportunity to participate
in a briefing by the Chairman of the 1737 Committee,
I would like to say that my country welcomes the
agreement between the P5+1 and Iran of 24 November
2013 and the cooperation agreement between Iran and
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). They
provide a unique opportunity for Iran to prove the
peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.
Chile welcomes with satisfaction the most
recent report of the Director General of the IAEA
of 20 February on the implementation of the NPT
safeguards agreement and relevant provisions of

8/13

20/03/2014

Security Council resolutions in the Islamic Republic of
Iran. We particularly welcome the fact that the highly
enriched uranium reserves have been significantly
reduced pursuant to the 24 November agreement and
that the IAEA recognizes that Iran is meeting its
commitments to slow down its most sensitive nuclear
activities in exchange for the lifting of some economic
sanctions.
Our country follows such reports with interest, but
also with caution. Our country notes the issues raised
by the various delegations during the Committee’s
consultations in the recent quarter. In particular, we
note the view that, in the context of the ongoing talks
between the P5+1 and Iran, it is not advisable to take
steps that could threaten the current momentum in the
dialogue.
Chile understands that we are not working in a
political vacuum and that any kind of action that could
be misunderstood by the parties should be avoided.
However, until a final and satisfactory agreement is
reached and endorsed by the Security Council, the
measures imposed by the United Nations with regard to
Iran’s nuclear programme will remain in effect.
In that context, my country expresses its strong
support for the 1737 Committee and its Panel of Experts,
and hopes that its work will not be impeded and that
it will able to fully fulfil its mandate in a timely and
effective manner. That is particularly relevant given
the recently reported incident in the Red Sea, where a
ship carrying ballistic missiles, apparently of Iranian
origin and destined for the Gaza Strip, was intercepted.
We hope that the Panel of Experts will be able to
begin to collect information on that case as soon as
possible in order to gather objective data to enable us to
decide whether or not it was a violation of the relevant
resolutions.
In conclusion, Chile expresses its vote of confidence
that the spirit of collaboration and commitment observed
on the part of the Government in Tehran in its dialogue
with the P5+1 with regard to its nuclear programme
will be reflected in other equally pressing matters in
the Middle East, in which Iran plays an important role.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing on the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). We greatly appreciate his able leadership
and the Panel of Experts for their robust activities.

14-27015

20/03/2014

Non-proliferation

Let me begin by reiterating my Government’s
support for the joint plan of action agreed between
the P5+1 and Iran last November. We welcome the
initiation of the implementation of the agreed measures
since January. We are keenly watching the negotiations
towards a comprehensive resolution of the Iranian
nuclear issue. We hope the process can have a positive
influence on other outstanding non-proliferation
issues. We also underline the importance of the IAEA’s
role in resolving all present and past issues, including
the possible military dimensions of the Iranian nuclear
programme.
With regard to today’s briefing, we consider it
important that the obligations set out in the Security
Council resolutions remain in full force and be
faithfully implemented by all Member States. As
highlighted in the briefing, we think the various
communications received from Member States and
international organizations indicate the importance
of the Committee’s work and its role in the sanctions
regime. We look forward to the Panel’s new final report
with high expectations, which will shed further light on
the implementation of the Security Council resolutions.
Finally, we note that, as mentioned in the briefing,
there are important overdue pending issues on violation
cases. There are also some recommendations from
last year’s final report that have not yet been fully
implemented. We encourage all Committee members
to strengthen cooperation to find common ground
and practical solutions to move those pending issues
forward before the next report is submitted.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank Ambassador Quinlan
for presenting the quarterly report on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) and for his dedicated and devoted leadership of
the Committee.
We have received the most recent report of the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), dated 20 February. In that regard, I
would like to underscore that, according to the report, in
the specified three-month period, Iran implemented the
initial practical measures contained in the annex to the
framework for cooperation with the IAEA. Moreover,
we believe that it is auspicious that the Agency and Iran
have agreed to the next seven steps to be implemented
before 15 May and that the report also recognizes that
Iran has fulfilled its obligations with regard to the
measures of the joint action plan agreed with the P5+1.

S/PV.7146

As we said in the Council in December (see
S/PV.7082) and in other forums, we understand that the
agreement between the P5+1 and Iran reaffirms the value
of diplomatic measures and represents a significant step
forward in the area of Iran’s nuclear programme. We
therefore congratulate the Governments of the United
States, Iran, France, China, the Russian Federation, the
United Kingdom and Germany on the entry into force
of the agreement on 20 January.
We are also pleased that the P5+1 and Iran have
requested the IAEA to carry out the nuclear energyrelated monitoring and verification activities that are
necessary in order to implement the joint action plan,
and that the Board of Governors of the IAEA approved
the Agency’s carrying out of those tasks at its session in
January. In that regard, we believe it important for the
Agency to have the necessary capacity to carry out its
work effectively.
While we welcome the progress achieved in recent
months in the negotiations, we have taken careful
note of the Director General’s conclusion that there
is still much to be done to resolve pending issues. In
that regard, we believe that it is essential that Iran
cooperate actively with the Agency on all pending
issues, particularly with regard to the possible military
dimensions of Iran’s nuclear programme — on which
there has not yet been significant concrete progress,
according to the report — and that it comply with its
obligations, including Security Council resolutions.
With regard to the Committee’s work, as
Ambassador Quinlan indicated the sanctions imposed
by the Security Council are still in effect and should
be implemented by Member States. In that regard, I
reiterate my delegation’s concern with regard to the
quality of the lists of persons and entities subject to
sanctions developed by some Committees. We stress
the importance of entries being supported by sufficient
data to allow Member States to properly identify them
in applying sanctions. For that reason, we support the
Chair’s efforts to improve the quality of the Committee’s
list and, consequently, the sanctions’ effectiveness.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation welcomes the efforts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) in
assisting States and international organizations with
issues related to the implementation of the resolutions
imposing sanctions on Iran by providing guidance and
answers to States’ technical questions on the timeliness
and accuracy of the implementation of the resolutions.

14-270159/13

S/PV.7146

Non-proliferation

We encourage the Committee to continue conducting
the necessary investigations of violations and to assess
opportunities for ongoing engagement with the Iranian
Government with a view to clarifying pending questions
regarding violations cited in the report, especially with
respect to the prohibited missiles launched during the
Great Prophet VII military exercises, and to the arms
shipment that was seized on 23 January 2013 aboard a
vessel en route to Yemen.
We appreciate the Committee’s efforts to consult
with other sanctions committees in issuing guidance
to States on the implementation of targeted financial
sanctions.
Finally, we welcome the conclusion of the Geneva
agreement on the joint action plan between Iran and
the P5+1. However, at the same time, we urge the
Committee to carry on its mandated tasks to the fullest
possible extent.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): I, too, thank the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), the Permanent Representative of Australia, for
his briefing. The report that was presented to the Council
today, which he described as dry but not entirely devoid
of interest, addresses the issues of implementation and
compliance as they affect the mandate of the 1737
Committee. We note and welcome the willingness of
Member States and international organizations to invite
the Panel of Experts to assist in the investigation of
cases related to violations of national implementation
of sanctions measures.
We commend the Committee’s continued provision
of guidance, assistance and timely responses to
Member States and international organizations in
the verification of the compatibility of requests
with the sanctions regime. Those actions are clearly
demonstrated in the reported cases, including those
received from Hungary, Sweden, Kuwait, Argentina,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization. We also
welcome the assistance provided to the Committee
through the transmission of useful information by the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
We urge the Islamic Republic of Iran to respond
to the Committee’s letter of 12 April 2013 in relation
to the Panel’s conclusion that it had launched Shahab-1
and Shahab-3 ballistic missiles in contravention of
resolution 1929 (2010). The Islamic Republic of Iran
should also respond to the Committee’s letter of 21 May

10/13

20/03/2014

2013 in relation to the Panel’s conclusion concerning an
arms shipment intercepted in Yemen, which represents
a probable violation by Iran of resolution 1747 (2007).
We note and welcome the cooperation the
Committee has received from Member States that have
updated the Committee on enforcement actions they
have taken. We see merit in the Panel’s recommendation
that the Committee encourage States to be alert to the
procurement of items destined for an end use prohibited
by relevant resolutions. We commend the Committee
for launching a consultative process with other relevant
sanctions committees to consider the implementation
of targeted financial sanctions against agents and
affiliates of designated persons.
Finally, we would like to commend the Permanent
Representative of Australia for his astute leadership of
the 1737 Committee.
Mrs. Kazragienė (Lithuania): I would like to
thank Ambassador Quinlan for his quarterly briefing
and to commend the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and its Panel of Experts for their
important and dedicated work.
Lithuania remains concerned about the nature of
Iran’s nuclear programme and its failure to comply
with numerous resolutions of the Security Council and
the Board of Governors of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) obliging Iran to suspend all
reprocessing, heavy water and enrichment-related
activities. In his latest report, the Director General of
the IAEA has once again noted that the Agency was
not in a position to conclude that all nuclear material
in Iran was used for peaceful activities and that it
remained concerned about the possible undisclosed
military dimension of Iran’s nuclear programmes.
At the same time, we welcome the 24 November
2013 plan of action agreed by the E3+3 and Iran as the
first confidence-building step. We further call on Iran
to engage constructively with the E3+3 in reaching a
comprehensive agreement on all outstanding issues
and welcome another round of talks that took place
on 18 and 19 March in Vienna. We are encouraged by
the fact that the six initial practical measures foreseen
in the framework for cooperation between the IAEA
and Iran have been implemented. We also welcome
the agreement on the next seven practical measures.
The overarching goal of the ongoing negotiations is to
build mutual trust and confidence that Iran will not be

14-27015

20/03/2014

Non-proliferation

able to build nuclear weapons, in return for which the
economic and financial sanctions be lifted.
Pending the comprehensive solution of the
Iranian nuclear issue, all Security Council sanctions
imposed on Iran remain in effect. Iran is required to
cooperate fully with the international community on all
outstanding issues before the measures imposed by the
Security Council can be lifted. Member States, in their
turn, are obliged to rigorously implement the sanctions
regime. Their Government and private entities, as well
as their nationals, must strictly adhere to restrictions
related to engagement with their partners and Iran. The
work of both the Committee and the Panel of Experts
in verifying compliance with relevant Security Council
measures should therefore remain unaffected.
As the next annual report of the Committee’s Panel
of Experts is due in May, we need to make sure that
all relevant recommendations contained in the 2014
report are duly addressed. In that regard, we welcome
discussions on the implementation assistance notice
related to a catch-all clause, and hope for speedier
progress following the adoption of a notice related to
an equivalent provision of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006).
Iran’s repeated violations of the conventional arms
embargo are a matter of great concern. Despite the
complete ban on the export of any arms from Iran and
the ban on the supply of major conventional weapons
to Iran, there have been reports of weapons transfers
to Syria, to non-State actors in Gaza, and to a number
of States. The Committee’s letter regarding the seizure
by Yemeni authorities of arms and related material
has gone unanswered by Iran since May 2013. Recent
official reports on the interception of a vessel allegedly
carrying weapons to Gaza are also worrying and need
to be investigated by the Committee and its Panel of
Experts without delay.
Lithuania supports all efforts geared to finding
a comprehensive negotiated solution to the Iranian
nuclear issue that would fully reassure the international
community of the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. It is the hope of my delegation
that Iran’s recent engagement in E3+3 talks will also
translate into its meaningful cooperation with the
Committee.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): Allow me to start by
thanking Ambassador Gary Quinlan of Australia for his
update of the 90-day report and for his able leadership

S/PV.7146

of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). We encourage the Committee this year to
continue working with Member States seeking guidance
on the implementation of the sanctions regime. With
the continued support of the Panel of Experts, Member
States can be reassured of proper guidance towards
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.
We would like to reiterate our belief in the three
pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons: non-proliferation, disarmament and the use
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. In our view,
every country has the right to develop nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes, and in this context Rwanda
appreciates the current positive momentum in the talks
between the P5+1 and Iran. We take note of the initial
steps taken and commitments undertaken by the Islamic
Republic of Iran towards the implementation of the
joint plan of action adopted in Geneva on 24 November
2013, and we hope that Tehran will continue fulfilling
its obligations in that respect. We welcome the current
spirit in ongoing negotiations aimed at reaching a
comprehensive agreement that could permanently
remove the threat that the Iranian nuclear programme
poses to the countries of the region.
In the meantime, the sanctions regime remains
in place, and the 1737 Committee shall continue to
implement relevant resolutions of the Security Council
with the assistance of the Panel of Experts. However,
we urge all stakeholders — in particular, members of
the P5+1 — to avoid any decision that could undermine
the current talks. As stated by the Committee Chair,
last year Iran did not reply to two letters from the
Committee regarding an incident investigated by the
Panel of Experts — the letter dated 12 April 2013, on the
launched of the Shahab-1 and Shahab-3 missiles during
the Great Prophet VII exercises, in contravention of
resolution 1929 (2010), and the letter 21 May, 2013, on
an intercepted arms shipment in Yemen, in probably
violation of resolution 1747 (2007). We hope that
the Iranian Government will have a better approach
towards the Committee in 2014, which could amplify
the current positive momentum.
Similarly, Rwanda is concerned at reported
violations of the sanctions regime by Member States
and other entities. It is important for all actors to
implement the sanctions regime in good faith and to
work towards negotiated solutions. In that regard, we
are concerned over reports on the interception in the

14-2701511/13

S/PV.7146

Non-proliferation

Red Sea by Israeli forces of a ship transporting ballistic
missiles, reportedly of Iranian origin, to the Gaza
Strip. We hope that the Panel of Experts will carry out
a proper investigation in that regard.
In conclusion, Rwanda looks forward to the final
report of the Panel of Experts to be submitted in May.
We hope that with the implementation of the Geneva
joint plan of action, the progress in the current talks for
the comprehensive agreement and the full collaboration
with the 1737 Committee, the Islamic Republic of Iran
and other international stakeholders could play an
important in ensuring that all sanctions that continue to
harm the Iranian people are permanently lifted.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006), Ambassador Gary Quinlan,
for his quarterly report on the activities of the
Committee. I welcome his emphasis on strengthening
communications between the Committee and Member
States and international organizations with regard to
the implementation of the provisions of resolutions and
the importance he attaches to contacts with Member
States. Indeed, it was such communication that allowed
Member States to receive reports on the measures taken
by national structures or thanks to assistance from the
Panel of Experts of the Committee, as contained in the
Committee’s annual report.
My country congratulates the Committee on its
adoption of its biannual plan of work and takes note of
the six recommendations of its Panel of Experts.
In conclusion, I note that, in the light of the
launching of a Shahab-3 missile by Iran, in violation
of paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010), according to
the Panel of Experts, and the interception of an arms
shipment in Yemen, which the Committee characterized
as a probable violation by Iran of paragraph 5 of
resolution 1747 (2007), the Committee should continue
to communicate with Iran seeking responses to its
concerns. Likewise, the ongoing talks between the P5+1
and Iran, following the Geneva joint plan of action of
24 November 2013, must continue and produce positive
results.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make a
statement in my national capacity as the representative
of Luxembourg.
I, too, thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his
briefing and for the commitment he and his team have
shown in leading the Committee established pursuant
12/13

20/03/2014

to resolution 1737 (2006). The quarterly report that
he presented to the Council today shows that the
Committee continues to perform important work in
support of the resolutions of the Security Council.
Luxembourg also expresses its appreciation to the
Panel of Experts created by resolution 1929 (2010) for
the valuable support it provides to the work of the 1737
Committee.
The interim agreement adopted on 24 November
last year in Geneva was an important step. For the first
time in a decade, it was possible to reach a detailed
agreement addressing the most concerning elements
of the Iranian nuclear programme. We welcome
once again the energy and determination of the High
Representative of the European Union, Catherine
Ashton, whose role in the negotiations between Iran
and the E3+3 continues to be central.
The implementation of the joint plan of action
defined by the interim agreement began on 20 January.
Negotiations aimed at a comprehensive long-term
solution have also begun, addressing the most crucial
questions, including uranium enrichment to 20 per
cent, the development of advanced centrifuges, and the
Arak heavy water reactor. Any comprehensive longterm solution must take the resolutions of the Security
Council into due account — a principle that figures
explicitly in the plan of action.
Reaching a comprehensive solution is a difficult
and laborious process. We expect Iran to act in good
faith and to cooperate actively with the international
community. We note with interest the latest report
of the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), dated 20 February, on the
implementation of safeguards agreements under the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and of the provisions of the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council. For the first time, the report
also notes the progress made in implementing the
cooperation framework agreed between the Agency
and Iran on 11 November last year and the interim
agreement between the E3+3 and Iran.
We welcome the timely implementation by Iran
of the initial practical measures emanating from the
cooperation framework, as well as the fact that the
Agency has been able to begin its monitoring and
verification activities with respect to the measures
contained in the interim agreement. The development
of the cooperation framework between Iran and the
IAEA represents an important step forward towards
14-27015

20/03/2014

Non-proliferation

proving the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme. As noted by the IAEA Director General,
the measures implemented by Iran and the other
commitments it has made are positive developments,
but much remains to be done to resolve all outstanding
issues related to the possible military dimension of its
nuclear programme. We therefore eagerly await further
detail from the Agency on the implementation by Iran
of the new seven practical steps that it must apply by
15 May, under the cooperation framework.
Restoring the confidence of the international
community will require Iran to respect its international
obligations under the relevant resolutions of the IAEA
Board of Governors and the Security Council. Pending
a comprehensive long-term solution, the Security
Council’s resolutions impose sanctions on Iran, which
continue to remain in force, as clearly indicated in
the quarterly report of the 1737 Committee. In the
last quarter, we learned with deep concern of reports
on contracts for arms sales from Iran to Iraq that
allegedly were concluded in 2013. We also learned
of the interception in the Red Sea on 5 March of an
Iranian ship, the Klos-C, transporting missiles of
Syrian manufacture destined for Gaza. We recall that
all imports, all exports and all transfers of any weapons
from Iran are prohibited under the relevant Security
Council resolutions. In that regard, we look forward with
interest to additional clarification to be provided by the
parties concerned as well as the Panel of Experts to the
Committee.
The confirmed or alleged violations by Iran of the
sanctions regime remain a source of grave concern. We
regret the fact that the Committee was unable to take
decisive measures against reported violations, such as

S/PV.7146

the interception of a shipment of carbon fibre to Iran; the
Shahab-1 and Shahab-3 missile launches in 2012 during
the Great Prophet VII exercises; and the interception
in 2013 of a cargo of arms off the coast of Yemen. The
Panel of Experts also plays a key role in helping States
that are attempting to implement the sanctions. We
commend the work of the Panel to investigate Iran’s
attempts to circumvent the sanctions. The Committee
must strive harder to make this information public
and to disseminate best practices to detect and prevent
violations.
Luxembourg wishes every success to the negotiators
who are trying to reach a comprehensive long-term
solution within the allotted time period of six months, as
defined in the joint plan of action agreed between Iran
and the E3+3 countries. We understand that they will
meet from 7 to 9 April in Vienna. Nevertheless, until
a comprehensive solution is found, the international
community must remain vigilant. All States must fulfil
their obligations to effectively and fully implement
the sanctions established by the Security Council.
In the same spirit, the 1737 Committee and its Panel
of Experts must continue their vital twofold work of
helping States to better understand and better implement
their sanctions work, and of establishing consequences
imposed for violations of Security Council resolutions.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

14-2701513/13
