168

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

(e) The ongoing examination of adjustment programmes and their supportive arrangements, including a
comprehensive review of conditionality in the International Monetary Fund;
l O. Stresses that increased flexibility should be applied
by the parties concerned in the development of innovative
approaches to reduce the debt burden of developing countries, including, as appropriate, the identification ofpossible regulatory impediments, and that measures such as the
introduction of various forms of new financia! instruments
and of formulas that do not add to the stock of debt, including those devised by banks and debtors to take advantage of discounts prevailing in the secondary market,
should be further pursued, and emphasizes that banks
should be encouraged to co-operate flexibly with debtor
countries according to individual circumstances to
achieve this end;
11. Calls upon the international community to continue its efforts, in the context of official debt restructuring
exercises, to take appropriate and realistic measures to
reduce the burden of official debt, adapted to the specific
needs and circumstances of individual countries, ínter
alia, so as to allow an adequate planning horizon and longterm adjustment; consideration should be given to unforeseen changes in a country's externa! payments;
12. Urges the international community to give serious
consideration to mutually agreed ways and means of assisting debtor developing countries faced with large and
bunched debts to the multilateral financia! institutions,
taking into account the need for increased capital flows on
terms adapted to their payment situation and the specific
economic circumstances of individual countries;
13. Calls upon the international community to intensify its efforts to provide the necessary resource flows to
African countries, including increasing official development assistance in support of their reform efforts, and to
continue its efforts to grant adequate terms of rescheduling and other effective debt relief measures, as appropriate, to alleviate the debt burden;
14. Stresses that urgent specific actions in respect of
the indebtedness of the least developed and poorest developing countries are required, as contained in the relevant
provisions ofthe Final Act adopted by the the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its seventh
session, including substantial increases of concessional finance, essentially in grant form;
15. Recognizes that the problems of externa! indebtedness of sorne other countries with serious debt-servicing
problems also give rise to concern, and invites all those involved to take into account, as appropriate, the above in
addressing these problems;
16. Stresses the importance of the expansion of world
trade and the promotion of a climate conducive to the
strengthening of an open and liberalized trading system,
including, in particular, the improvement ofmarket access
for developing countries' exports, and, in this context,
stresses the importance of ensuring effective observance of
standstill and rollback commitments and the importance
of promoting improved commodity markets;
17. Requests the Secretary-General, in preparing the
agenda for the next session of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to propose that due priority be given
to the consideration of the issue of the externa! debt crisis
and development in the Committee's discussions ofthe international economic situation;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with the
relevant bodies and eminent personalities to prepare a
comprehensive report on the international debt situation,

reviewing also ways and means of advancing the efforts
towards finding a durable, equitable and mutually agreed
solution to the debt problems of developing countries in
the light of the relevant provisions of the Final Act
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development at its seventh session and ofthe present resolution, to be submitted to the General Assembly at its
forty-third session.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/199.

Assistance for the reconstruction and development of Lebanon

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/146 of 20 December 1978,
34/135 of 14 December 1979, 35/85 of5 December 1980,
36/205 of 17 December 1981, 37/163 of 17 December
1982, 38/220 of20 December 1983, 39/197 of 17 December 1984, 40/229 of 17 December l 985 and 41/196 of 8
December 1986,
Recalling a/so Economic and Social Council resolutions
1980/15 of 29 April 1980, 1985/56 of 25 July 1985 and
1986/46 of 22 July 1986, and decisions 1983/112 of 17
May 1983 and 1984/174 of 26 July 1984,
Noting with deep concern the grave deterioration of the
economic situation in Lebanon,
Welcoming the determined efforts ofthe Government of
Lebanon in undertaking its reconstruction and rehabilitation programme,
Reaffirming the urgent need for further international action to assist the Government of Lebanon in its continuing
efforts for reconstruction and development,
Considering that filling the vacant post of United Nations Co-ordinator of Assistance for the Reconstruction
and Development of Lebanon would facilitate the normal
operations of international assistance to Lebanon,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General93 and
of the statement made on 15 October 1987 by the UnderSecretary-General for Political and General Assembly Affairs and Secretariat Services,94
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his report and for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance to Lebanon;
2. Commends the Under-Secretary-General for Political and General Assembly Affairs and Secretariat Services
for his co-ordination of system-wide assistance for Lebanon;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue and intensify his efforts to mobilize all possible assistance within
the United Nations system to help the Government of
Lebanon in its reconstruction and development efforts;
4. Invites the Secretary-General, in view of the critica!
economic conditions prevailing in Lebanon, to consider
the urgent need to appoint a United Nations Co-ordinator
of Assistance for the Reconstruction and Development of
Lebanon so that the functions of the Co-ordinator may be
resumed in Lebanon;
5. Requests the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system to intensify their programmes of
assistance and to expand them in response to the needs of
93 A/42/553 and Corr.1.
94 See Official Records of che General Assembly, Forcy-second Session,
Second Commictee, 15th meeting, and corrigendum.

V.

Lebanon, and to take the necessary steps to ensure that
their offices at Beirut are adequately staffed at the senior
leve!;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/200.

Special economic assistance to Chad

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/198 of 8 December 1986 and
its previous resolutions on assistance in the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of Chad, emergency
humanitarian assistance to Chad and special economic assistance to that country,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on special economic assistance to Chad, 95 relating, ínter alia, to the economic and financia! situation of Chad,
the status of assistance provided for the rehabilitation and
reconstruction ofthe country and the progress made in organizing and executing the programme of assistance for
that country,
Considering that the war and the drought are compromising ali the reconstruction and development efforts of
the Government of Chad,
Concerned at the recent invasion of locusts, which has
aggravated the already precarious food and health situation in Chad, in particular that of the people displaced as a
result of the war and the drought,
Taking note of the numerous appeals launched by the
Government of Chad and governmental and nongovernmental organizations regarding the seriousness of
the food and health situation in Chad,
Taking note also of the appeal made by the Government
of Chad for a round table on the rehabilitation and reconstruction needs of the northern region, which has suffered
the most from the effects of the war,
Recognizing the need for emergency humanitarian assistance to Chad,
Also recognizing the need for assistance in the reconstruction and development of Chad,
Recalling the round table on assistance to Chad convened by the United Nations Development Programme at
Geneva on 4 and 5 December 1985, in accordance with the
arrangements agreed upon at the International Conference on Assistance to Chad, held in November 1982,
1. Expresses its gratitude to the States and governmental and non-governmental organizations that responded
and are continuing to respond generously to the appeals of
the Government of Chad and of the Secretary-General by
furnishing assistance to Chad;
2.. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for h1s e!forts t? make the international community aware
of the d1fficult1es of Chad and to mobilize assistance for
that country;
3: Rene~s the re9ue~t made to States, competent
Un!ted Nat1ons orgamzatlons and programmes and internatlonal economic and financia! institutions to continue:
(a) To provide the necessary humanitarian assistance
to the people of Chad, who have suffered as a result of the
9s See A/42/442, sect. 11.C.

169

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

war, the effects of the drought and the invasion of locusts
and predators;
(b) To contribute to the reconstruction of Chad;
4. Again invites States and agencies to take part in the
sectoral meetings scheduled at the round table on assistance to Chad and to honour the commitments they made;
5. Rer¡:Jests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to implement the interim
development plan submitted at Geneva;9 6
(b) To continue to assess, in close collaboration with
the humanitarian agencies concerned, the humanitarian
needs, particularly in the areas of food and health, of the
people displaced by the war and the drought;
(e) To mobilize special humanitarian assistance for
persons who have suffered as a result of the war, the
drought and the invasion of locusts and predators and for
the resettlement of displaced persons;
6. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to organize, in collaboration
with the competent United Nations organizations and
programmes and the Government of Chad, a round table
to formulate an emergency assistance programme for the
reconstruction and rehabilitation of the northern region
and for the resettlement of persons displaced by the war;
7. Calls upan the Secretary-General to keep the situation in Chad under review and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/201.

Special assistance to front-line States

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/199 of 8 December 1986,
Having considered the initiatives of the SecretaryGeneral on special assistance to front-line States and other
bordering States, 97 namely the establishment of a focal
point at United Nations Headquarters, the formation of
an informal inter-agency consultative group and the setting in motion of a contingency planning process,
Deeply concerned at the continuing deteriorating situation in southern Africa, which has aggravated the economic problems confronting the front-line States and
other bordering States, arising from the apartheid policies
of the Pretoria régime,
Conscious of the responsibility of the international community to address the problems of the region,
Commending the concerted and determined efforts of
the countries of the region to cope with the prevailing adverse conditions by strengthening their economic cooper_ation an~ lessening their dependence on South Africa,
partlcularly m the areas of transportation, communications and related sectors,
Reaffirming the importance of close co-operation between the United Nations and the front-line States,
Mindful of Security Council resolutions 568 (1985) of
21 June 1985, 571 (1985) of 20 September 1985 and 581
(1986) of 13 February 1986, by which the Council, inter afia, requested the international community to render
assistance to the front-line States,

96/bid., sect. 11.C.4.
97 See A/42/422 and Add. l-4.
