S/2016/1137

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 December 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali
I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2295 (2016), the Security Council extended the mandate of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) until 30 June 2017 and requested me to report on a quarterly b asis on
its implementation, focusing on progress in the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and the efforts of MINUSMA to support it.

II. Major political developments
A.

Implementation of the peace agreement
2.
On 23 September, on the margins of the general debate of the seventy -first
session of the General Assembly, I chaired, together with the President of Mali,
Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, a ministerial meeting aimed at mitigating the tensions that
had arisen among the parties to the peace agreement between July and September,
giving fresh impetus to the peace process and soliciting enhanced international
support. Following the opening session, the event was co -chaired by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation and African Integration of Mali,
Abdoulaye Diop, and the Minister of State, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Algeria, Ramtane Lamamra, together with the Under Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations. In the Co-Chairs’ summary of the
meeting, the parties were urged to fully and sincerely maintain their commitments
under the agreement and encouraged to take specific steps to swiftly implement the
agreement. Those efforts notwithstanding, progress in the implementa tion of the
agreement remained slow. Amid renewed fighting between the Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad (CMA) and the Platform coalition of armed groups, key
provisions of the agreement, including the establishment of interim authorities and
the launch of mixed patrols, were not put in place. Meanwhile, new armed groups
sought inclusion in the interim institutional and security arrangements.
Political and institutional measures
3.
On 21 and 22 September, the Agreement Monitoring Committee held it s
eleventh meeting, in Bamako, against the backdrop of a continuing standoff between

16-23076 (E)

090117

*1623076*

110117

S/2016/1137

signatory armed groups in the Kidal region. While CMA accused the Government of
supporting the Groupe d’autodéfense des Touaregs Imghad et leurs alliés (GATIA),
the Platform stressed the need to address the perceived domination of Kidal by the
Tuareg Ifoghas community, the group that forms the backbone of CMA. On
21 September, the international mediation team issued a statement in which it
condemned the ceasefire violations and stressed the need for dialogue in order to
accelerate the implementation of the agreement. It also warned of possible sanctions
against anyone who failed to cease hostilities and/or further derailed
implementation. On the same day, CMA provided lists of nominees for the National
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission, the Commission on
Integration and the National Council for Security Sector Reform, while the Platform
nominated representatives for the interim authorities. On 7 October, CMA submitted
lists of candidates for the interim authorities.
4.
On 14 October, the Government appointed members of the interim authorities
for the Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu regions, together with members of the transitional
councils for the Ménaka and Taoudenni regions, stipulating that they designate their
President from within their ranks. The Government also nominated special advisers
to the State representatives in each of the five northern regions, leading CMA to
accuse it of unilaterally increasing its quorum of representatives within the interim
authorities. Both CMA and the Platform insisted on assuming the presidency of the
interim authorities in Kidal. Civil society organizations, especially youth groups in
the Gao and Ménaka regions, protested against the establishment of interim
authorities. Notwithstanding the existence of Act No. 2015 -052 of 18 December
2015, instituting measures to promote gender equality in access to nominated and
elected positions by providing for a minimum 30 per cent quot a for the
representation of each gender, all 37 members of the interim authorities proposed by
the parties were men. The Government designated one woman out of the 32
members of the transitional councils and two women out of the 20 special advisers.
5.
At the twelfth and thirteenth meetings of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee, on 19 and 20 October and 28 and 29 November, respectively, persistent
disagreements between CMA and the Platform over security arrangements in Kidal
overshadowed discussions on other issues. Although the signatory armed groups
agreed in principle to launch mixed patrols in Kidal, the Platform requested CMA
combatants who would not take part in the mixed patrols to leave Kidal for
pre-cantonment sites outside the city. No agreement ha s been reached on this issue.
In response, the Committee established a working group, chaired by the High
Representative of the President for the implementation of the peace agreement,
Mahamadou Diagouraga, to facilitate the implementation of interim measu res,
including the establishment of the Operational Coordination Mechanism in Gao and
Kidal.
6.
In the meantime, CMA splinter groups sought to be part of the peace process
amid competition for power in northern Mali. On 16 December, the Mouvement
populaire pour le salut de l’Azawad, the Coalition du peuple de l’Azawad and the
Coordination des mouvements et fronts patriotiques de résistance II (CMFPR -II)
issued a joint statement in which they denounced their exclusion from the interim
political and security arrangements put in place through the agreement. At the
fourteenth meeting of the Agreement Monitoring Committee, on 20 December,
CMA announced the suspension of its participation in the Committee and its

2/29

16-23076

S/2016/1137

subcommittees, citing a lack of progress in the imp lementation of the agreement and
the proliferation of armed groups, among other reasons. CMA also called for a high level meeting of the international mediation team. The meeting, which proceeded
without CMA, yielded limited progress on the establishment o f interim authorities,
while no solution was found to the demands of the splinter groups.
Local elections
7.
On 23 September, a group of opposition parliamentarians filed a motion before
the Constitutional Court for the annulment of the new electoral l aw, arguing that it
contravened, among other things, the Constitution and Act No. 2015 -052 of
18 December 2015. On 13 October, the Court rejected the motion. On 17 October,
the President promulgated the law, enabling the Government to proceed with the
organization of local elections in line with the electoral calendar that it had
announced in the middle of 2016. The signatory armed groups protested that that
move was incompatible with the agreement, which provides that the establishment
of interim authorities would precede elections. The Government held that the
Constitution precluded a further deferment of local elections already postponed four
times since 2009. On 20 October, the international mediation team met the Prime
Minister, Modibo Keita, and encouraged the Government to pursue further
consultations with the signatory armed groups. MINUSMA continued to engage
with all stakeholders to help to achieve consensus on the electoral process. On
19 November, I issued a statement in which I encouraged the Government to pursue
a constructive dialogue with all stakeholders to ease any tensions that might arise
before and after the polls.
8.
On 20 November, voting was conducted in 92 per cent of the country’s 703
municipalities, with women representing about 31 per cent of all candidates.
Security incidents and obstruction by armed individuals, including members of
signatory armed groups, prevented voting in 43 municipalities in the northern and
central regions, including in the Kidal region where candidatures had been
registered in two municipalities. The polls were not conducted in 15 other
municipalities in the Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu regions, as well as in the Ménaka
and Taoudenni regions where no candidates had stood. Unidentified assailants killed
five soldiers in the Timbuktu region when they ambushed the armed forces
transporting ballot boxes. MINUSMA provided logistical, security and technical
assistance for the conduct of the polls. Through the United Nations Development
Programme basket fund, the international community contributed $10 million
towards staffing costs, electoral materials and awareness-raising programmes,
among other things.
9.
On 21 November, CMA issued a statement in which it rejected the legitimacy
and results of the elections. The presidential majority parties, Rassemblement pour
le Mali and Alliance pour la démocratie au Mali-Parti africain pour la solidarité et la
justice, won 187 and 131 municipalities, respectively. The Union pour la république
et la démocratie won 102 municipalities. The national average turnout was 43 per
cent (23 per cent in Bamako and 60 per cent in the Gao region). In Bamako and the
Gao region, 30 per cent of the municipal counsellors elected were women, while in
the Timbuktu region the figure was 29 per cent. On 26 November, the Government
indicated that it would first organize by-elections in the municipalities in which
operational and security conditions would allow and thereafter establish municipal -

16-23076

3/29

S/2016/1137

level interim authorities in those areas in which no candidate had stood and/or in
which the security environment remained highly volatile.
Defence and security measures
10. Following the clashes between signatory armed groups from July to
September, the Technical Commission on Security decided on 29 and 30 September
that, as from 17 October, unless armed groups notified MINUSMA of movements of
heavy weapons beforehand, the Mission would confiscate the armaments concerned
and that movements of convoys of more than five vehicles would require prior
consultation with MINUSMA. On 22 October, the Mission observed two unreported
movements involving more than 25 Platform vehicles in the vicinity of Aguelhok,
Kidal region. It warned the signatory armed groups to cease such movements.
11. New ceasefire violations between signatory armed groups were reported in the
Gao region. On 1 December, CMA indicated that one of its members had been killed
and an unspecified number of others captured in an attack on its base in Marsi by
GATIA. On 3 December, the Platform and an armed group associated with CMA
clashed in Fafa, leaving two Platform members injured. On 7 December, CMA and
the Platform reportedly engaged in an armed confrontation in Talataye. The joint
observation and verification team of the Technical Commission on Sec urity could
not investigate the allegations, reported by the signatory parties, owing to security
concerns.
12. On 14 October, the signatory parties decided that cantonment would begin as
soon as possible, a milestone that is unlikely to be achieved becaus e the signatory
armed groups have yet to submit their lists of combatants, the Commission on
Integration has not adopted criteria for the combatants’ integration into the Malian
defence and security forces and there are no mixed patrols to secure the canto nment
sites. All eight sites have nevertheless been ready to accommodate 12,000
combatants, including female combatants and children associated with armed
groups, since 31 October. Throughout the reporting period, MINUSMA pursued its
community violence reduction projects around cantonment sites in the Gao, Kidal,
Mopti and Timbuktu regions. On 8 December, the donor conference held in Bamako
in support of financing the National Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration Programme raised $25 million for the reintegration of former
combatants in Mali.
13. The Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission, the
Commission on Integration and the National Council for Security Sector Reform
were fully staffed by the end of the reporting period. On 16 N ovember, the
Government appointed the Chairs of the Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration Commission and the Commission on Integration. On 2 and
8 December, the Government appointed representatives of signatory parties to the
two commissions and the National Council. CMA and the Platform contested the
reduced number of their members among the appointees, while the Government
committed itself to paying benefits to the members of these entities. MINUSMA
assisted the Government in developing draft integration criteria and organized a
workshop aimed at strengthening the capacity of the members of the Commission
on Integration and the National Council. The Mission also provided financial
support for the rehabilitation and equipping of the National Council premises.

4/29

16-23076

S/2016/1137

14. The operationalization of the Operational Coordination Mechanism and the
launch of mixed patrols were further delayed owing to, among other things, the
absence of integration criteria for the inclusion of combatants from the armed
groups into national security institutions, disagreements over pre -cantonment sites
in Kidal and demands by splinter armed groups to be included in the mixed patrols.
Consequently, the signatory parties repeatedly pushed deadlines back. Nevertheless,
the Malian armed forces and elements from the Platform and the Mouvement
populaire pour le salut de l’Azawad conducted joint patrols in the Gao and Ménaka
regions on 3 October. CMA criticized the initiative as a violation of the agreement.
On 5 December, about 100 members of CMFPR-II briefly occupied the Operational
Coordination Mechanism site in Gao and demanded to be included in the mixed
patrols. After intervention by MINUSMA, the group agreed to withdraw. In a
statement issued on 8 December, CMFPR-II and the Mouvement populaire pour le
salut de l’Azawad condemned their exclusion from the mixed patrols and repudiated
all measures taken to implement the agreement that did not involve them. On
10 December, members of the Malian armed forces began registration at the
Mechanism site in Gao. The vetting, screening and registration of Platform
combatants began on 11 December. As at 22 December, 200 soldiers and 176
Platform members had joined the Mechanism in Gao and begun training for the
mixed patrols. At the time of writing, the CMA combatants were expected to arrive
in the coming days. On 20 December, about 50 armed members of CMFPR -II
briefly gathered at the Mechanism site in Gao and demanded to take part in the
mixed patrols. Following engagement by the Mission, they left the site. MINUSMA
and the United Nations Children’s Fund are working closely to identify and protect
children associated with these armed groups.

B.

Other developments
15. The Government has developed, with the support of MINUSMA, a set of
benchmarks and timelines to assess the progress of the signatory parties towards the
implementation of the agreement (see annex I).
16. The restoration of State authority in the north and the centre of the country
remains challenging. An increase of 4 per cent (from 33 to 37 per cent) in the
number of State officials deployed to the northern regions notwithstanding, the
Governor of Taoudenni was based in Timbuktu owing to the limited infrastructure in
Taoudenni, while the Governor of Kidal was not able to deploy owin g to security
concerns. In the central region of Mopti, the Governor advised government officials
deployed in some areas to conduct their duties from the regional capital in the light
of the deteriorating security situation.
17. Early in November, the committee of experts for the revision of the
Constitution submitted a draft revised constitution to the Government, following a
series of consultations with political parties, signatory armed groups, civil society
organizations and traditional leaders. Proposed therein are changes to the
Constitution, including the creation of a senate, as envisaged in the agreement.
18. On 4 November, the President appointed the Ombudsman of Mali, Baba
Hakim Haïdara, to head the committee for the preparation of the national
reconciliation conference. As envisaged in the agreement, the conference is

16-23076

5/29

S/2016/1137

expected to facilitate national reconciliation by addressing the root causes of the
conflict and generating consensus on the way forward. The conference wa s initially
planned for December, but has been postponed.

C.

Regional developments
19. There were security incidents in the countries neighbouring Mali, including in
northern Burkina Faso and the western part of the Niger, close to the borders with
Mali, in which assailants attacked civilians and defence and security forces, among
others. In one such incident, 22 members of the security forces of the Niger were
killed and several others injured in an attack against a security post at a refugee
hosting area in Tazalit on 6 October. On 7 October, the Minister of Defence of the
Niger implied that the Haut Conseil pour l’unité de l’Azawad, part of CMA, was
responsible for the attack, along with terrorist groups. On 8 October, CMA denied
its involvement. On 16 December, unidentified armed men attacked a military post
in Nassoumbou, Burkina Faso, some 30 km from the Malian border, killing
12 soldiers.
20. On 20 October, MINUSMA held a meeting with military representatives of the
Group of Five for the Sahel and presented the terms of reference for the deployment
of their liaison officers to the Mission. In addition, MINUSMA took part in and
supported various regional security initiatives, including a workshop on preventing
radicalization and violent extremism in the Sahel, co-sponsored by the High
Representative of the African Union for Mali and the Sahel, held in Bamako from
11 to 13 October.
21. From 9 to 11 November, MINUSMA hosted a team of independent consultants
reviewing the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. Discussions focused
on the creation of a regional environment that would favour the implementation of
the peace process and the mandate of MINUSMA, as well as the Mission’s
stabilization efforts in close collaboration with the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel.
22. From 18 October to 2 November, Malian and French forces conducted an
operation along the Mauritanian border to reduce terrorist activities.

III. Major security developments
23. The security situation in the northern and central regions remained volatile
pending the implementation of the political and security arrangements envisaged in
the agreement and in the light of the limited deployment of the Malian defence and
security forces and State authorities. With a view to countering attacks against
civilians and United Nations personnel, MINUSMA endeavoured to maintain the
more robust and proactive posture assumed since the adoption of its new mandate,
the force’s substantial capability shortfalls notwithstand ing.

6/29

16-23076

S/2016/1137

A.

Asymmetric and other attacks
24. Asymmetric attacks continued to target Malian, French and MINUSMA forces,
using complex attack tactics, suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices,
roadside bombs and mortars/rockets. A total of 25 atta cks were perpetrated against
the Malian defence and security forces and 29 against MINUSMA, compared with
39 and 27, respectively, in the previous reporting period. In total, 15 members of the
Malian defence and security forces were killed and 33 injured i n attacks, compared
with 52 killed and 72 injured in the previous reporting period. Furthermore, 3
peacekeepers were killed and 25 injured, compared with 13 killed and 32 injured in
the previous reporting period.
25. On 3 October, assailants fired three mortar bombs towards the MINUSMA
camp in Aguelhok, Kidal region. Two MINUSMA military vehicles responding to
the attack struck an explosive device, killing two peacekeepers and injuring seven
others. On 30 October, a mortar attack against the MINUSMA camp in Kidal
damaged three medium utility helicopters. Ansar Eddine claimed responsibility for
the attack, saying that it had targeted the French forces. On 6 November, a
MINUSMA logistics convoy hit a roadside bomb and armed assailants then opened
fire on it, killing a peacekeeper and injuring eight others. Two Malian civilians
following but not part of the convoy were also killed. On 29 November, assailants
drove two vehicles laden with explosives into the Gao airport. One detonated,
injuring two private security guards and destroying MINUSMA facilities. Six
MINUSMA aircraft (five helicopters and a fixed-wing aeroplane) were also
damaged. Al Mourabitoun claimed responsibility for the attack. On the same day,
two rockets landed near the Timbuktu airport. Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
claimed responsibility, saying that its target was the “airport of the French forces”.
26. On 13 October, assailants attacked the Malian armed forces after a military
vehicle hit an explosive device 35 km north-east of Diabali, Ségou region, killing
four soldiers and injuring seven others. Ansar Eddine claimed responsibility for the
attack. On 6 December, in another attack claimed by Ansar Eddine, eight assailants
attacked the prison in Niono, Ségou region, freeing 93 prisoners, who allegedly
included members of violent extremist groups, and seizing weapons, ammunition
and motorbikes. A prison guard was killed.
27. On 8 October, a military chief of staff of the Haut Conseil pour l’unité de
l’Azawad, Cheikh Ag Aoussa, was killed some 300 m from the MINUSMA camp in
Kidal when his vehicle exploded after leaving a security coordination meeting there.
The United Nations has launched an investigation into the circumstances leading to
his death.

B.

Protection of civilians
28. Major physical threats to civilians included armed banditry; targeted attacks
by armed individuals often resulting from political dynamics, including during the
local elections; mines, improvised explosive devices and explosive remnants of war;
collateral damage to civilians caused by clashes between splinter armed groups; and
attacks by violent extremists, terrorists and State actors. Retaliation by armed

16-23076

7/29

S/2016/1137

individuals against civilians suspected of cooperating with the Government or
MINUSMA persisted.
29. In response to such threats, the MINUSMA force continued to carry out
medium-range and long-range patrols, monitor checkpoints and conduct
reconnaissance flights with a focus on protecting civilians. The Mission also
established helicopter refuelling points in some camps to enhance its ability to react
rapidly to reported threats to civilians. It conducted monthly coordinated operations
with the Malian armed forces in the I-n-Tillit area, Gao region, and near Goundam,
Timbuktu region. The operations were aimed at detecting armed elements,
enhancing intelligence gathering and reaching out to the local population.
MINUSMA police officers conducted 293 patrols jointly with their Malian
counterparts.
30. MINUSMA monitored intercommunal tensions in the Mopti regio n, mainly
between the Fulani and Dogon communities. On 10 November, the Malian
authorities reported a clash between young people from the two communities in
Bankass in which seven people were injured. On 9 December, the leader of a Dogon
self-defence group based in the region informed the Mission that the group had been
reactivated in the light of the increasing insecurity there.

C.

Support to the Malian defence and security forces
31. MINUSMA continued to assist the operations of the armed forces, inc luding
with regard to surveillance and reconnaissance, air support and medical evacuation.
Nevertheless, the Malian defence and security forces have not yet completed their
redeployment plan for the centre and the north of the country pursuant to which the
Mission could assess its support. A response to the Mission’s offer of co -location in
the MINUSMA camp in Léré, Timbuktu region, remains pending.
32. MINUSMA continued to provide assistance to the Malian police, gendarmerie,
National Guard, civil protection authorities and customs authorities, including
training on countering suicide bombings and the management of crime scenes
involving improvised explosive devices and operational support in efforts to combat
serious organized crime and terrorism. MINUSMA continued to assist the
Government in making its specialized unit on terrorism and transnational organized
crime operational. The Mission and the United Nations Development Programme
continued their joint support for the development of a national strategy for the
prevention of violent extremism and countering terrorism.
33. Between 18 and 20 October, the Government completed the revision of the
national border policy with the support of the European Union Common Security
and Defence Policy mission in Mali and MINUSMA. In the revised policy emphasis
is laid on the need for enhanced security cooperation with neighbouring countries
and the strengthening of infrastructure and basic services in the border areas.

D.

Mine action, weapons and small arms
34. Since January 2015, at least two civilians have been affected every month by
accidents caused by explosive remnants of war, with children accounting for 80 per

8/29

16-23076

S/2016/1137

cent of the victims. The Mine Action Service raised awareness about explosive
hazards in conflict-affected communities in central and northern Mali, reaching
some 18,420 people. MINUSMA and partners trained 17 personnel of the Malian
defence and security forces in the management of humanitarian demining and 79
others in explosive ordnance awareness and disposal. The Mission refurbished four
storage facilities for weapons and ammunition.

IV. Human rights situation
35. MINUSMA documented 104 cases of human rights violations and abuses
involving at least 235 victims, including 13 children, compared with 117 cases and
at least 202 victims in the previous reporting period. The cases involved 7 instances
of execution; 1 of forced disappearance; 8 of ill-treatment or torture; 1 of sexual
violence; 1 of recruitment of child soldiers; 2 of forced displacement; 4 of
abduction; 21 of illegal detention or arbitrary arrest, involving 57 individuals; 4 of
lack of due process as a result of ineffective investigations; 7 of infringements of
the right to vote; 38 of extortion or looting; and 2 of intimidation. There were also
eight direct attacks against humanitarian or peacekeeping personnel. Most cases
were documented in the Kidal and Timbuktu regions. The main alleged perpetrators
of human rights violations and abuses remain members of the Platform and CMA,
accounting for 36 and 30 cases, respectively, while the Malian defence and security
forces and the Malian judicial authorities are allegedly responsible for 21 cases.
36. Unlawful arrests in relation to the conflict, including for alleged terrorist
activities, continued to be reported nationwide. A total of 23 individuals were
detained by the Malian armed forces and gendarmerie ille gally, without arrest
warrants or beyond the legally permitted length. On the basis of the available
information, the detention of 20 individuals by the French forces needs to be
clarified. An information-sharing mechanism was established to address cases of
arrests by international forces, including the French forces. As at 22 December, 249
conflict-related detainees, including 190 detained for terrorism-related charges,
remained in State-run detention facilities. Among them were five children. The
illegal detention of individuals by signatory armed groups continued. CMA and the
Platform have arrested at least 73 additional individuals and released 53, bringing
the total number of detainees to 26, including those detained during previous
reporting periods.
37. On 26 and 27 October, MINUSMA trained representatives of six ministries on
conflict-related sexual violence and helped to identify prevention measures to be
implemented by the ministries. As at 22 December, 113 cases of conflict -related
sexual violence filed since November 2014 in Bamako had yet to be processed by
the Government. Since 2014, only 37 victims have been heard by judges.
MINUSMA continued to assist with the finalization of an action plan aimed at
eradicating sexual violence by Platform members.
38. The Ministry for the Advancement of Women, Children and Families
validated, with the support of MINUSMA and partners, strategic guidance on the
identification, separation and reintegration of children associated with armed forces
and armed groups for the national strategy on the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of children.

16-23076

9/29

S/2016/1137

39. On 16 November, the Council of Ministers endorsed the national policy on
human rights, focusing on human rights promotion and protection, assistance to
human rights actors and international human rights cooperation. The Ministry of
Justice and Human Rights subsequently established a human rights department
within the Ministry to implement the policy. During the monthly consultations with
the Ministry, MINUSMA submitted alleged human rights violations that it had
documented. In collaboration with the European Union Training Mission in Mali
and the European Union Common Security and Defence Policy mission in Mali,
MINUSMA continued to train members of the Malian d efence and security forces,
including 180 soldiers, 2,185 police officers, 14 police instructors and 60
corrections officers, on human rights and international humanitarian law.
40. On 30 November, the trial began of Captain Amadou Haya Sanogo and 17
others accused of crimes during the coup d’état in 2012. It has, however, been
repeatedly postponed owing to a lack of due process, a boycott by lawyers and the
absence of defence witnesses.
41. Pursuant to the human rights due diligence policy, MINUSMA initiated the
human rights screening of 600 members of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism, 75 representatives of the interim authorities and 29 regional officials of
the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission. MINUSMA has also developed a
training programme on human rights and international humanitarian law for
members of the Mechanism.
42. MINUSMA continued to provide technical advice to the Truth, Justice and
Reconciliation Commission, including on the confidentiality and security of victims
of conflict-related sexual violence interviewed by the Commission, and on
reparations that they may receive. The Commission’s regional offices in Bamako
and Ségou opened on 1 December, followed by the office in Mopti on 13 December.
The office in Gao, for the regions of Gao and Ménaka, and the office in Timbuktu,
for the regions of Taoudenni and Timbuktu, opened on 15 December. The office in
Kidal did not open owing to security concerns.

V. Humanitarian situation
43. Persistent insecurity, recurrent food insecurity, chronic poverty, the limited
presence of State authorities and inadequate basic social services, coupled with
clashes between the signatory armed groups, led to a further deterioration in the
humanitarian situation in the northern and central regions. Meanwhile, seasonal
flooding of the Niger River affected 18,000 people, mainly in the Mopti and
Timbuktu regions, and destroyed 2,400 houses and 790 latrines. Humanitarian
actors worked with the Government to distribute relief items. Nevertheless, as at
22 December, only $134.5 million (38 per cent) of the total amount of $354 million
required for the humanitarian response plan for 2016 had been financed.
44. Humanitarian actors continued to be victims of criminal activities, such as
theft of vehicles and equipment, in the northern and central regions. As at
22 December, 29 security incidents involving humanitarian actors had been
reported, mainly in the northern regions, compared with 20 incidents in the previous
reporting period. Humanitarian actors continued to negotiate access and security

10/29

16-23076

S/2016/1137

guarantees with armed groups in the Kidal and Ménaka regions and advocated
respect for humanitarian principles by all parties. On 13 October, convoys carrying
food rations to Kidal arrived for the first time since Ju ne under MINUSMA military
escort. The Mission also facilitated humanitarian assistance to Kidal by flying
humanitarian personnel. To improve accessibility, MINUSMA plans to again repair
the airstrip in Kidal, which was destroyed by protesters in April, sho uld it receive
the necessary security guarantees.
45. During the reporting period, 109 additional schools were closed, bringing the
total number of closed schools in the conflict-affected areas of the Gao, Kidal,
Ménaka, Mopti, Ségou and Timbuktu regions to 405 of 2,380 schools. On
17 October, the Governor of Kidal officially visited Kidal for the first time since his
appointment on 23 March to open the academic year in the region. Humanitarian
actors continued to support the Government to reopen schools i n the north.
46. A national food security and nutrition assessment estimated that 25 per cent of
the Malian population remained food insecure. The moderate acute malnutrition rate
fell to 14.3 per cent in the Timbuktu region, where the Food and Agricultur e
Organization of the United Nations and the World Food Programme implemented
resilience-building activities, working with farmer organizations. Following the
outbreak of Rift Valley fever in the Niger, declared on 20 September, the
Government, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
World Health Organization conducted an assessment mission to the Ménaka region
from 22 to 30 October and supported the local authorities in taking preventive
measures and preparing for a potential outbreak. MINUSMA provided logistical and
security support. On 2 December, the Minister of Energy and Water and the
Governor of Kidal visited Kidal to assess electricity and water supply needs.
47. Since my previous report (S/2016/819), the number of internally displaced
persons has fallen by 6 per cent, to some 36,700 as at 31 October. The number of
Malian refugees residing in Burkina Faso, Mauritania and the Niger increased from
some 134,000 to 136,000. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) constructed and restored 850 shelters in the Gao, Ménaka,
Mopti and Timbuktu regions and facilitated the voluntary return of 478 refugees. In
the Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu regions, UNHCR supported the Government in
providing cash-based assistance to 2,437 returnees, while the International
Organization for Migration implemented several community stabilization projects,
including the rehabilitation of health centres, primary schools and water sources.
48. In the Gao, Ménaka and Timbuktu regions, UNHCR raised the awareness of
832 returnees and the local population of sexual and gender -based violence. In the
Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu regions, the United Nations Population Fund provided
psychosocial support to survivors of sexual and gender -based violence; as a result,
175 survivors received psychosocial support and 82 post-rape kits were distributed.

VI. Economic development and cultural preservation
49. In the absence of Malian regional development agencies and as a result of the
limited presence of State authority in the northern regions, the population has
limited access to basic social services. The lack of a development strategy for the

16-23076

11/29

S/2016/1137

north constrained the disbursement of pledges made at the international conference
for the economic recovery and development of Mali, held in Paris on 22 October
2015.
50. From 1 to 3 November, a joint assessment mission by the United Nations and
the International Organization for Migration visited the Liptako-Gourma region and
the border areas with Burkina Faso and the Niger to identify cross -border threats to
peace and security that could be tackled by community-based solutions. On the
basis of the assessment, a Peacebuilding Fund cross-border project has been
developed and is awaiting approval by the three Governments.
51. On 18 November, the Peacebuilding Fund extended an additional amount of
$1.5 million for three projects to be implemented by MINUSMA and the United
Nations country team in Gao and Timbuktu in support of the peace process. The
projects will continue support for teaching schoolchildren about peaceful conflict
resolution, employment of young people and women and efforts to combat gender based violence. In December, the Fund approved $2.4 million for youth and gender
initiatives to be implemented by MINUSMA, the United Nations country team and
non-governmental organizations.
52. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, with
the support of MINUSMA, continued to rehabilitate cultural heritage sites,
especially in Timbuktu. On 1 December, it and MINUSMA began to rehabilitate
three private libraries of ancient manuscripts in Timbuktu; the physical conservation
of the manuscripts is continuing. The rehabilitation of the three mosques designated
as world heritage in Timbuktu continued.

VII. Capacities of the Mission
53. On 15 December, the Secretariat approved the updated mission concept for
MINUSMA. Following the adoption of resolution 2295 (2016), in which the
Security Council encouraged the keeping of the mission concept under constant
review, MINUSMA aligned the existing document with its new mandate. The
following three interrelated objectives were identified in the revised mission
concept:
(a) To ensure a sustainable, credible and inclusive peace process to
accelerate the implementation of the peace agreement;
(b) To improve security, including support for the redeplo yment of the
Malian defence and security forces;
(c) To reach full operational capacity, including capacity to protect and
sustain the mission, and conduct priority tasks in key areas.
54. A number of required capabilities remain unfulfilled, while pled ges continue
to fall short of these capabilities, mainly in self-sustainment and major equipment.
Military
55. As at 22 December, the strength of the military component of MINUSMA
stood at 10,791 personnel, or 81 per cent of the authorized strength of 13,289.

12/29

16-23076

S/2016/1137

Women accounted for 1.6 per cent of the force. A number of critical capability gaps
remain. With the departure of military helicopters currently in Gao in
January/February 2017, MINUSMA will require four helicopter units to reach the
required number of six (one attack helicopter unit and one medium utility helicopter
unit for Gao, one attack helicopter unit for Kidal and one medium utility helicopter
unit for Timbuktu). The Mission still requires an intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance company for Kidal, an airfield support unit for Gao and Timbuktu, a
special forces company for Timbuktu, an explosive ordnance disposal company for
Timbuktu and a combat convoy battalion. Pending the deployment of the battalion,
infantry units escort the Mission’s logistics convoys, which significantly constrains
the military component’s ability to perform mandated tasks. The shortage of
armoured personnel carriers — 99 are still required — remains a major constraint.
Preparation continued for the redeployment of the quick reaction force in the United
Nations Operations in Côte d’Ivoire to MINUSMA. The advance party is scheduled
to deploy to Mopti by mid-February 2017.
Police
56. As at 22 December, the strength of the police component of MINUSMA stood
at 1,260 personnel, reaching 66 per cent of its authorized strength of 1,920 with 83
per cent of individual police officers (15 per cent of them women) and 62 per cent
of formed police unit personnel (5 per cent of them women) deployed. The
deployment of a special intervention team is under way. Pledges were received for
the four outstanding formed police units, which are scheduled to deploy in January
and February 2017. MINUSMA continues to require additional 59 individual police
officers, 20 armoured personnel carriers, 11 armoured cars for individual police
officers and specialized skills in forensics, counter -terrorism, improvised explosive
devices, serious organized crime and drug trafficking, and small arms and light
weapons.
Civilian personnel
57. As at 22 December, 86 per cent of all MINUSMA civilian staff had deployed,
including 87 per cent of international staff, 87 per cent of United Nations Volunteers
and 84 per cent of national staff. Women held 27 per cent of the international posts,
31 per cent of United Nations Volunteer positions and 19 per cent of national staff
posts.
Camp construction and securing supply routes
58. A number of continuing construction projects were delayed owing to the
volatile security environment and the slow suppl y of construction materials.
MINUSMA is according priority to the construction of hard -wall accommodation
for military personnel deployed in the north. The construction of camps is
continuing for formed police units to be deployed in Douentza, Goundam and
Ménaka. To accommodate civilian personnel living in a dedicated zone around the
Mission’s camp in Mopti, the Mission plans to upgrade the camp to an integrated
camp, which includes accommodation. In the meantime, the Mission has accorded
priority to preparations to receive the quick reaction force in Mopti. The
construction of the MINUSMA operational base in Bamako is 80 per cent

16-23076

13/29

S/2016/1137

completed, while the Timbuktu integrated camp is 70 per cent completed. The new
Gao logistics hub is 75 per cent completed and has begun operations.
59. The Mission’s logistics convoys continued to face asymmetric threats in
northern Mali. Efforts to open a southern supply route to Gao from Cotonou, Benin,
through Niamey are continuing, in consultation with the respective Governmen ts.

VIII. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
60. During the reporting period, 29 security incidents involving United Nations
civilian personnel occurred. Five peacekeepers lost their lives: two in the Kidal
region on 3 October and another in the Mopti region on 6 November in attacks; one
in a traffic accident; and one as a result of illness. There were 29 attacks against
humanitarian actors. Asymmetric attacks, terrorism and crime continued to pose
threats and security risks to United Nations staff, premises and operations.
MINUSMA adjusted its security posture to adapt to the fluid security situation,
including by building stronger anti-blast and protected shelters to counter the threat
posed by indirect fire. The Mission also updated its contingency plans and
pre-positioned safety and security units.
61. Nevertheless, significant challenges remain with regard to the Mission’s
civilian medical evacuation teams owing to limited availability and difficulty in
operating in high-risk conditions, which caused delays in responding to incidents.
MINUSMA still urgently requires aeromedical evacuation teams in Mopti and
Tessalit, where specialized search and rescue assets have been already positioned, to
ensure that dedicated helicopters for casualty evacuation are available within a onehour radius of Mission activities.

IX. Conduct and discipline
62. There have been no new allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse since my
previous report. The two allegations mentioned in that report, received in January
and June 2016, are still pending investigation, the former with the relevant troop contributing country and the latter with the United Nations. MINUSMA continued
its prevention activities, including outreach and public information activ ities
concerning the expected standard of conduct for United Nations personnel,
especially the policy on zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse.

X. Observations
63. The peace process in Mali is at a critical juncture. Notwithstanding some
progress made over the past 18 months since the signing of the peace agreement, the
signatory parties continue to disagree on key interim measures, thus stalling the
process for all other provisions. Although the peace process is complex and
challenging, it behoves the signatory parties to act promptly and decisively to fulfil
their obligations to the Malian people. With only six months left until the end of the
interim period stipulated in the agreement, I strongly urge all parties to immediately
cease fighting and resume a constructive dialogue. The signatory parties must make

14/29

16-23076

S/2016/1137

full use of the potential offered by the follow-up mechanisms provided for in the
agreement, including through sustained involvement and higher -level
representation, to resolve differences and demonstrate their commitment to the
peace process. To this end, while the international community, including the
mediation team, has shown dedicated support for the implementation of the
agreement, it must redouble its efforts and use its full political weight to ensure the
commitment of signatory parties and achieve immediate results on the ground.
Should the dialogue fail, I call upon the Security Council to consider, in the coming
months, the imposition of targeted sanctions against those who obs truct the
implementation of the agreement.
64. I congratulate the Government of Mali for holding the first local elections
since 2009 amid considerable political, security and logistical challenges. I regret
that polls were not held in the Kidal, Ménaka and Taoudenni regions, as well as
some parts of the Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu regions, owing to security incidents and
obstruction, including in areas controlled by signatory armed groups. In the run -up
to the elections, I noted the objections expressed by op position parties and the
signatory armed groups. All stakeholders must work to narrow differences and find
common ground. Reaching consensus will require inclusive, interactive and
constructive approaches. As the Malian people prepare for district and regi onal
elections and a constitutional referendum in 2017, I strongly encourage the
Government to engage actively with relevant stakeholders and ensure a dialogue
that leads to inclusivity and consensus. The United Nations stands ready to continue
to support the effort.
65. The limited progress in putting in place the security arrangements foreseen in
the agreement has facilitated the spread of insecurity from the far north to the centre
of Mali, with terrorist and violent extremist groups expanding their acti vities and
consolidating their presence. The growing insecurity in the border areas with
Burkina Faso and the Niger, together with the continued impact of drug trafficking
on peace efforts, demonstrates, once again, the need for enhanced regional
cooperation to take on security threats. To reverse these negative trends of violence,
I urge the Government to redouble its efforts to progressively redeploy the Malian
defence and security forces and re-establish State authority nationwide. It is critical
for all Malian parties to accelerate the implementation of the security provisions of
the agreement in order to regain public confidence in the peace process and prevent
the spread of violent extremism. I also encourage Member States in the subregion to
strengthen their efforts to help to resolve political and security issues in Mali
through mediation efforts and active engagement in the follow -up mechanisms of
the agreement. Given the multiplicity of regional initiatives, it is important that
Member States coordinate their efforts, including to combat drug trafficking with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and in the framework of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. The United Nations remains committed to
collaborating with regional mechanisms, including the Nouakchott Process on the
enhancement of security cooperation and the operationalization of the African Peace
and Security Architecture in the Sahelo-Saharan region and the Group of Five for
the Sahel.
66. I strongly condemn the continued attacks by violent extremists and terrorists
against civilians, signatory armed groups, the Malian and French forces and
MINUSMA personnel, who remain the target of asymmetric attacks. I reiterate that

16-23076

15/29

S/2016/1137

these attacks targeting United Nations peacekeepers constitute war crimes under
international law and call for the perpetrators to be brought to justice. I also express
my most heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families and the Governments of
those concerned, as well as to the people and the Govern ment of Mali who continue
to suffer losses.
67. The precarious security situation underscores the relevance of the interim
measures contained in the agreement and the urgency of putting them into effect. I
call upon the Government to demonstrate political leadership to bring all parties
together to establish the interim authorities in earnest and to launch the Operational
Coordination Mechanism to help the signatory armed groups to move forward with
cantonment. I welcome the recent appointment by the Gover nment of the members
of interim authorities and transitional councils, in addition special advisers for the
northern regions. I urge the signatory armed groups to resolve outstanding issues
constructively and unblock the impasse to launch the mixed patrols.
68. The United Nations remains committed to supporting the signatory parties in
their full and effective implementation of the agreement, including through the
benchmarks developed by the Government with the assistance of MINUSMA. I
count on the Government’s leadership to ensure the endorsement of the benchmarks
by the other signatory parties and generate new momentum for the accelerated and
inclusive implementation of the agreement. All parties must do their part. I
encourage the signatory parties to once again recognize their important
responsibilities and actively pursue the achievement of the benchmarks in a timely
manner.
69. I deeply regret that no woman was appointed to the interim authorities, while
just one sits on a transitional council and onl y two were selected as special advisers
to State representatives in northern regions. I also note with concern the exclusion
of women and young people in the implementation of the agreement. Both women
and young people in Mali have played active roles that affect the peace process,
including as mediators at the community level and as members of civil defence
groups protecting their communities from armed attacks. Their empowerment and
participation contribute decisively to the success of the peace process, to conflict
prevention and the likelihood of sustainable peace. I therefore urge all Malian
stakeholders to more actively ensure the participation and leadership of women and
young people in every aspect of the implementation of the agreement, including in
the preparation process for the national reconciliation conference. I congratulate the
women who ran for office in the local elections on 20 November, thereby making
the new gender law, under which a 30 per cent quota for women candidates in
elections was established, a reality. I applaud the fact that women accounted for 30
per cent of the people elected in Bamako and the Gao region.
70. Interim measures must be sustained by a solid foundation that steers Mali into
long-term peace and stability. I call upon the Government to accelerate efforts to
complete a national strategy designed to reform the security sector, in addition to
the establishment of the integration criteria that would enable members of the
signatory armed groups to join security institutions. It is critical that the
Government clarify its plans for security sector reform in order to sustain the
engagement of the signatory armed groups in the peace process. I welcome the
progress made in the revision of the Constitution and look forward to its

16/29

16-23076

S/2016/1137

completion. Moving forward, the organization of the national reconciliation
conference will be a crucial opportunity to find political solutions through a wide ranging discussion that addresses the drivers of conflict and makes the peace
process truly inclusive of all Malians in all Mali. I strongly urge the Government to
ensure a genuine reconciliation process that reaches all levels of society. Addressing
the root causes of the conflict remains a key requirement to ensure national
reconciliation.
71. The human rights situation remains of concern. I strongly condemn human
rights violations and abuses committed by State actors, armed groups, extremist
groups and others. I urge all parties concerned to respect international human rights
law and international humanitarian law, in addition to their obligations under the
agreement. I welcome the opening of the regional offices of the Truth, Justice and
Reconciliation Commission in several regions, but regret that little progress has
been made in the Government’s efforts to combat impunity. I encourage the
Government to swiftly operationalize the remaining regional offices, including in
Kidal, and deploy officials so that they can begin to engage with victims. The
United Nations stands ready to assist the work of the Commission, as well as the
establishment of the international commission of inquiry.
72. I remain concerned by the limited availability of basic social services in
northern and central Mali, where chronic humanitarian needs persist. I deplore the
blocking of supplies following the outbreak of hostilities between CMA and the
Platform, which exacerbated the humanitarian situation in Kidal. I urge the
signatory parties to resolve differences in the framework of the agreement and not to
take civilians hostage as part of their disagreements. The window of opportunity for
the Government to demonstrate peace dividends is slowly narrowing, given that the
agreement has yet to provide them in the social and economic terms that the Malian
people were expecting. I strongly encourage the Government to sustain its efforts to
expand the coverage of basic social services in the northern and central regions to
ensure that conflict-affected communities benefit from those dividends.
Strengthening the delivery of services in remote locations and reaching the
marginalized is critical to prevent the excluded communities from being
disfranchised. I urge the Government to implement the development strategy for the
north, which was expected to be finalized following the interna tional conference for
the economic recovery and development of Mali held in October 2015. I also
reiterate my call upon the Government to make progress with the sustainable
development fund to which it pledged to contribute €450 million from 2016 to 2018.
73. MINUSMA continues to operate in an extremely challenging environment,
constantly faced with threats of violent asymmetric attacks. Significant operational
difficulties are likely to continue in the current political and security context marked
by insecurity, drug trafficking and terrorism. Consequently, the Mission uses a
substantial part of its resources to protect itself and sustain its presence. I encourage
all troop- and police-contributing countries and bilateral donors to step up their
efforts to ensure that the Mission has the equipment and resources that it needs,
including urgently required helicopter units, an intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance company, airfield support units, a special forces company, an
explosive ordnance disposal company, a combat convoy battalion, individual police
officers, armoured personnel carriers and armoured cars for individual police
officers. I urge the Security Council to engage actively with Member States to this

16-23076

17/29

S/2016/1137

end. Already diminished mobility and capacity to conduct casualty and medical
evacuations owing to the departure of helicopter units and other aviation assets
damaged in attacks will have a negative impact on the operational performance of
the Mission.
74. Lastly, I reiterate my appreciation to my Special Representative, Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, for his tireless efforts in advancing the peace process. I pay tribute to
the women and men of MINUSMA and to the troop- and police-contributing
countries for their dedication to the Mission and for workin g in such arduous
locations under continued difficult conditions. I commend the members of the
international mediation team for their sustained support to the Malian parties. I
express my gratitude to the African Union, the Economic Community of Western
African States, the European Union, bilateral partners, United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, including the Peacebuilding Fund, non -governmental
organizations and all other partners, who spare no effort to contribute to peace and
security in Mali.

18/29

16-23076

16-23076

Annex I
[Original: French]

Benchmarks for monitoring the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali
Objectives

1.

Progress indicators

State of
implementation

Deadline a

Comments

Political and institutional matters

Significant progress in the implementation of an institutional architecture designed to guarantee the participation and inclu sion of all Malian
citizens and enable the restoration of State authority throughout the count ry
1.1 Establish an
institutional architecture
based on the principle
of free administration
and increased
representation of
communities within
national institutions

1.2 Define the
authorities of territorial
communities by
specifying their
respective roles and
responsibilities, and
those of the State

1.1.1 The interim authorities responsible for
the administration of municipalities
(communes), districts (cercles) and regions in
the north are operational

Ongoing

2017

They have been appointed
for the regions but are not
yet in place

1.1.2 The Government of Mali has established
territorial communities, elected through
universal suffrage and with extensive authority,
by amending Act No. 93-008 on free
administration and Act No. 2012-006 on the
administrative organization of the territory

Ongoing

2017

The texts have been
drafted but not yet
approved

1.1.3 For every region the Government has
established a Regional Assembly, elected by
direct universal suffrage, to which authorities
and resources have been transferred

Ongoing

2017

Related to the adoption of
texts

1.2.1 The Government has ensured that each
region is able to establish and manage collective
infrastructure and basic social services

Implemented

1.2.2 Every region has developed an economic, Implemented
social and cultural development plan and will
be responsible for land management
S/2016/1137

19/29

Progress indicators

1.2.3 Every region is responsible for
establishing and implementing a tax system
suited to its economic structure and
development objectives, in accordance with
current legislation
2.

State of
implementation

Deadline a

Comments

Not
implemented

Defence and security aspects

Implementation and progressive functioning of inclusive defence and security forces that are accountable to citizens and comp ly with human
rights and the rule of law, thereby strengthening national cohesion and contributing to the promotion of regional security
2.1 Implement reform
of the security and
defence sectors

2.1.1 Decrees are adopted defining the makeup, role and operation of the National
Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration Commission, the Commission on
Integration and the National Council for
Security Sector Reform

Ongoing

The decrees are under
review following
complaints from
movements about
non-compliance with
quotas

2.1.2 The National Disarmament,
Ongoing
Demobilization and Reintegration Commission,
the Commission on Integration and the National
Council for Security Sector Reform are
established in an inclusive manner and are
operational

The Commissions have
been set up but are not
operational

2.1.3 The National Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Commission,
the Commission on Integration and the National
Council for Security Sector Reform have
developed a new national vision of defence and
security, taking relevant local, national and
international factors into account

S/2016/1137

20/29

Objectives

16-23076

16-23076

State of
implementation

Objectives

Progress indicators

2.2 Implement
cantonment and
disarmament,
demobilization and
reintegration (DDR)
programmes for
combatants, in
accordance with the
guiding principles of the
Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali
and in keeping with
international standards

2.2.1 The National Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Commission
has drawn up a national DDR and cantonment
programme, with the support of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and
other partners

Ongoing

2.2.2 The Commission on Integration has set
up a support programme which defines the
measures necessary for the reintegration of
ex-combatants and takes into account crosscutting issues (gender, human rights and the
protection of civilians)

Ongoing

2.3 Reconstitute and
progressively redeploy
defence and security
forces throughout
national territory

2.3.1 The Technical Commission on Security
and the Operational Coordination Mechanism
have submitted an implementation plan for
security arrangements in the north, with the
deployment of joint patrols to provide security
for the cantonment and DDR process

Implemented

2.3.2 Under the aegis of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism, joint units of
combatants from signatory parties and the
defence and security forces, including special
counter-terrorist units, are operational and
carrying out joint patrols that contribute to the
restoration of security

Ongoing

Deadline a

Comments

The programme has been
drawn up for approval. A
round table with donors
has been organized

First half of 2017

First half of 2017

2.3.3 The gradual redeployment throughout
Mali of reconstituted defence and security
forces is in effect and guarantees that security
and public order are maintained
S/2016/1137

21/29

3.

Progress indicators

State of
implementation

Deadline a

Comments

Humanitarian assistance, socioeconomic and cultural development and the provision of basic social services

Establishment of structures and mechanisms designed to achieve inclusive, participatory and sustainable local development
3.1 Create the
conditions necessary to
facilitate the return,
repatriation,
resettlement and
socioeconomic
reintegration of all
displaced persons and
refugees; enable
communities to benefit
from peace dividends;
and strengthen social
cohesion and
humanitarian assistance

3.1.1 Establishment of monitoring mechanisms Ongoing
for displaced persons and refugees, in
accordance with regional and international
instruments

Progress made:
– Signature of two
protocols with the
International Organization
for Migration and the
Office of the United
Nations High
Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) to
monitor population
movements and register
returnees
– Signature of tripartite
agreements with Burkina
Faso, Mauritania, Niger
and UNHCR for the
repatriation of Malian
refugees
– Signature by UNHCR of
a protocol to facilitate
support for voluntary
repatriation
– Establishment of national
coordination for
repatriation, with the
support of UNHCR
– Creation of 28 entry
points for the registration
of refugees
– Creation of a database

16-23076

– Publication of a quarterly
report on the situation of
refugees

S/2016/1137

22/29

Objectives

16-23076

Objectives

Progress indicators

3.1.2 Neutral and impartial humanitarian
assistance is delivered in areas impacted by the
crisis to those most vulnerable (residents,
returnees, displaced or repatriated persons),
enhancing their means of subsistence and
resilience

State of
implementation

Ongoing

Deadline a

Comments

Progress made:
– Provision of tents,
blankets, mattresses and
treated mosquito nets
– Establishment of a credit
line to fund incomegenerating activities
– Supplies of cereals and
foodstuffs to
communities
– Provision of cattle feed
and emergency kits
– Signature of a
memorandum of
understanding with the
Food Security
Commission for the
provision of 1,500 tons
of cereals to meet
humanitarian and social
needs

3.1.3 With the support of humanitarian and
development partners under the 2015-2017
emergency humanitarian plan and the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework
(UNDAF+), peace dividends are brought to
communities in order to reduce socioeconomic
disparities among regions, with increased
access to basic services in the poorest regions

Ongoing

Progress made:

S/2016/1137

23/29

– Nine sites have been
developed in the northern
regions (nine water
towers equipped with
solar pumps; the drilling
and equipping of
boreholes; the
construction of a storage
dam; the rehabilitation of
a well; the rehabilitation
of two community health
centres; the construction

Progress indicators

State of
implementation

Deadline a

Comments

of a school with three
classrooms; and the
construction of a health
centre)
– Provision of solar kits
and cattle feed
3.2 Mobilize the
resources necessary to
implement the specific
development strategy
for the northern regions
of Mali

3.2.1 Establishment of a northern development
zone with an Interregional Advisory Council,
comprising representatives of Regional
Assemblies, and with a specific development
strategy relevant to the sociocultural and
geographic realities and the climate of the
region

Ongoing

The development
The process of setting this
zone’s governance up is under way. A draft
bodies will be
text is being drawn up
established once
the new regional
councils have been
established

3.2.2 Establishment of a sustainable
development fund, comprising the resources
pledged during the International Conference for
the Economic Recovery and Development of
Mali, held in October 2015, with the support of
technical and financial partners

Ongoing

2017

3.2.3 Establishment of a regional development
agency in each region for programme
management and monitoring implementation of
the commitments undertaken by the
Government to benefit the regions, under the
authority of the President of the Regional
Assembly

Ongoing

3.2.4 Programme agreements are concluded
between the State and the regions for the
implementation of multi-year investment
programmes, with the participation of the
territorial communities concerned

Ongoing

The draft text establishing
the fund is in the process
of being validated

The agencies have been
created

2016

Contract plans have been
signed between the State
and the regions of
Timbuktu, Kidal and
Mopti. Only the one for
Gao has yet to be signed

S/2016/1137

24/29

Objectives

16-23076

16-23076

Objectives

4.

Progress indicators

State of
implementation

Deadline a

Comments

Justice and Reconciliation

Prevent impunity and promote genuine national reconciliation by ensuring legal and judicial assistance and access through the implementation
of transitional justice mechanisms and comprehensive justice sector reform, in accordance with international norms and standa rds
4.1 Organize a
national reconciliation
conference on the
underlying causes of the
conflict

4.2 Establish
transitional justice
mechanisms

4.3 Reform the justice
system and strengthen
the rule of law in order
to enhance traditional
and informal justice
mechanisms, improve
access to justice for
perpetrators and
victims, and end
impunity

4.1.1 An inclusive national reconciliation
conference on the underlying causes of the
conflict is organized, with the support of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee, to ensure
genuine national reconciliation

Ongoing

4.1.2 A Charter for Peace, Unity and National
Reconciliation is drawn up on the basis of
consensus and based on the outcomes of the
national reconciliation conference

Not
implemented

4.2.1 The Truth, Justice and Reconciliation
Commission is operational and has regional
offices throughout the country

Implemented

4.2.2 The international commission of inquiry
is established and operational

Ongoing

4.3.1 The justice system is strengthened to
improve access to justice for perpetrators and
victims

Ongoing

4.3.2 The perpetrators of human rights
violations are prosecuted and convicted in
accordance with international norms and
standards

Ongoing

4.3.3 The victims of human rights violations,
including sexual or gender-based violence, are
treated fairly by the justice system, receive
reparations and benefit from new judicial
protection measures

Ongoing

March 2017

The Republic’s
Ombudsman has been
appointed by the President
to organize the conference
Related to the national
reconciliation conference

S/2016/1137

25/29

a

Progress indicators

State of
implementation

4.3.4 Traditional and customary mechanisms
are integrated into the justice system, without
prejudice to the sovereign right of the State

Ongoing

4.3.5 Institutions regulating and protecting
specific rights, such as freedom of expression,
of the press and of communication, are in place
or strengthened and work effectively

Implemented

4.3.6 The Anti-Corruption and Financial
Crime Commission is established

Implemented

The text boxes are empty where no information was provided.

Deadline a

Comments

S/2016/1137

26/29

Objectives

16-23076

S/2016/1137

Annex II
Military and police strength of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
as at 20 December 2016
Police component
Military component
(staff officers and units)
Country

Austria
Bangladesh

Men

Women

Total

6

6

1 534

1 534

Belgium

7

7

Benin

259

259

Bhutan

3

3

Bosnia and Herzegovina
Burkina Faso

2
1 671
296

Cameroon

3

Chad

1 393

China

385

1 721

Men

Women

Total

7

20

160

8

168

28

133

2

7

1 393

4

4

8

4

4

8

5

1

6

5

1

6

9

9

9

1

1

405

47

84

Estonia

10

10

Ethiopia

1

1

Finland

6

France

22

68

9
5

5

5

5

6

5

5

5

5

1

23

8

8

8

8

6

252

7

91

4
7

3

10

7

3

10

7

3

10

7

3

10

1

1

220
6

862

1

1

Indonesia

22

22

Italy

2

2

1

Hungary

16-23076

140

1

14

68

Guinea-Bissau

164

14

El Salvador

856

1

14

Egypt

220

163

27

Djibouti

Guinea

140

140

136

14

25

Ghana

136

3

25

4

136

24

Total

303

Democratic Republic of the
Congo

246

136
1

Women

12

Czechia

Germany

Men

12

8

Gambia

Total

23

Women

12

8

45

Men

Total police

12

Côte d’Ivoire

Denmark

Formed police units

2
50

Burundi
Cambodia

Individual police officers

1

27/29

S/2016/1137

Police component
Military component
(staff officers and units)
Country

Men

Jordan

1

Kenya

4

Women

Individual police officers

Formed police units

Total

Men

Men

1

5

5

5

5

1

1

1

1

3

7

5

49

Latvia

1

Liberia

44

Lithuania

4

4

5

5

Total

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

1

Madagascar
Mauritania

Women

Total police

Nepal

148

2

150

Netherlands

435

19

454

19

1

20

19

1

20

Niger

854

6

860

12

14

26

12

14

26

Nigeria

67

15

82

1

22

141

Norway

9

9

Portugal

68

68

Romania

1

Senegal

569

Sierra Leone
Sweden
Switzerland

10

6
265

118

22

140

119

269

9

278

281

10

291

3

7

1

7

579

12

1

13

7

7

277

4

3

7

4

6

2

2

2

7

6
12

6
29

939

4

8

12

138

14

152

0

46

1

47

46

1

47

Turkey

0

2

2

2

2

9

9

9

United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland

2

United States of America

8

Yemen

6

6

9

10 593

202 10 795

251

Total

28/29

134

6

140

2

Tunisia

Togo

910

1

2
2

10

41

292

930

44

974

1 181

85

1 266

16-23076

S/2016/1137

16-23076

29/29
