S/PV.9189

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9189th meeting

Monday, 14 November 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Agyeman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Oliveira Freitas
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Police Commissioners

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-68901 (E)
*2268901*

S/PV.9189

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Police Commissioners
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General
for Peace Operations; Ms. Christine Fossen, Police
Commissioner, United Nations Mission in South
Sudan; Mr. Mody Berethe, Police Commissioner,
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and
Ms. Emma Birikorang of the Kofi Annan International
Peacekeeping Training Centre.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

The intention for this meeting is for it to be as
interactive as possible, as it was at the same briefing
last November (see S/PV.8901) and as we are in our
dialogues with Force Commanders. We look forward to
questions from Council members for the Commissioners
and from the Commissioners for the Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s meeting. I am especially pleased to
be joined by the distinguished Police Commissioners
from our peacekeeping operations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as in South Sudan, where
I was very recently. This annual briefing to the Council
is an opportunity to reaffirm the vital role that United
Nations police play across the conflict-prevention
spectrum, from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. It
also provides a forum for discussing our achievements
of the past year as well as strategic priorities for the
coming months.
The greatest challenges to global peace, security
and development that we are seeing today, all of which
will call for unique and increasingly specific policing
responses, include the growing incidence of conflict in
dense settings such as urban areas, the protection of
civilian sites and camps for the internally displaced, the
continued expansion of transnational organized crime
2/30

14/11/2022

and violent extremism, increased risks of climate and
cyber insecurity and greater demand for comprehensive
national institutional capacity-building and police
reform. We must therefore work collectively to ensure
that the United Nations police are properly prepared,
equipped and resourced to address them. This briefing
is a timely opportunity to discuss some of the key
priorities for United Nations policing, through which
we aim to support our Member States in fostering
representative, responsive and accountable police
services that serve and protect the people.
The Action for Peacekeeping initiative, particularly
the areas that we have prioritized within the Action
for Peacekeeping Plus (A4P+) initiative, continues to
provide our strategic direction. I am very grateful to
everyone here for their efforts to take forward their
respective commitments and for their support to the
Secretary-General’s efforts to do the same. I am also
grateful to the Member States that announced pledges
of policing-related support at the 2022 United Nations
Chiefs of Police Summit and the 2021 Seoul United
Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial to help enhance the
performance and environmental impact of peacekeeping
operations, in line with the A4P+ priorities, which I
will discuss in more detail.
The first priority of A4P+, which is about ensuring
coherence behind political strategies, acknowledges
that entities across the United Nations system bring
to bear various resources and leverage that can
support and influence a country’s political trajectory.
In one example, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, police from the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo have been working with United Nations
partners, the Congolese National Police and the
Ministry of the Interior to advance the United Nations
Joint Police Reform Support Programme, strengthen
human rights protection and fight impunity — all of
which are ingredients for a successful transition.
Strengthening those synergies lies at the heart of
the second priority of A4P+, which is to ensure greater
strategic and operational integration across mission
components. In Mali, United Nations police planning
officers are working with their civilian and military
counterparts to increase the linkages between longerterm strategic planning and operational decision-making
and support integrated planning for strengthened
mandate implementation. And in Somalia, police from
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia,
22-68901

14/11/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

together with the multidimensional African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia, the Federal Government
of Somalia, the African Union, the European Union,
the United Nations country team and other partners,
are working in tandem with the aim of handing over
security responsibilities to Somali counterparts by the
end of 2024. We expect the Inter-Agency Task Force
on Policing, which was established last year and is
co-chaired by the Department of Peace Operations
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
to facilitate an even greater coherence between United
Nations police and other United Nations entities
involved in aspects of policing and law enforcement.
The Department is also working to enhance
capabilities and mindsets — the third A4P+
priority — by aligning predeployment training by
Member States with the Organization’s in-mission
training. With the aim of ensuring that the capabilities
of deployed formed police units match their mandated
tasks, performance metrics are being monitored by the
Police Division and the Department of Operational
Support and reported on in order to form a basis for
engagements with police-contributing countries
requesting remediation of identified gaps in deployed
contingent-owned equipment.
The fourth priority of A4P+, which is ensuring
the highest levels of accountability to peacekeepers,
remains critical to improving the safety and security of
our personnel. The Action Plan to Improve the Security
of United Nations Peacekeepers, now in its fourth
iteration, continues to structure our efforts to that end.
In support of the implementation of the Action Plan,
the United Nations police have conducted in-mission
performance assessment and evaluation team visits
to our missions in the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali and South
Sudan this year, examining critical areas such as
command-and-control structures, contingent-owned
equipment and training. Furthermore, the United
Nations police is continuing its efforts to create enabling
environments and foster gender-responsive working
environments and accommodations, including by
strengthening women’s networks within our missions.
To advance our fifth priority, the accountability
of peacekeepers, the United Nations police continues
to underline zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and
abuse through enhanced predeployment and in-mission
training. We are also stepping up efforts to regularly
assess performance, recognize good performance and

S/PV.9189

improve accountability for performance, including
through the development of proposed police-related
impact indicators within the Comprehensive Planning
and Performance Assessment System, which will be
discussed during this Police Week. Moreover, conduct
relates to how we manage the environmental footprints
of our missions, and the United Nations police
continues to contribute to the environmental adaptation
and mitigation measures of our missions and hostState counterparts.
Regarding strategic communications, the sixth
priority, in line with initiatives of the Department of
Peace Operations (DPO), the United Nations police
works to amplify the positive impact of our presence
through enhanced strategic communications, including
new engagement on social media platforms, as well as
community-oriented policing and awareness-raising
activities. Furthermore, the United Nations Police
contributes to DPO’s efforts to proactively counter
misinformation, disinformation and hate speech. My
visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo last
July made clear the urgent and critical need to further
enhance our capacities to better manage expectations
and de-escalate tensions, including with United Nations
police officers specialized in strategic communications
and crisis response — a capacity with which we expect
our Member States to provide us in greater quantity.
Finally, in line with the seventh A4P+ priority,
our efforts continue to improve cooperation with host
countries during transitions, as we witnessed in Darfur,
where experts from our Standing Police Capacity
are helping the mission with the establishment of its
monitoring support component and operationalizing
the ceasefire mechanisms as part of the Juba
Peace Agreement.
At the same time, the women and peace and
security agenda is infused in all aspects of A4P+ and
remains the foundation for improving our overall
effectiveness. Gender-responsive policing efforts by the
United Nations police ensure that the different security
needs of women, men, girls and boys are considered,
including through a robust network of gender advisers
and police gender focal points. With the support of
our Member States, the United Nations police has
already achieved its gender parity targets for 2025,
with women currently comprising almost one in five
United Nations police officers, including 31 per cent of
individual police officers and 15 per cent of members of
formed police units. I am very pleased that women now

22-689013/30

S/PV.9189

United Nations peacekeeping operations

head five out of the nine police components in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We will continue to
count on the assistance of Member States in helping us
to expand and sustain those numbers.
Interactions between Member States and the
Secretariat during the third United Nations Chiefs
of Police Summit highlighted the greater demand for
United Nations police assistance beyond peacekeeping,
including support to United Nations country teams
and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
through our Standing Police Capacity in Brindisi. With
the continued support of Member States, we will be able
to meet the need for United Nations policing assistance
today and tomorrow.
A4P+ is our vehicle and part of a renewed
collective engagement to strengthen peacekeeping as
an invaluable instrument for peace and security and an
expression of international solidarity. Through it, we
are better placed to address today’s challenges to peace
and security and to ultimately improve the lives of the
people whom we serve.
I will conclude by reiterating my deep gratitude
to Member States for their ongoing support to United
Nations peacekeeping, including their continued
dedication to implementing their respective A4P
commitments and A4P+ priorities and their contributions
of highly qualified police personnel to serve for peace
with the United Nations. Before I end, let me also
express to you, Mr. President, our deep satisfaction at
the prospect of the next United Nations Peacekeeping
Ministerial being held in your country, Ghana.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.

14/11/2022

the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
has largely transitioned from a Mission anchored in
static protection to one that is focused on mobility
and meeting protection needs where they are greatest
(see S/PV.9134). We are also moving into a more
intense phase of political engagement to support the
full implementation of the transitional road map. This
process envisages the holding of elections in South
Sudan in December 2024. For UNPOL, this means we
are doubling down on our efforts across all three tiers
of protection, in the context of a clear political strategy
laid out in the Mission’s strategic vision 2021-2024.
First, UNPOL participates in whole-of-Mission
efforts to foster protection through dialogue and
engagement, and we support political solutions to
conflicts. The challenges in this context are vast, as root
causes go deep. These root causes include fractures in
social cohesion, the proliferation of weapons and gender
disparities — all of which continue to fuel cycles of
subnational violence, of which sexual and gender-based
violence is a harrowing hallmark.
Together with the South Sudan National Police
Service (SSNPS), we are conducting outreach
activities to help improve the relationship between
law-enforcement agencies and the people they serve,
especially women and children, youth and community
leaders. We have created 185 police-community
relations committees to address gender-based violence,
child protection and crime prevention in general. Our
focus in this regard is on trust-building as a foundation
for effective community policing as a first link in the
overall justice chain.

Ms. Fossen: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council today on the
contribution of the United Nations Police (UNPOL)
to the protection of civilians in South Sudan. The
protection of civilians remains at the heart of what we
do and is a mutually reinforcing component of other
parts of our mandate, which includes support for the
implementation of the Revitalized Peace Agreement;
building the capacity of the local police of South Sudan;
monitoring and reporting on human rights violations;
and creating conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.

Specifically,
we
have
created
more
police-community relations committees in and outside
the internally displaced persons camp in Bentiu, as well
as in Koch, Pariang and Leer, to address concerns of
sexual and gender-based violence and conflict-related
sexual violence. The goal is to identify hotspot areas
and bring community members and police together
to discuss their security concerns. It also feeds into
our early-warning prevention-and-response efforts.
But we are painfully aware that our reach is limited
when compared to the scale of the problem. And this
underscores the need for the Government to further
take up its responsibilities for the protection of its
own civilians.

As Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Haysom told the Council in a prior briefing,

More broadly, our specialized police team is working
closely with the rule-of-law team to deliver training for

I now give the floor to Ms. Fossen.

4/30

22-68901

14/11/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

SSNPS officers and military judge-advocates on sexual
and gender-based violence and conflict-related sexual
violence. The training-of-trainers format for the SSNPS
has increased local ownership of these workshops and
ensures they are tailored to the South Sudanese context.
We have also contributed to gender-responsive policing
initiatives through the launch of the SSNPS women’s
network, together with our gender-affairs unit.
Secondly,
UNPOL
has
extended
its
physical-protection presence through increased
participation in integrated civilian-military-police
patrols and deployments to temporary operating
bases. This follows the redesignation of all but one
protection-of-civilians site, which has freed up our
capacity to expand UNPOL’s footprint around and
beyond the internally displaced persons camps. We
are also providing individual mentoring and advisory
and assistance services to SSNPS officers. Through 12
recently completed quick-impact projects, we have also
accelerated the presence of SSNPS in areas of civilian
concentration, including in conflict hotspots and areas
of return.
Thirdly, we are contributing to a protective
environment through support for rule-of-law institutions
that promote accountability and access to justice. This
includes providing technical support to the SSNPS
on crime-scene management, arrest and detention,
and ethics and anti-corruption awareness. Without
any semblance of an integrated justice chain in South
Sudan, this is a legacy issue whereby we are seeking to
build a platform for institutions to take root and hold
after this peacekeeping mission leaves. Furthermore,
with elections on the horizon, we foresee the need for
capacity-building support for South Sudanese lawenforcement agencies, upon the invitation of the host
Government, in elections-security policing, publicorder management and training, including to ensure
a human-rights-based approach that supports an open
civic and political space.
The recent graduation of the necessary unified
forces underscores the challenges and opportunities
in fostering a professionalized national police service.
There are low baselines of education and literacy, and
women are underrepresented in leadership positions. A
lack of logistical support also means that graduating
police have limited resources — from pens and paper
to vehicles — to carry out their most basic duties. The
absence of a judiciary system means that there is a low
application of the penal code, which limits the space

S/PV.9189

for victim-centred responses where survivors can seek
redress through the formal justice chain.
While the institutions are as young as the nation
itself, we are pleased to report a generally positive
working relationship with the host Government.
Looking ahead, Action for Peacekeeping Plus provides
a useful framework for enhancing our own effectiveness
in the protection of civilians and in aligning the support
of Member States. The primacy of politics is at the core
of our mandate implementation both in our strategic and
operational responses to protection challenges in South
Sudan, as we continue supporting more accountable,
transparent governance, political coherence and
broader civic and political space and strengthening
partnerships towards more inclusive, sustainable and
meaningful peace in South Sudan.
We welcome the deployment of more women
peacekeepers to support all aspects of the women and
peace and security agenda. UNMISS is proud to be a
gender-parity champion, having already surpassed its
uniformed gender-parity targets. Women now represent
37.5 per cent of individual police officers and 25 per
cent of formed police units, but we can always do
more with more. That brings me to the need to create
more enabling environment conditions that incentivize
women’s participation in peacekeeping. In accordance
with the Elsie Initiative guidelines, UNMISS has
adopted design specifications and guidance on
facilities and infrastructure to improve the living
conditions in our field offices, but we need continued
resource support to implement those objectives in an
environment where costs are high, procurement time
frames are long and the logistical challenges are many.
In that same regard, we strive for technologyenabled, data-driven peacekeeping, although some
basic hurdles include unstable Internet and electricity in
austere field conditions. We would welcome additional
capacity in support of joint and integrated planning,
including to continue implementing the Comprehensive
Planning and Performance Assessment System, as part
of the A4P+ priority area to strengthen strategic and
operational integration.
Capabilities and mindsets are vitally important.
I am proud of our hard-working UNPOL team in
UNMISS. We will continue to need boots on the
ground to walk the extra mile, not necessarily niche
experts but proactive and resourceful officers with
good education and predeployment training who are

22-689015/30

S/PV.9189

United Nations peacekeeping operations

ready to roll up their sleeves in the world’s newest
nation. The deployment of additional formed police
units would also greatly enhance the Mission’s capacity
for key protection tasks as South Sudan moves into a
phase of increased political and security competition
around elections.
In conclusion, I am proud to be serving in South
Sudan, a young and dynamic country that has so much
potential. However, that can be unlocked only through
a foundation of the rule of law, because a nation cannot
be built on force. UNPOL is doing its part to support the
people and the Government of South Sudan in that task,
and I thank the Council for its continued confidence
in us.
The President: I thank Ms. Fossen for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Berethe.
Mr. Berethe (spoke in French): It is an honour for
me to brief the Security Council today on the topic of
the contribution of the United Nations police to the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on Peacekeeping
Operations and the priorities of the Action for
Peacekeeping Plus (A4P+) initiative, in particular the
efforts of the police component of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO ) to further improve
the performance of the police officers deployed here in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Like other police components, MONUSCO’s
police component has made peacekeeping a priority
in achieving its key objectives. Despite the difficulties
encountered on the ground, efforts therefore continue
to be made by the police component to further improve
its performance in order to achieve the objectives
established by the Mission’s mandate.
In that regard, allow me to take stock of some
factors that contribute to measuring the component’s
performance. Those factors illustrate what was
described by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
through the various instruments that are in place within
countries and within the Mission. Those include human
resources management and performance improvement
by means of internal training within the Mission and
operational engagement on the ground, as well as
assistance in national capacity-building, particularly in
the areas of investigations, training and the advisory
and monitoring activities of our national partners.
6/30

14/11/2022

In terms of human resources, the MONUSCO
police component is currently comprised of 384
individual police officers out of a total of the 591
officers authorized. We also have 1,223 formed police
unit personnel. All those personnel are today deployed
in five sectors in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In the context of that deployment, in accordance
with the provisions established by the Department of
Peace Operations and through the assessment process
set up at the national level, an evaluation of the various
skills and the specific needs of the Mission has been
carried out.
We aim to identify the expertise that meets the
needs of our national partners, in particular in the
transition context of our Mission. In order to identify
and implement those resources, there is ongoing
communication with the 31 police-contributing
countries, which is essential. That allows us to not only
individually identify resources but also communicate
with regard to the quality of the formed police units and
undertake discussions to identify the specific skills that
we need for our specialized teams.
For example, our Mission currently receives
support from Canada, Sweden and Tanzania, through
which we have received specialized police teams
to combat sexual and gender-based violence. Those
teams have quickly gained the trust of the local
population through their know-how and commitment to
professionalizing specific units to deal with that issue
within the Congolese National Police. Those rapid and
concrete results and the successful performance of the
teams have encouraged us in our discussions with the
police-contributing countries to broaden that kind of
configuration and recreate that model with a view to
providing specialized teams for public order.
During their deployment, training continues
on topics to build police officers’ competencies.
The effectiveness of police officers’ performance
is measured objectively through the use of various
monitoring and measurement systems, such as the
Comprehensive Planning and Performance Assessment
System, which measures the impact of UNPOL’s
mandate on the ground.
The police component has also put in place a
monitoring and assessment mechanism, which consists
of systematically collecting information on the
implementation of the annual work plan, as established
globally and divided into quarters and trimesters. That
22-68901

14/11/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

allows us to review how the units deployed on the
ground are working and review the performance of
each officer and each unit. That is an important tool for
us to be able to identify where things are going well and
where there are shortcomings.
That assessment is not just technical work of
ticking boxes, but it is also a way to measure our
commitment with our partners at the operational level.
Our commitment, alongside our partners, is measured
by capacity-building activities in which UNPOL
provides major contributions to bring about calm and
security through established strategies.
In that regard, I would like to mention two particular
areas of commitment.
The first example is the operational strategy to
combat insecurity — which we call SOLI — and is a
tool for measuring performance in combating crime in
urban areas. It is also a model for community policing
methods and the use of statistics to measure police
performance. Currently, we have seven of the so-called
SOLI teams conducting monitoring and capacitybuilding activities among the Congolese National
Police. Notable results have been recorded in terms of
crime prevention in 2022.
In the areas in which we maintain a presence, that
mechanism has allowed us to respond to no fewer than
223,000 calls from the population, resulting in more
than 17,000 police reactions and responses and more
than 4,500 arrests. Therefore, with practical support,
we have set up instruments that can statistically
measure what we have achieved at the national level and
also allow us to evaluate the individual and collective
commitment of our units.
The second example is the deployment of teams
in charge of capacity-building in the area of organized
crime. Those teams prioritize thematic training,
which can and must contribute to our national efforts
to combat impunity. The Congolese National Police
has therefore received training in intelligence and
investigation techniques on serious organized crime,
such as kidnapping for ransom, illicit trafficking in
minerals and various other types of crime.
For us, counter-organized crime investigations
and techniques are not only an opportunity to transfer
skills in terms of managing crime scenes for our
Congolese colleagues but also an opportunity to
contribute to national efforts to stop the spread of

S/PV.9189

small arms and light weapons through the various
units set up in the framework of the arms embargo in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As we near
the end of 2022, we can see that over the course of
the year our units have supported no fewer than 212
investigations through various forms of assistance to
our Congolese counterparts, including assistance in
complicated investigations on improvised explosive
device explosions.
Cooperation with the Congolese National Police
extends beyond assessment measures and is also a
way to contribute to the security of United Nations
personnel deployed in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. UNPOL contributes to mobilizing national
stakeholders to assume their responsibility in the
investigation of serious crimes committed against
peacekeepers and participates in joint efforts with the
other entities of the Mission in the context of work
within the criminal justice system. Our technical and
forensic support extends beyond the national police
and also includes the military justice system and has
facilitated numerous arrests for serious crimes and
crimes against humanity.
In a similar vein, MONUSCO has equipped its
formed police units with advanced technology, such as
drones, to strengthen the safety of the camps. We are
working collaboratively with the MONUSCO force and
the Department of Safety and Security to contribute
to the full range of elements that are included in the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, and as the Council
knows, we are in an environment where the threat is
evolving and the situation very volatile.
MONUSCO’s police component is aware of the
magnitude of the current challenges in the specific
context of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is also aware of the very changing nature of the
peacekeeping environment, and it remains convinced
that performance-evaluation measures are essential
to the success of the work being done on the ground,
not only in the context of building national capacity in
accordance with the mandate, but also in the context
of the guidance provided by the Secretary-General
through the Action for Peacekeeping initiative in the
supporting UNPOL’s contribution to the security of
United Nations personnel.
The President: I thank Mr. Berethe for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Birikorang.

22-689017/30

S/PV.9189

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Ms. Birikorang: It is my pleasure and honour to
join today’s meeting and to share my thoughts with
the Security Council.
Decisions, norms, ideas and policies at the
multilateral level often filter down to the national level
and consequently influence decision-making. Beyond
the policy level, direct exposure to institutional norms
predisposes actors to behave in ways that demonstrate
a certain level of learning and eventual application.
Peacekeeping missions are expected to be the
embodiment of the application of international norms
of human rights, among other things. Peacekeepers are
therefore trained and oriented to uphold such principles
while in the theatre of ever more complex operations.
To attain those lofty goals, the pre- to postdeployment stages of the United Nations peacekeeping
cycle are an important component of the Action for
Peacekeeping Plus principles. Many peacekeepers from
police-contributing countries (PCCs) have completed
several tours of peacekeeping missions in usually
difficult and ever more complex and fluid terrains.
As a result, their preparations before their duty tours,
post-operations debriefing, top-up training and skills
enhancements have become even more essential to the
overall success of a peacekeeping mission. As previous
speakers have emphasized, United Nations police
(UNPOL) are critical components in the implementation
of the Action for Peacekeeping Plus priorities. I want to
highlight three key, interlinked points in that regard.
The first is that peacekeeping has a democratizing
effect on the security sector in host communities and
troop-contributing countries themselves and must
take into account the need for a political process
that is inclusive and sensitive to local dynamics.
Secondly, peacekeeping strengthens the legitimacy and
effectiveness of domestic security relations among the
various entities of the security sector in the country.
Thirdly, there are mutually reinforcing benefits that
police in peacekeeping bring to the women and peace
and security agenda in the peacekeeping theatre and at
the domestic level in Member States.
Those three points highlight a number of the Action
for Peacekeeping Plus priorities. The first is strategic and
operational integration — that is, enhancing strategic
and operational integration to achieve unity of purpose
for greater impact. The second relates to capabilities
and mindset. Peacekeeping missions must have the
right capabilities and mindset for implementing their
8/30

14/11/2022

mandates. The third is innovation, and to that I would
add adaptive peacekeeping that is flexible, responsive
and sensitive to the operational environment. The
fourth is the cross-cutting theme of women and peace
and security in ensuring a positive multiplying effect
on women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in
peace and political processes. The fifth that I want to
highlight is the accountability of peacekeepers, as well
as strategic and operational integration.
On the issue of the democratizing effect of
peacekeeping on the security sector, there are several
police-contributing countries that are relatively young
democracies with complex histories. Some of them
are on positive paths to democratization. Others are
grappling with their own internal security challenges.
In their deployment to peacekeeping missions, those
countries are therefore on a mission to provide support
to other countries in distress, improve their own
capacities and support host countries in their quest for
peace and security. That results in a mutually beneficial
relationship between UNPOL both in the peacekeeping
theatre and when its personnel return home.
In striving to achieve the highest standards of the
peacekeeping mission, police peacekeepers sometimes
engage in tasks that they might not ordinarily perform
in their own countries, such as establishing and
maintaining strong partnerships with local civil-society
and women’s networks, and regularly interacting with
fragile people and local communities to achieve unity
of purpose and greater impact. The performance of
those tasks and the high standards that peacekeepers
are expected to maintain ensure that they become
accountable. The domino effect of that practical
learning experience is that norm diffusion occurs
and that the international institutional norms and
standards that are met during peacekeeping operations
are then transposed formally and organically to the
police services of the contributing countries. In
studies conducted using Ghana’s police service as a
case study, former peacekeepers have testified that
robust peacekeeping standards have positive effects
on domestic performance and their discharge of
their duties.
With regard to strengthening the legitimacy of
domestic security relations through peacekeeping, it
has been established that in peacekeeping missions,
enhancing strategic and operational integration is
essential to achieving unity of purpose for greater impact.
UNPOL’s contribution to that objective is critical as
22-68901

14/11/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the entity that has regular and direct interaction with
host communities, whether through individual police
officers or as formed police units (FPUs).
In addition, maintaining operational effectiveness
requires strong inter-unit cohesion and collaboration
with other actors in both the peacekeeping theatre
and the host community. That has also led to strong
domestic security relations at the troop-contributing
country level, as personnel interact with several
actors from diverse backgrounds in the peacekeeping
mission. Ghana typifies that phenomenon. It has
engaged in several peacekeeping missions over several
decades, and its police officers have been deployed to
several missions.
Through those experiences, Ghana established a
formed police unit, the first deployment of which was to
South Sudan in 2015. Originally established to deploy
to international peacekeeping missions, the FPU has
increasingly been used for internal operations. Within
Ghana, it has been deployed to guard critical national
security installations, as a first responder to local crises
across the country and in a preventive deployment
capacity during public assemblies. That stand-alone
model of the FPU at the local level is an interesting
phenomenon that, I would argue, supports the Action
for Peacekeeping Plus priorities. As a formalized unit
within the Ghana Police Service, it has regular training
on firearm safety, human rights, crowd control and the
protection of civilians and other vulnerable groups.
Their constant training has improved their
professionalism, both internally in Ghana and at the
United Nations level, where they are regularly honoured.
In December 2018, for example, 165 officers of the
formed police unit who had been on deployment to the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan were honoured.
They had been deployed to Bentiu, South Sudan, for
one year and were honoured for the critical role they
played in giving special protection to vulnerable
groups, especially women and children, affected by
the instability in the country. The experiences of the
standing arrangement of the police and their regular use
in Ghanaian law enforcement has ensured that they are
operationally ready for deployment, as they are often in
so-called mission mode.
With regard to ensuring the positive multiplier
effect of women’s full and equal participation in peace
and political processes, since the promulgation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and other related resolutions on

S/PV.9189

women and peace and security, the United Nations has
encouraged Member States to increase the nomination
of women to peacekeeping missions. To reinforce
that agenda, troop- and police-contributing countries
are often given percentage quotas. That agenda has
benefits for both the host community and the troop- or
police-contributing country.
To meet United Nations targets, police-contributing
countries have enhanced the recruitment of women
into their police units, resulting in a larger pool of
women police officers for international peacekeeping
and for domestic purposes. While the figures may
still be low and more needs to be done to increase
the number of women in United Nations police, the
positive roles played by women police in peacekeeping
missions and their influence on host communities is
commendable. Women police officers are instrumental
in the aftermath of conflict-related sexual violence;
during disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes; in the recruitment and training of women in
the security services; and in critical cordon-and-search
functions. At the domestic level, police responses to
gender-based violence have improved significantly.
In conclusion, UNPOL’s contributions to the Action
for Peacekeeping priorities are critical. To improve that
contribution, there is a need for innovation, adaptability,
operational readiness, strategic and operational
integration and accountability for peacekeepers
in missions in which fragile States are often the
beneficiaries. Yet it has been established that, beyond
fragile host countries, police-contributing countries,
through innovative strategies, have maximized their
participation in United Nations peacekeeping in order to
benefit their own societies and strengthen the legitimacy
and effectiveness of domestic security relations.
The President: I thank Ms. Birikorang for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me start by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the other briefers
for their comprehensive insights on the contribution
of United Nations police (UNPOL) to the Action for
Peacekeeping Plus priorities.
Albania supports the United Nations police and
its vital role as part of the overall efforts to enhance
international peace and security in conflict, post-

22-689019/30

S/PV.9189

United Nations peacekeeping operations

conflict and other crisis situations by carrying out
effective, efficient, responsive and accountable
police services that serve and protect populations. A
people-centred, agile, flexible, rights-based and normdriven United Nations police that has at its core a mission
to ensure the protection of civilians — a top priority for
the Council — helps host countries, as we heard from
Commissioners Fossen and Berethe, to maintain public
order and safety in accordance with those countries’
needs, while always adhering to the rule of law and
respect for international human rights law.
In the course of the past decade, we have seen
conflicts not only increase but also become more
complex, fragmented and protracted. The steady
proliferation of new non-State armed groups, including
rebels, militias, criminal groups and gangs and violent
extremist groups, have added to that complexity. As
a result, innocent lives have been destroyed, societies
broken, institutions damaged and development set back
by decades.
The international community continues to spend
time and resources on reacting to and managing
conflict — but unfortunately not enough on preventing
them. We still live in a time in which, despite renewed
efforts, conflict prevention remains largely insufficient
and ineffective. Prevention requires the strengthening
of local capacities for peace by strengthening
national political, security, justice, rule-of-law and
socioeconomic institutions and making societies more
resilient to violence and conflicts.
The United Nations police is well placed to play
a critical role in many of those crucial activities, but
in order for it to be successful all stakeholders must
fulfil their responsibilities by working together with
key partners, regional organizations, Member States
and United Nations agencies under a common strategy.
In particular, police in peace operations should
become a key component of conflict analysis, early
warning and prevention efforts by understanding the
drivers of conflict at all levels. United Nations police
have a presence on the ground, often in remote locations,
meaning that they have first-hand information. They
also know how to interact and communicate with
people in local communities, which helps them to better
understand the local and national drivers of conflict
and identify why particular communities are more at
risk of tensions, thereby contributing to early-warning
mechanisms. That potential must be fully exploited.
10/30

14/11/2022

Women have proven to be extremely successful
in accessing communities and creating relationships
of trust with local populations, in particular the most
vulnerable categories. Therefore, recruiting and
retaining women police components is paramount
to achieving gender equality and also contributes to
lasting peace, as women and men experience violent
conflict differently, which in turn may enrich the
understanding of peace.
Albania strongly believes in the benefits generated
by the presence of well-integrated women personnel
and advocates for a stronger presence of women among
peacekeeping ranks. It may also prove to have an
additional positive impact, since increasing the number
of women police will encourage more women from
the countries in which UNPOL operates to participate
in public life and help to dismantle stereotypes and
assumptions that impede women’s ability to play
a central role in peacebuilding processes. It is a
concrete way to promote and ensure the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in peace processes
and a concrete materialization of the women and peace
and security agenda.
Finally, UNPOL’s cooperation with local
communities and host countries is crucial in serving
its primary purpose — to protect civilians. Albania
remains committed to supporting the United Nations
police and the work of the United Nations to help
countries in conflict and post-conflict situations meet
the ever-growing security challenges dictated by our
globalizing world.
UNPOL must continue to play a crucial role in
promoting respect for human rights and the rule of
law and ensuring accountability for crimes committed
against civilians and peacekeepers.
It is also important to note that accountability
should also involve peacekeepers themselves when it
comes to legal violations. Peacekeepers represent the
United Nations — all of us — and they are expected
to observe, at all times and in all circumstances,
the highest standards and values. Therefore, the
relationship with the host country needs innovative,
inclusive and multidimensional methods, with a holistic
approach that encompasses peace and security, political
engagement, justice, human rights and development to
ensure the best way forward towards sustaining peace.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the Police
22-68901

14/11/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Commissioners of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for their briefings. I also listened closely to the
statement made by Ms. Birikorang.
Peacekeeping police are the guardians of
international peace and have made great sacrifices
for the sake of and important contributions to the
maintenance of security in conflict areas. As we
speak, almost 10,000 peacekeeping police officers
from 129 countries are staffing posts in 18 mission
areas to provide a security umbrella for vulnerable
groups and people in conflict areas. I would like to
take this opportunity to pay the highest tribute to all
peacekeeping police officers and their families.
Currently, the international security situation
is complex and evolving. Regional hotspot issues
are emerging one after the next. United Nations
peacekeeping operations are facing a series of new
situations, new tasks and new challenges. The Security
Council and the international community should think
deeply, build consensus, advance peacekeeping policing
in the right direction, focus on key mandates and better
meet the expectations of people in conflict areas.
I would like to make the following three points.
First, we should use our advantages to the fullest.
Peacekeeping police are an important part of the United
Nations peace and security architecture. They have
unique advantages in terms of maintaining community
security, combating violent crime and capacitybuilding. Peacekeeping operations should make full
use of the advantages afforded by peacekeeping police
and serve the overall goal of maintaining peace and
stability and resolving hotspot issues. UNMISS has
done a great deal of work and played an important
role in working with local police to combat crime,
conduct various kinds of patrols, ensure the safety of
civilians and provide training to South Sudanese law
enforcement and judicial institutions. Those important
and useful practices merit being summarized.
In order to better implement its mandate,
peacekeeping police should closely coordinate with
United Nations agencies in their work. China welcomes
the establishment of the United Nations inter-agency
task force on policing and expects the task force
to fully tap the comparative advantages of various
agencies, effectively implement their core mandates of

S/PV.9189

peacekeeping operations and respond to the reasonable
needs of host countries in a timely manner.
Secondly, we should strengthen capacity-building.
The capacity-building of peacekeeping police is an
important part of the Action for Peacekeeping Plus
initiative of the Secretary-General and a shared task
for the Secretariat, host countries, police-contributing
countries and capital-contributing countries. We must be
guided by the implementation of the Strategic Guidance
Framework for International Policing and the United
Nations Police Training Architecture Programme.
It is imperative to make constructive use of the
communication channels, such as the light coordination
mechanism, and strengthen training cooperation on
different aspects so that every peacekeeping police
officer can apply a full skill set in doing their work. The
Comprehensive Planning and Performance Assessment
System is being expanded to all peacekeeping missions.
It is our hope that the parties concerned will be guided
by the results of the evaluation and target their work to
address weaknesses.
Gender equality in is an important link in capacitybuilding for peacekeeping police. China welcomes
United Nations police’s success in realizing the gender
parity target targets for 2025 ahead of schedule and hopes
that peacekeeping operations will continue to maintain
that positive momentum, provide equal opportunities
for female police officers in terms of training,
recruitment and promotion, and give full play to the
unique advantages that women offer in the protection
of vulnerable groups and community communication.
China will continue to send more talented personnel,
including female peacekeeping police, to participate
in United Nations peacekeeping operations and will
continue to provide professional training for female
personnel from police-contributing countries.
Thirdly, we should ensure the safety of personnel.
Peacekeepers have faced an increased security risk
in recent years. At the end of July, two UNMISS
peacekeeping police officers were killed in an attack,
which once again sounded the alarm for us. Member
States and the Secretariat must adopt practical measures
to fully implement resolution 2518 (2020), strengthen
early warning and intelligence-sharing, improve risk
assessment and emergency response, and provide
comprehensive and multi-level security guarantees
for peacekeepers.

22-6890111/30

S/PV.9189

United Nations peacekeeping operations

It is imperative to better equip peacekeeping police
in a customized manner and improve the security
of hardware as much as possible. In carrying out
their mission, peacekeeping police should focus on
interacting constructively with the local population,
debunk misinformation and disinformation in a
timely manner, strive to provide better understanding
and support, and work to improve software security.
The community interactive patrols conducted by the
peacekeeping police of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei and UNMISS have achieved
positive results, and their relevant experience should
be shared.
China has always been a supporter of and contributor
to United Nations peacekeeping operations. Since 2000,
China has sent more than 2,600 peacekeeping police
officers to carry out peacekeeping missions. They
have travelled to 11 mission areas on four continents,
and eight of them have given their precious lives.
For the cause of peace throughout the world, China’s
peacekeeping police have carried out their missions
with a great sense of responsibility in very difficult
environments. China will continue to support, promote
and participate in United Nations peacekeeping
operations and make greater contributions to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Ms. Christine Fossen,
Mr. Mody Berethe and Ms. Emma Birikorang for their
insightful briefings.
Kenya joins other Security Council members in
paying tribute to the United Nations police officers — the
gallant women and men who have committed themselves
to serving humankind in United Nations peacekeeping
around the world. They are among the earliest United
Nations personnel deployed in peace operations. The
nature of their skills, expertise and experience makes
them a critical asset as first responders in engaging
local communities. They are better positioned to not
only understand the drivers of conflicts within their
areas of jurisdiction, but also, and more importantly, to
innovatively address potential disputes and underlying
grievances and support early warning systems.
The increasingly complex and risky operating
environment has placed a greater demand on United
Nations police to deliver more, while maintaining
the expected levels of efficiency, professionalism and
accountability. That calls for investment in equipping
12/30

14/11/2022

the United Nations police with up-to-date specialized
expertise and skill sets. In that regard, we commend
the Department of Peace Operations for developing
specialized police teams with a project-oriented
approach to capacity-building. However, specialized
skills are only part of the solution. Correct mindsets,
the integration of modern technology and appropriate
equipment are vital.
Kenya reiterates its support for the efforts of
the Secretary-General, including his Action for
Peacekeeping Plus (A4P+) initiative, which aims to
strengthen partnerships, enhance performance and
accountability, boost safety and security, improve
conduct and support political agreements through
peacekeeping. We also commend the efforts to
further develop and implement the Strategic Guidance
Framework for International Policing, which reinforces
and enriches peacekeeping, rule-of-law, protection-ofcivilians and peacebuilding activities.
Kenya remains committed to all efforts aimed at
ensuring the full, equal and meaningful participation
and leadership of women in United Nations policing.
Indeed, we are encouraged by the number of policewomen
who take part in peacekeeping and the fact that more
of them have leadership roles. Those women, such as
Ms. Violet Lusala of Kenya, the Police Commissioner
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei,
are inspiring millions of people. We will continue to
advocate for gender mainstreaming with the aim of
successfully addressing any implementation gaps in
the women and peace and security agenda. In support
of the measures to achieve the A4P+ priorities, Kenya
would like to share the following recommendations.
First, the police must be an integral player in
all stages of the planning and execution of all peace
operations and special political missions. That will assist
in guaranteeing that the policing-related activities in
mandates are appropriate and realistic. It is also critical
for ensuring a system-wide approach to the rule of law,
including corrections services. Within missions, there
should be close cooperation and integration between
the different elements and components of peacekeeping
and political missions in order to ensure synergy and
unity of effort.
Secondly, there is a need for more cooperation
between the United Nations and international, regional
and subregional organizations, with a special emphasis
on training, sharing experience and exchanging of
22-68901

14/11/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

information on policing. In that regard, Kenya’s
International Peace Support Training Centre, a
recognized centre of excellence dedicated to capacitydevelopment, is available for such interactions.
Thirdly, the protection of all United Nations
police officers remains vital. There is a need for
enhanced collaboration and coordination with the
host communities and security services, which
requires constant communication on the mandates and
their tasks.
Fourthly, gaining and maintaining the acceptance
and trust of the host communities should be the aim
of all United Nations police officers. In order to
achieve that, they must display the highest levels of
discipline, dedication to duty and respect for the social
and cultural settings of the host communities. In that
regard, police-contributing countries should always
ensure that all police personnel to be deployed are
vetted for previous criminal acts, including sexual
exploitation and abuse, and should ensure mandatory
predeployment training, including on preventing sexual
exploitation and abuse.
Finally, we reiterate the need for more action to
incentivize the greater participation of women, including
through conducting a review of the obstacles preventing
women’s recruitment and professional advancement.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to thank the briefers for their
valuable input and the detailed information they
provided, including on the priorities of the United
Nations police in the context of peacekeeping operations,
as well as the efforts being made in that respect.
I also take this opportunity to commend Mr. Luis
Carillho for his leadership at the helm of the United
Nations Police Division. The United Arab Emirates
stands ready to cooperate closely with his successor
and his team.
I would like to highlight two priorities that the
United Arab Emirates considers to be fundamental
pillars for the implementation of the Action for
Peacekeeping Plus (A4P+) agenda.
The first priority is the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda. In that context, we
appreciate the efforts of police-contributing countries
and the United Nations Police Division in nominating
female officers to serve in the United Nations police
force in order to achieve the objectives set by the

S/PV.9189

Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy. Experience has
demonstrated the importance of the participation of
female police officers in peace operations, particularly
for promoting community participation, increasing
awareness of local circumstances and developing earlywarning systems.
However, we believe that increasing the
participation of women will also depend on the ability
of the United Nations to ensure appropriate living
conditions and the necessary infrastructure in all
Missions, in addition to adopting the improvements
required. We hope that those steps will receive more
attention and gain broader scope. Efforts must continue
to ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in all peace operations.
The second priority is the importance of increasing
the use of technology and innovation in peace
operations. New tools can have a positive impact
in enhancing the safety and security of uniformed
personnel and protecting local communities, through
the use of monitoring and surveillance technology to
improve field situational awareness. Technology also
plays a key role in improving performance, strategic
communications and other critical mission elements.
As a concrete example, the United Arab Emirates, in
cooperation with the International Security Alliance,
organized the first virtual reality-based exercise to
address a simulated terrorist attack. That innovation
was demonstrated at a side event on the margins of the
third United Nations Chiefs of Police Summit, which
was held recently in New York. In that context, we look
forward to hearing from the briefers about their views
on what could perhaps be done differently in the area
of technology to make peacekeeping operations more
efficient and effective.
Following the interventions of Commissioners
Christine Fossen and Mody Berethe, I would like to
note the positive impacts of the Integrated Peacekeeping
Performance and Accountability Framework and the
Comprehensive Planning and Performance Assessment
System. We are hopeful that such initiatives will
contribute to improving the work of the police
components of peace operations.
We all know that peace operations are not created
to be permanent; on the contrary, they play a key role
in building the capacity of the local police who will be
responsible for taking control of and maintaining the
achievements made during peace operations, particularly

22-6890113/30

S/PV.9189

United Nations peacekeeping operations

in host countries. In that sense, capacity development
must be at the heart of cooperation among peace
operations and the relevant authorities in host countries.
Before concluding, I would like to thank
Ms. Christine Fossen, Police Commissioner, United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, for welcoming the
recent Special Policing Advisory Group’s visit to South
Sudan, in which the United Arab Emirates participated.
We also commend the support provided to South Sudan
by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, including
by protecting civilians, providing support to correctional
institutions and establishing capacity-building.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates is keen
to promote international efforts to strengthen security
and stability across the world. Accordingly, Abu Dhabi
hosted the most recent annual conference of the heads of
police components of United Nations peace operations
last August, which was held for the first time away
from United Nations Headquarters. My country will
also sponsor the next Chiefs of Police Summit, to be
held in New York in 2024.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reiterates
its full support for promoting the United Nations
police capabilities, and we stress the need to ensure
appropriate support in order to ensure that important
component of peacekeeping operations can completely
fulfil its mandate.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for initiating this exchange with United Nations police
components. This is the first time that Gabon has been
invited to contribute to this annual debate since it began
its term on the Security Council.
We listened with great interest to the briefings
delivered by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peace Operations, the Heads of
the police components of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and Ms. Emma Birikorang,
representative of the Kofi Annan International
Peacekeeping Training Centre. Their briefings
illustrate the unwavering commitment of the United
Nations to the protection of civilians and peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. They also serve to inform us about
the challenges and obstacles that United Nations
police components face on the ground, as well as the
sometimes-precarious conditions in which they carry
14/30

14/11/2022

out their mandates. I would therefore like to pay
tribute to the work of those police officers, whose role
in supporting national police services, promoting the
rule of law and consolidating peace and development
significantly contributes to the recovery of States in
conflict, post-conflict and crisis situations.
Through their outreach activities, police
components are very often the direct link between
peacekeeping operations and local communities. They
are closest to the actual situation in the country by
carrying out community policing activities, as I said.
In that regard, they are a major asset, particularly in
developing the mandates of peace operations and
political missions so that they are better adapted to the
needs of host countries.
In that context, the training and capacity-building
of police components are crucial. In order to be more
effective, the training policy of the Blue Berets must
take into account both the different kinds of threats and
the specific realities on the ground where those forces
are deployed. From one region to the next and from one
country to another, the realities, aspirations and needs
vary, and we must take that into account in the training
of such men and women in the field, in developing
mandates and in the choice and provision of equipment
in order to better protect civilian populations and
improve their perception of the presence and work of
peacekeepers, as well as strengthening the security of
those soldiers.
The role of women in police components is also a key
issue. They are indispensable, particularly in the context
of outreach activities and peace and peacebuilding
processes, and their presence encourages women to
become more involved. In most cases of sexual violence
and in the fight against crime, local communities are
more open to interacting with female police officers.
Increasing the number of women in uniform in the
police components of peace operations is therefore a
major commitment that our Organization must meet.
They bring value added that cannot be overlooked.
In that regard, Gabon’s support for the Action for
Peacekeeping Plus initiative, which places high priority
on the expedited implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda, is unwavering.
I would like to conclude by calling for the capacitybuilding of developing countries to enable them to
provide even more police contingents, in particular
women’s contingents.
22-68901

14/11/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Since you wanted this meeting to be interactive,
Mr. President, I would like to ask Mr. Berethe
some questions. In his briefing, he mentioned the
implementation of an evaluation mechanism. I would
like to ask him to elaborate a little more on the current
status of the capacity-building of the national police.
Since, as part of the police component, he is closer to
the population, I would also like to know the current
mindset of the Congolese people, particularly following
the events of last July. My last question is the following.
With regard to the renewal of MONUSCO’s mandate,
what can the Security Council do to improve the
effectiveness of the police component in particular?
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important discussion.
I also thank the briefers for their inputs.
Norway has been a consistent contributor to the
United Nations police (UNPOL). We support UNPOL
with skilled police officers and leaders, such as
Ms. Fossen, financial contributions, policy reforms
and tools, such as the Strategic Guidance Framework
for International Policing, as well as specialized police
teams — a deployment modality pioneered by Norway.
We recognize the need for the United Nations
police to modernize its capacity-building to reflect
contemporary policing methods and respond to
emerging threats. Norway therefore welcomes the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping (A4P)
reform initiative and the Action for Peacekeeping Plus
implementation strategy.
We particularly commend the efforts that UNPOL
has made to meet the target numbers set out in the
Secretary-General’s Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy.
Nevertheless, we emphasize that gender parity is
not only about quantitative measures, but also about
maximizing the effectiveness of peace operations. To
that end, we must ensure that progress towards parity
includes efforts to create a safe work environment for
everyone, with a zero-tolerance policy towards gender
discrimination, sexual harassment and abuse.
While there has been steady progress since the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations was signed in 2017, the United
Nations police has the potential to deliver even stronger
results to contribute to the A4P goals. In that regard, I
would like to emphasize four key areas.

S/PV.9189

First, with regard to partnerships, UNPOL’s
capacity to make a difference by itself is limited.
The involvement of key stakeholders, including civil
society, the private sector and other international
organizations, such as INTERPOL, is therefore critical
to modern police work, not least by facilitating a
holistic and coherent approach across the entire judicial
sector. Norway encourages all the relevant institutions
to enhance efforts to lead an inclusive one-United
Nations approach to police, justice and corrections in
peace operations.
Secondly, regarding Member State involvement,
UNPOL depends on police-contributing countries.
Changes in the United Nations recruitment policy and
training programmes, as well as the organization of
important events, such as the United Nations Chiefs of
Police Summit, would benefit from broader consultation
with Member States.
Thirdly, on emerging challenges, over the past
decades, United Nations peacekeeping has changed
in response to new threats. Terrorism and violent
extremism, including the nexus with transnational
organized crime, require a holistic and transparent
criminal justice response. The United Nations police,
along with other rule-of-law entities and security
institutions, has an important role to play in delivering
technical assistance and capacity-building to help host
State law enforcement and core justice institutions to
address threats, while protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
Finally, UNPOL can play a critical role in
transition contexts. The move from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding must be inclusive and nationally owned
and must have a strong focus on the protection of
civilians, including children, in order to be successful.
Resolution 2594 (2021), on United Nations transitions,
places a particular focus on the need to enhance the
State’s capacity to protect its own civilians. That is an
area where UNPOL has a pivotal role to play through
training and support.
Let me conclude with two questions. I would like
to ask Ms. Fossen to elaborate on what her thoughts
are as to how to better incorporate the rule-of-law
components in peace operations. I would like to ask
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix what measures can
be taken to enhance the work of United Nations police
against terrorism and organized crime.

22-6890115/30

S/PV.9189

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Ms. Moran (Ireland): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix, Ms. Birikorang and Police
Commissioners Fossen and Berethe for their insightful
briefings. Huge thanks go to Ghana for arranging this
important meeting.
Ireland is a strong supporter of the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) agenda. Action
for Peacekeeping Plus (A4P+) should continue to provide
the framework to support the United Nations police
(UNPOL) to develop policing capabilities, advance the
women and peace and security agenda and improve
accountability and performance. The A4P+ initiative is
especially necessary as missions navigate increasingly
complex political and security environments.
We receive regular reports of the important work
that the Police Commissioners and their teams carry
out. Their strong leadership is key to advancing policing
performance and the A4P+ goals. Their work does not
go unnoticed, and we thank them for their continued
commitment. Their contributions to the advancement
of the women and peace and security agenda must
truly be acknowledged. They act as role models for
policing everywhere.
Ireland has contributed to UNPOL for 30 years,
including through its current deployment to the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, in which we are
the largest police-contributing country. This morning I
want to highlight a number of areas where Ireland sees
particular relevance for the ongoing implementation
of priorities.
First, UNPOL can play a pivotal role in the
transitions contexts. It is important that UNPOL
components offer support and training to host
Governments, civil society, including women’s
networks, and police and security-sector actors.
That enables the development of mechanisms and
environments that engage, support and protect local
communities, including women, in a bid to build
sustainable peace.
Secondly, peacekeeping operations must have the
right capabilities in the right place, at the right time and
with the right mindsets to deploy more adaptable and
capable personnel. As an A4P women and peace and
security champion, we believe that this must include
breaking down the barriers to the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women police officers in
every role at every level. Partnerships are also important
in developing those skills and capabilities. To assist in
16/30

14/11/2022

developing capacity, in September Ireland was delighted
to host an UNPOL specialized train-the-trainers course
for 10 Member States.
Accountability to peacekeepers lies at the heart of
A4P+, including in cases of crimes committed against
them. Ireland encourages efforts to address serious
and organized crime, support the implementation of
the peacekeeping intelligence framework and prevent,
investigate and prosecute crimes against peacekeepers.
The provisions of resolution 2589 (2021) must be fully
implemented to support those who put their lives on
the line. Ireland welcomes the reported improvements
to base defence measures and integrated security
initiatives. From an environmental perspective,
increased use of renewables and improved adaptation
and mitigation measures should continue. Ireland
also recognises UNPOL’s work to improve their
evidence-based assessments of performance and ensure
adherence to standards of conduct by reinforcing zero
tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse.
Finally, as Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
mentioned this morning, peacekeepers face increasingly
dangerous and hostile environments and are themselves
targets of misinformation and disinformation, as we have
seen in the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Mali. We must ensure that
peace operations make strategic communications a
whole-of-mission activity, integrating it into planning
and mandate implementation. UNPOL can play an
important role by supporting and engaging local actors
and fostering mutual trust and dialogue.
I would like to finish with a number of questions.
I want to ask Commissioner Fossen what additional
capabilities and training Member States can provide to
help UNPOL better respond to increasingly dangerous
environments. I would like to know from Commissioner
Berethe how the host nation has assisted in his strategic
messaging to improve the local community’s attitude to
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, bearing in mind
the point I made on strategic communication. Finally,
Ms. Birikorang mentioned adaptive peacekeeping and
it would be great if she could give us some insights into
the factors that might help realize that.
Mr. De Oliveira Freitas (Brazil): I thank the
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his opening
remarks. I also thank Commissioners Fossen and
Berethe for their briefings and for their valuable work
22-68901

14/11/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

in the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
respectively. I listened attentively to Ms. Birkorang
on the activities of the Kofi Annan International
Peacekeeping Training Centre.
The international security situation is more
complex, and conflicts are more diverse, than they were
just a few years ago. Not only are the populations in
the countries affected at risk, so are the peacekeepers
themselves. In that context, the role of police components
in United Nations missions is more important and more
challenging than ever. Peacekeeping missions are
frequently deployed in areas where State institutions,
including law-enforcement agencies, are either absent
or severely impaired. Blue Berets are therefore called
on to re-establish order and protect civilians, not as
a permanent substitute for local police forces, but for
temporary assistance, and ideally as a partner who can
help prepare local forces to resume their responsibilities.
The police contingent in United Nations missions
plays an important role in peacebuilding as well as in
peacekeeping itself. That role is particularly important
during transitions in order to help ensure that local
institutions are up to the task of maintaining stability
and preventing the reversal of the hard-won gains
achieved by the missions and the host countries. We
should explore ways to strengthen the contribution
of United Nations police to realizing the priorities of
the Action for Peacekeeping Plus (A4P+) initiative. I
would like to highlight three fundamental elements
of effective peacekeeping — the safety and security
of peacekeepers, strategic communications and
the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
Brazil believes that the United Nations police can
play a fundamental role in promoting the women and
peace and security agenda. Female police officers are
especially well suited for protecting vulnerable groups
such as women and children, as well as promoting
women`s participation and strengthening community
engagement. It is necessary not only to have female
police personnel, but also to ensure that women fill
command and leadership roles.
In order for Blue Berets to implement their
mandates, appropriate training is essential. Brazilian
police personnel deployed to United Nations missions,
besides having to abide by the demanding requirements

S/PV.9189

of their own individual departments, have to undergo
additional training at the Sérgio Vieira de Mello Peace
Operations Joint Training Center, run by the Brazilian
Armed Forces.
As we have witnessed too many times in recent
months, peacekeepers themselves are at risk. I honour
and praise the five United Nations police personnel
who paid the ultimate price in fulfilling their duty
in 2022, including in MONUSCO, represented here
by Commissioner Berethe. In that context, strategic
communications can play an important role in
promoting the safety and security of peacekeepers.
Appropriate explanations of the mandate and two-way
communication with the local authorities, the local
society and other partners can help dispel unrealistic
expectations and clarify the actions undertaken by
missions. That could help counter misinformation and
disinformation campaigns against missions and prevent
episodes of violence against peacekeepers and mission
facilities, such as those that we have unfortunately
witnessed in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Mandates for police components vary
from mission to mission, but they usually involve the
protection of civilians, peacekeepers and facilities, the
strengthening of State institutions, support for securitysector reform and support in the fight against organized
crime. Strategic communications can be a facilitator
and a multiplier in achieving all of those goals.
In conclusion, the police personnel in United Nations
missions help fulfil one of the most fundamental tasks
of peacekeeping — re-establishing, either directly or
by way of cooperation with local institutions, order
and normalcy in societies affected by conflict. In doing
so, they contribute to respect for human rights and a
resumption of economic activities. They are therefore
an essential part of the peace and security architecture,
and Brazil is proud to contribute with some of its best
law-enforcement professionals in the area.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and our
briefers today, and I want to especially thank Ghana
for bringing us together to discuss how United Nations
police can support the implementation of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. It is also critical that we
continue to support the Action for Peacekeeping Plus
initiative, which aims to ensure that United Nations
peacekeepers live up to the high expectations that
come with wearing the blue helmet or the blue beret.
At the same time, it strives to ensure that those who

22-6890117/30

S/PV.9189

United Nations peacekeeping operations

bravely volunteer to serve in the name of peace have
adequate resources and support to keep them safe
and empower them in carrying out their important
peacekeeping missions.
We were honoured that Ambassador ThomasGreenfield spoke as a panellist with Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix at the United Nations Chiefs of Police
Summit in September, and I am glad that we are here
today to continue that conversation. We are meeting in
the midst of a global pandemic, a food crisis exacerbated
by the continued Russian aggression against Ukraine,
and a battle against the climate change that is so deeply
affecting the security of African nations and our
peacekeeping and policing missions in those nations.
But despite all that, the mission and the dedication of
United Nations police have remained the same — to
help restore, establish or strengthen the rule of law in
places where it has broken down owing to conflict or
complex emergencies.
The United States is a strong supporter of United
Nations police peacekeeping. Since 2012, we have
provided more than $80 million to help prepare
thousands of police from a dozen countries for
service in peacekeeping missions. We are dedicated to
making peacekeeping, including police peacekeeping,
stronger, safer and more effective. Moreover, we
believe, and studies have shown, that those goals
are mutually supportive. Peacekeepers who perform
better are better at keeping themselves and others safe.
Performance promotes safety and security.
The United States strongly supports the efforts
of the United Nations Police Division, the Integrated
Training Service, the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research and others that are working to
strengthen the doctrinal and curricular framework of
United Nations policing, which provides the foundation
for strong peacekeeper performance. We are pleased
to see, for example, that the predeployment training
for formed police units is being updated and revised
to be more practical and tailored to the threats that
peacekeepers face on the ground. We also note that
training for individual police officers is now more
robust and focused on preparing these officers to carry
out their critical advisory roles.
Those are positive trends, and we look forward to
seeing them continue. At the same time, challenges
remain. For the United Nations Police to be effective
in dangerous and complex environments, there must
18/30

14/11/2022

be regular, meaningful assessments of performance
in mission, along with recommendations to address
any deficiencies. The best way to keep peacekeepers
safe is to promote their effectiveness. It is our shared
responsibility to ensure that the tools we have,
including the Integrated Peacekeeping Performance
and Accountability Framework, are implemented
fairly and thoroughly, and that the performance data
from in-mission assessments is appropriately shared
and analysed to address common challenges. Let me
be clear: there must be continued implementation of a
zero-tolerance police for sexual abuse and misconduct.
It is necessary to talk about the critical role that
women play in all of this work, because we know
that police peacekeeping units with greater gender
representation are more effective. Studies have shown
that the presence of women peacekeepers promotes
community trust and increases the mission’s ability
to engage with women and girls, groups that we know
are disproportionately affected by conflict. Women’s
integration into police peacekeeping has come far but
not far enough.
Lastly, peacekeepers remain at risk, facing growing
threats from both direct attacks and indirect threats,
such as misinformation and disinformation that can
create more hostile operating environments. In order to
better address these concerns, the United States hopes
that the Secretary-General will issue a new report on
United Nations policing in the near future, so that we
can all track the important progress we have made,
while taking stock of where we need to improve.
We look forward to working with the briefers in the
Chamber today, the United Nations and Member States
moving forward to address today’s challenges to police
peacekeepers and empower them to carry out their
missions as fully, safely and effectively as possible.
In support of making today’s meeting more
interactive, I have a couple of questions for the Police
Commissioners from the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan. First, how are they seeing the effects of climate
change during their daily mission activities, and how
is climate insecurity affecting their work? Secondly,
can they discuss their experiences with misinformation
and disinformation? How they are combating them, and
what the Security Council can do to help?
22-68901

14/11/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, we would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix, as well as
Commissioners Fossen and Berethe and Ms. Birikorang
for their briefings.
Mexico recognizes the valuable work of the
members of the police components of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Their work, as has been noted
this morning, is key to the prevention and investigation
of crime and the maintenance of public order and
security. All of this is essential to the protection of
civilians through the promotion of the rule of law.
As has been discussed in our exchanges, police
officers face increasingly complex challenges. To ensure
good police-personnel performance, it is necessary,
we believe, to adapt their training programmes to the
security challenges they face in the field, in contexts
significantly marked by conflicts of an asymmetric
nature. We stress, once again, the importance of
ensuring that these trainings incorporate tools that
address the mental health of personnel before, during
and after their deployment.
The police components of peacekeeping missions
are key to the development of the capabilities of national
civilian institutions. Strengthening them is therefore in
line with the need to respond to threats to international
peace and security using strategies that go beyond the
military. By supporting law-enforcement tasks, peace
missions help to create a framework of democratic
governance that is indispensable for achieving lasting
peace. Police components are better able to interact at the
local level with communities most affected by conflict.
From there, they can contribute to defusing tensions
and fostering dialogue, with the aim of preventing
escalations that compromise the prospects of peace
processes. Accordingly, the case of Haiti reminds us
that in order to achieve sustainable peace, it is essential
that the strengthening of police capacities be taken into
consideration in a peace mission’s transition processes.
In addition, Mexico believes that strategic
communication is indispensable for the success of
peacekeeping tasks. As we have witnessed in several
cases, most recently in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the perception of the local population can
be decisive for the performance of missions. For this
reason, greater attention must be paid to strategic
communication as a central element in publicizing the
mandates of peace missions, particularly their police

S/PV.9189

components, and in raising public awareness not just of
their scope but also of their limits.
As we indicated at the third Police Chiefs summit
in September, my country fully supports the objectives
of the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
initiatives. In particular, we underscore the importance
of making progress in the area of accountability,
including personnel-performance evaluation and the
implementation of the zero-tolerance policy in cases of
sexual exploitation.
Mexico calls for the strengthening of coordination
with countries that contribute police personnel so that
peacekeeping missions have teams with the appropriate
mindset for responding to challenges in the field. In
this regard, we also call for closer cooperation with
such institutions as INTERPOL.
Finally, we reiterate that the full, equal and
meaningful participation of policewomen in missions
is an element that contributes to mission success. We
insist that a gender approach must be incorporated in
a cross-cutting manner in all aspects of their design
and operation. While we recognize the progress made
in complying with the gender-parity strategy, we must
do more to increase the number of women in peace
missions, including in missions’ police components.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): Allow me to thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix for his briefing today. I
also thank the other briefers for their valuable insights
and briefings.
I would take this opportunity to pay tribute to all
peacekeepers for their supreme sacrifice and for their
contribution to the restoration of peace and stability in
their respective areas of deployment. Sadly, 16 police
officers from India have lost their lives, including two
police peacekeepers, Shishupal Singh Bagadia and
Sanwal Ram Bishnoi, who died during crowd violence
against bases of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) on 26 July 2022. We pay homage
to their sacrifice and convey our sincere condolences to
their families and friends.
India fully supports the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping initiative and its Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations aimed at making the United Nations
peacekeeping an efficient and effective tool of the

22-6890119/30

S/PV.9189

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Security Council for maintaining international peace
and security.
India has deployed close to 3,000 police officers
in approximately 24 United Nations peacekeeping
operations. In fact, India was the first country to
deploy an all-female formed police unit in Liberia in
2007. Around 170 Indian police personnel are currently
serving in the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, and
MONUSCO, playing a significant role in strengthening
the law-enforcement efforts of the host Governments.
United Nations policing plays an important role
in situations of armed conflict. United Nations police
also help in the capacity-building of the host States,
especially in areas such as the rule of law and civilian
policing. It is therefore important that we acknowledge
the important role of our police peacekeepers and make
the effort to make them more effective and efficient. To
that end, I submit the following points.
First, the primary role of police in United Nations
peacekeeping missions is to train and build the capacity
of the host nation to enable it to build sufficient
expertise and skills in policing, which is an important
task in the enforcement and maintenance of the rule of
law. While the rapid deployment of formed police units
may be required in certain contexts, such deployments
should be based on clear and achievable mandates that
are supported by adequate resources.
Second, the timing of deployment and role of police
in peacekeeping varies according to specific contexts.
Their capabilities and responsibilities are distinct from
those of military peacekeeping troops. Therefore, their
mandates should be clearly aligned with the tasks they
are trained to handle and distinct from those of the
peacekeeping troops.
Third, as we all know, armed groups, terrorists
and transnational organized crime work hand in glove
in the contemporary conflict environment. Therefore,
it is essential that United Nations police and military
contingents operate together and with other agencies.
Developing joint training and operating protocols is
critical in that regard.
Fourth, triangular consultations between the
Security Council, the Secretariat and police-contributing
countries (PCCs) are of paramount importance while
making policy decisions on the role of United Nations
police in peacekeeping operations. PCCs should be
20/30

14/11/2022

involved at all levels of decision-making on police
deployment planning, as well as on transition and
exit strategies.
Fifth, close coordination between the United
Nations police, the host Government’s law enforcement
machinery and the civilian population is essential to
improving the efficiency of policing on the ground.
Community policing should be the norm rather than
the exception.
Sixth, as mentioned by others, women police
officers and peacekeepers play an indispensable role in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, in particular
during high-visibility patrols and search operations,
as well as in reaching out to communities in which
only female police officers may be allowed to interact
with female members of the community. They help to
promote gender equality and can act as role models by
inspiring local women and girls to pursue careers in
law enforcement.
The Indian female formed unit in the United
Nations Mission in Liberia, which I talked about
earlier, helped to increase the participation of Liberian
women in the security sector from 6 per cent in 2007,
when they were first deployed, to 17 per cent when
they left the Mission in 2016. That contribution was
repeatedly and most graciously acknowledged by the
former President of Liberia and Noble Peace Prize
laureate, Her Excellency Ms. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf.
India’s individual police officers, particularly women
officers, notably Ms. Kiran Bedi, have also contributed
immensely to United Nations peacekeeping.
In more recent times, an Indian woman police
officer, Ms. Shakti Devi, who was deployed in the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, was
awarded the International Female Police Peacekeeper
Award in 2014 for her contribution in the creation
of a women’s police council in Herat, Afghanistan.
Going forward, I assure the Council that India remains
committed to enhancing the footprint of our women in
United Nations policing.
Seventh, the harnessing of technology is as
important for the police as for the military. In that
regard, we are of the view that the police need to be
equipped with state-of-the-art technology for anti-riot,
crowd control and other policing tasks.
I conclude by stating that, as a long-standing
contributor, India looks forward to continuing its
22-68901

14/11/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

active and positive contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. India has expertise in the
investigation of serious and organized crimes, the
investigation of transborder crimes, cyberforensics,
improvised explosive device forensics and financial
fraud investigation, among others, and we stand ready
to share our experience by providing targeted training
for the United Nations police peacekeepers of friendly
States, as well as by offering to deploy Indian police
officers to the various field missions and at United
Nations headquarters.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix and the Police Commissioners of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, Ms. Christine
Fossen, and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mr. Mody Berethe, for their assessments. We
also listened carefully to Ms. Emma Birikorang.
Police components undoubtedly play an important
role in contemporary peacekeeping missions. As
an integral part of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, the Blue Berets help to implement mission
mandates that are determined by the specific situation
in the country of deployment. One of the objectives
of police components is to assist in reforming law
enforcement institutions and build the national capacity
of host States.
Peacekeeping missions are often deployed in
countries in which national law enforcement bodies
are considerably weakened and at times non-existent.
In such situations, Blue Berets have to take over their
functions. However, it is important to remember
that the United Nations does not have unlimited
capabilities, and that our global Organization cannot
permanently replace the efforts of local police. In that
regard, it is important for professionally trained and
well-equipped United Nations police officers to be able
to share their expertise, organize their work and train
local personnel as effectively as possible, which will
enable national security authorities to fully take over
the maintenance of law and order and independently
ensure the protection of civilians. It is the principle of
national ownership that is the key to success. We can
hardly consider international support to be effective if
the long-term presence of missions results only in the
United Nations replacing the efforts of local police.

S/PV.9189

Another critical mission of police peacekeepers
is to protect civilians from immediate security threats
by patrolling, monitoring and dealing with those who
violate public order. Those efforts and the role of the
Blue Berets, as the link not only between the population
and peacekeeping presence, but also between the
population and the Government of the host country,
helps to build citizens’ trust in Government institutions
and thus lays the groundwork for achieving national
reconciliation and sustainable peace.
Of key importance in that process is establishing
constructive communication with the host country
and taking the priorities it defines into account.
Another important aspect is effective engagement with
the people, attention to their concerns and, at times,
clarification of the mandate in order to win their trust
while preventing high or false expectations.
Depending on the national, cultural and religious
characteristics of the communities living in the mission
deployment area, women peacekeepers can play a
particular role in establishing communication with
them. At the same time, we are convinced that the focus
should not be on the pursuit of quantitative gender
indicators, but rather on the experience, professionalism
and competence of officers and on adherence to
the principle of broad geographical representation,
including at the senior level.
There is no doubt that for the police to effectively
carry out their tasks, especially given the increasingly
difficult operating conditions, proper logistical support
and staffing are required. Missions should improve
planning and management and avoid unnecessary
expenditures and the duplication of efforts. As part
of those processes, it is important that the Secretariat
carefully consider the views and recommendations of
police-contributing countries. Attempts to promote
various outside initiatives and concepts that have
not received the support of all Member States in the
General Assembly Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations are counterproductive. In that regard, we
believe there is a need for an ongoing dialogue between
the Security Council and troop-contributing countries,
as well as with host States, on all aspects of the activities
of peacekeeping operations, including at the planning
and mandate design stages.
We believe firmly in the importance of stepping up
cooperation with regional organizations, including at
the level of the United Nations police. In that regard,

22-6890121/30

S/PV.9189

United Nations peacekeeping operations

we support the work being done by the United Nations
Secretariat, as well as the initiatives of many regional
organizations, particularly the African Union, to
improve training for police peacekeepers. Russia is
also making its contribution to that common cause.
Our country conducts training for Russian and foreign
law-enforcement personnel through United Nationscertified programmes at the peacekeeping training
centre of the All-Russian Research Institute of the
Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Russian Federation
in Domodedovo. Over the past 20 years and more, the
centre has produced more than 2,500 highly skilled
professional police officers. The course curriculum is
targeted at law-enforcement officers from developing
States, particularly in Africa, with a focus on women
police. Special attention is also given to language
training, taking into account the specificities of
host States.
As a police-contributing country, the Russian
Federation has continued to systematically increase its
participation in United Nations police peacekeeping
and to deploy personnel with the relevant skills,
including women, to missions. Women personnel from
our Ministry of Internal Affairs have achieved positive
results in Cyprus, South Sudan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Abyei. As we underscored
at the most recent United Nations Chiefs of Police
Summit, Russia stand ready to continue contributing to
the development of police peacekeeping.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): My thanks go to
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and all of our other
briefers for their presentations today. Let me also take
this opportunity to thank all United Nations police
forces for their essential work in what are sometimes
extremely tough conditions.
I am pleased that today’s discussion is focused on
Action for Peacekeeping and Action for Peacekeeping
Plus. The United Nations police (UNPOL) has an
important role to play in delivering whole-of-mission
approaches to those reform priorities. I will therefore
focus on the areas that were covered by the two
Police Commissioners — the protection of civilians,
and performance.
First, I thank Commissioner Fossen for her
invaluable insights into implementing a protection-ofcivilians mandate in the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan. When talking about the protection of
civilians, we can sometimes forget how important
22/30

14/11/2022

unarmed approaches are. Of course, that is only part
of the picture, and both armed and unarmed activity
complement each other. We must consider the full
range of tools to prevent and respond to civilian
threats. Peacekeepers not only need to protect civilians
from physical violence, but they must also provide a
protective environment and space for mediation and
dialogue. UNPOL is uniquely placed for that task. Its
personnel are often the first and the last to meet with the
local population during any intervention or response to
a crisis. It needs to establish strong relationships with
those populations founded on trust.
Secondly, with regard to performance, I thank
Commissioner Berethe for speaking to that point in the
context of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). Operating in any mission environment
has its challenges, but MONUSCO is arguably one of
the most challenging, as we have seen in the increased
violence directed at the Mission in recent months. The
United Kingdom welcomes the ongoing implementation
of the Integrated Peacekeeping Performance and
Accountability Framework and the Comprehensive
Planning and Performance Assessment System to
monitor and evaluate performance and review progress
against mandate implementation. Better performance
means better missions.
For UNPOL to operate and perform at its best, it
needs to deliver the full range of policing roles it is
mandated to fill. That should include capacity-building
and development efforts for host-State police and justice
and corrections institutions. In line with the findings
of the 2016 external review of the functions, structure
and capacity of UNPOL, there could be a greater focus
on institution-building and specialist capabilities rather
than simply on the number of personnel deployed. It
is those skills that support sustainable peace and the
restoration of the rule of law.
Finally, our briefers and many speakers today have
underlined the importance of the contribution that
UNPOL makes to the women and peace and security
agenda. The United Kingdom strongly supports that
and welcomes the progress made to date. We look
forward to continuing to work together to strengthen
UNPOL to deliver on its full potential.
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
I thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peace Operations, and the two Police
22-68901

14/11/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Commissioners for their briefings. I would like to
highlight two points.
First, the United Nations police is an essential
component of peacekeeping. United Nations police
operate in an integrated manner in the missions. The
Comprehensive Planning and Performance Assessment
System has been implemented in 10 peacekeeping
missions. In some missions, police planners are present
in the integrated strategic planning units, which
helps to better link their own short-term operational
planning goals with long-term strategic planning
objectives that address the issues identified by the
Special Representative. That is particularly important
in improving the preparation for transition phases.
The United Nations police is there to protect. In
South Sudan, United Nations police coordinate with the
national police to conduct preventive patrols, as well as
operations to apprehend suspects. The aim is to combat
crimes, in particular sexual assault, committed within
protection-of-civilians sites and internally displaced
persons camps. In the Central African Republic, efforts
over the past several years in the PK5 neighbourhood of
Bangui have helped to build bridges with the population
by reassuring them and keeping them informed.
The United Nations police strengthens the capacities
of the internal security forces of host States. That is
done in synergy with other United Nations entities,
in line with the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy
and with a focus on promoting the role of women. In
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a police station
built as part of a collaborative project for peace and
security in Djugu has enabled 25 police officers, five
of them women, to be deployed. The United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo provided them with training
in combating impunity, human rights violations and
gender-based violence.
Secondly, the United Nations police is preparing to
begin a new chapter in its work in the service of peace
following the appointment on 31 October of Mr. Faisal
Shahkar as the United Nations Police Adviser in the
Department of Peace Operations. There is no shortage
of challenges. The United Nations police has been
able to reform itself to meet the new requirements of
peace operations. In particular, it has succeeded in
strengthening the role and place of women in the police
force, exceeding the targets set in the uniformed genderparity strategy. It has developed an ambitious training

S/PV.9189

programme, including predeployment training, and
has established a solid employment doctrine. It must
continue to play a full role in the implementation of
the Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative. In that
context, the United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial
Conference held in Seoul in December 2021 opened
up new capability perspectives for the United Nations
police. The complexity of the tasks entrusted to it
increasingly requires specialized police capabilities
that fully address the challenges identified in the
Strategy for the Digital Transformation of United
Nations Peacekeeping.
It also reinforces the importance of evaluating the
performance of police contingents. The most recent
report to the Council on the activities of the United
Nations police goes back as far as late December 2018
(S/2018/1183). Now, as the New Agenda for Peace
is being prepared, it would be useful to review the
performance of those activities.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ghana.
I begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix; Ms. Christine Fossen, Police
Commissioner, United Nations Mission in South
Sudan; Mr. Mody Berethe, Police Commissioner,
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and Ms. Emma
Birikorang, Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping
Training Centre, for their briefings.
We thank all police-contributing countries for the
sacrifices made by their personnel, their commitment to
peace and their continued effort in providing effective,
efficient and accountable policing in many parts of the
world. We also salute all police personnel who have
made the ultimate sacrifice and lost their lives in the
line of duty. May their sacrifice not be in vain.
Since Ghana’s first police deployment to the Congo
in the 1960s, our participation in several other missions
has reinforced our confidence in the utility of United
Nations policing. As the seventh largest troop- and
police-contributing country currently, Ghana has seen
first-hand the critical contribution of United Nations
policing to the stabilization of many conflict situations.
Over the years, United Nations police (UNPOL)
personnel have helped to restore hope to distraught and
displaced civilians, including women, children and the
aged, and have provided confidence for fragile societies

22-6890123/30

S/PV.9189

United Nations peacekeeping operations

through intelligence-backed surveillance, community
policing and the investigation of incidents of sexual and
gender-based violence, human rights abuses and other
serious crimes, including against children.
Even as present-day peacekeeping is complicated
by the dangerous environment and challenging
circumstances within which it must operate, United
Nations policing is becoming ever-more critical within
an enhanced-performance framework. It is in that
context that I will make a few additional points that
highlight the contribution of UNPOL, taking into
account the priorities of the Action for Peacekeeping
Plus initiative and emerging challenges to peacekeeping.
First, we welcome the sustained engagement and
commitment by the Department of Peace Operations
(DPO) and field missions to ensure accountability
for crimes against peacekeepers. Despite consistent
mobilization and the adoption of resolution 2589 (2021),
accountability to peacekeepers remains relatively low
as compared to the growing number of violent incidents
against peacekeepers. We must therefore be resolute in
working with host countries to demand accountability
for crimes against peacekeepers, including in the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Mali.
Secondly, we encourage the further deployment
of innovative technological solutions to addresses the
challenges of peacekeeping and note their critical role in
supporting mandate implementation. We are happy with
the work that is ongoing with the Unite Aware platform,
which continues to build on the capabilities rolled out
in the initial missions and is now being used to enable
situational awareness for medical support and engage
in radio mining and video data analysis. We thank India
for its support for that project. We also commend the
ongoing assessments by the DPO on the nature of the
threat that misinformation and disinformation pose to
missions and how missions have been countering that
threat with the use of strategic communications.
Thirdly, we encourage the further implementation
by UNPOL and the Department of Operational Support
of the women and peace and security agenda and its
priorities to ensure the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women at all stages of the peace process
and by systematically integrating a gender perspective
into analysis, planning, implementation and reporting.
Admittedly, there is much more that needs to be done to
24/30

14/11/2022

achieve the targets, but the progress is steady and must
be sustained.
Fourthly, peacekeepers are accountable. We
therefore support UNPOL’s efforts to improve
evidence-based assessments of performance and to
ensure adherence to standards of conduct by reinforcing
zero-tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse.
In conclusion, Ghana endorses UNPOL’s
approach for the establishment and maintenance of
strong partnerships with national counterparts and
communities, including civil society and women’s
networks, for meaningful cooperation with host
Governments and communities, as well as the
identification and implementation of shared political
strategies and agreements to address emerging threats
to peace and security.
We therefore encourage the further implementation
of the protection objectives through dialogue and
engagement, which we heard earlier from the Police
Commissioner of UNMISS. We also encourage the
important role of United Nations peacekeepers in
environmental management of the host country and
mandated missions, as well as the intensification of
efforts aimed at reducing the overall environmental
footprint of peacekeeping operations, as called for by
General Assembly resolution 76/274.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Lacroix to respond to the
comments and questions raised.
Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): First of all, I thank
all members of the Security Council for reaffirming
their support for the United Nations police. I have noted
a number of comments on important points, including
the key role played by the United Nations police in
national capacity-building in the area of the rule-oflaw institutions, which is key to creating one of the
conditions necessary for operations — to be able one
day to withdraw and leave behind strong institutions.
That point was raised by several delegations.
I also note the importance of integration — that
is, police components working in close coordination
at all levels — including at the planning and
operational levels, in close coordination with the
civilian and military operations components, as well as
humanitarian and development partners. Accordingly,
several missions have set up integrated planning cells,
22-68901

14/11/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and we have implemented the Comprehensive Planning
and Performance Assessment System.
The role of women in carrying out the mandates of
police components was also underscored. It is a matter
of ensuring not only that there are more women in our
police components but that their increased number be
used as a tool to better implement our mandates in
all areas, including the protection of civilians, which
requires establishing a relationship of trust with all
members of communities, including women.
With regard to the question asked by the
representative of Norway on strengthening the role of
the United Nations police in countering terrorism and
organized crime, which — especially with regard to
organized crime — are significant aggravating factors
of conflict, several points must be underlined.
First of all, concerning the work of the police
components, there is the role they play in strengthening
national capacities and the competent institutions so
that they are better able to combat those scourges. There
is also the role that they can play in strengthening the
capacities of our police components to be more familiar
with and anticipate such threat; hence the importance
of the systems that are being developed such as Unite
Aware in the framework of the Strategy for the Digital
Transformation of United Nations Peacekeeping,
which is one of the key priorities of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.
I would add that, in the framework of optimizing
our collaboration, which was recently strengthened
by the establishment of the Inter-agency Task Force
on Policing, co-chaired by the Department of Peace
Operations and our colleagues from the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime in Vienna, we will be able
to better articulate our response, in cooperation with
other competent United Nations actors, in order to
strengthen the effectiveness of the work of the police
components in those two areas.
Within the Police Division, we also have a team
that is in charge of organized crime, with focal points
that can work in cooperation with our colleagues on the
ground and draw on the resources of the standby police
unit in Brindisi in order to strengthen our response in
that area, including with regard to early warning and
strengthening our capacities at that level in terms of
better knowledge and threat assessment.

S/PV.9189

Lastly, we enjoy close cooperation with other
international organizations that have expertise in that
area, including, of course, INTERPOL and its regional
entities. In that context, the United Nations police
component is well positioned to develop its work to
address the challenges of terrorism and organized crime.
I also want to point out the importance of the role
of police components in combating misinformation and
disinformation, dangers that kill both civilians and our
colleagues. In that context, I would like to pay homage
to our police officers who recently lost their lives in the
attacks — and we call them attacks because they were
not spontaneous demonstrations — on personnel of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. And of course
I also extend that homage to all of our United Nations
police colleagues who have lost their lives in the service
of the values of the Charter of the United Nations.
Finally, I would like to conclude by paying
tribute to our colleague Luis Carilho for the excellent
commitment, professionalism and efficiency with
which he led the Police Division. I also wish every
success to his successor, Commissioner Faisal Shahkar,
who will soon take on that role.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for the
clarifications he has provided.
I now give the floor to Ms. Fossen to respond to the
comments and questions raised.
Ms. Fossen: I thank everyone for their questions.
First, I would once again like to thank the members of the
Security Council for their support to the United Nations
police (UNPOL) and the role we play in peacekeeping.
Secondly, I would like to thank the many members
of the Council who are police-contributing countries
(PCCs). I can assure them that all the police officers
from their countries are excellent peacekeepers, both as
individual police officers (IPOs) and in formed police
units (FPUs).
I will start with the question from the representative
of Norway as to how we can enhance the whole-ofjustice chain approach. First, I would say that it is
actually a question about continuously hard work. We
have to work — both UNPOL and the other rule-of-law
chain-of-justice components, and both in the Mission
and at Headquarters. In my view, the United Nations
can sometimes work in pillars, so this is something that
has been very important for me, because we are working

22-6890125/30

S/PV.9189

United Nations peacekeeping operations

in South Sudan with a whole-of-mission approach. We
need to work on the justice chain, and, as we can see,
many of our activities are interlinked. As leaders, it is
important for us to continue to walk the talk. We need
to talk about it, and we need to do it. We need to show
our peacekeepers that we work hand in hand. I am
lucky to have Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Haysom, who always talks about the whole-ofmission approach he expects from all of us responsible
for police components here in the Mission. Therefore,
my short answer is that hard work is required. We have
to talk about it in its entirety and about how the whole
chain of justice is interlinked.
I will move on to the question from the representative
of Ireland on how we can better respond to threats and
the security situation for peacekeepers. First, I would
say that we have to have good relations with the host
Government. Regardless of what kind of conflicts or
post-conflict countries we are operating in, we have
to try the best we can to have good relations with the
host Government. Secondly, UNPOL depends on good
predeployment training. We need very good, skilled,
trained police officers from the PCCs, and we need
them to meet the skill sets required in the Mission, both
for FPUs and IPOs. There also has to be a clear dialogue
between those of us in the missions, Headquarters in
New York and the PCCs. I cannot emphasize enough
how important it is to have good predeployment training
and the mission-specific training that is needed for the
peacekeepers before they come. Then, of course, after
they arrive at a mission, we need regular assessments
and to evaluate their performance. And we need to
constantly be alert to the security threat assessments
from the Department of Safety and Security and other
stakeholders, which provide us with information on
how to operate in unsecure environments.
I think that it is also very important for our
peacekeepers to understand the conditions, cultural
environment and security context of where they are
in the world. We need to adjust them to where they
come to. That is what we do in the induction training
when they come to the Mission. But we also need
to constantly talk about and make sure that all our
peacekeepers understand the situation in which they
are and the context in which they are operating. In that
regard, as mentioned in some of today’s briefings to the
Council, women often play a critical role in establishing
close contact in the environments or communities they
are operating in. And we need both male and female
26/30

14/11/2022

peacekeepers to understand the context and the security
arrangements that need to be taken into account on
our side. Therefore, I can say to the representative of
Ireland that there are many layers as to how we can
improve that, but we must always keep it at the top of
our minds, because we need to provide 24/7 security for
our peacekeepers. That is the most important thing we
do — secure our own people — otherwise, we cannot
be good peacekeepers in the host country and ensure
we are at our best for the populations we are serving.
I will move on to the third question, from the
representative of the United States, which was related to
climate change. In the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), in both UNPOL and the Force, we
are all affected by climate change and the flooding.
Those are the most significant effects of climate
change we see here. The flooding, combined with
the difficulties it creates in food distribution, creates
tensions that in turn affect security. Those are the most
significant areas in which we are affected directly by
climate change. And the same goes for UNPOL — we
are affected just as all the other components in the
peacekeeping Mission are, because UNPOL supports
the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
I will try to answer the other part of the question
from the representative of the United States, which
was about disinformation. We are trying our best,
here in UNMISS, to ensure that we have the technical
capabilities to work on data-driven peacekeeping and
use it, so as to be a component that uses intelligence-led
policing. But sometimes it is also important to
remember that we are in a post-conflict area. We have
troubles with the Internet. We have very, very bad
infrastructure. The level of illiteracy is very high, and
the road conditions and infrastructure are very poor.
It is therefore necessary to go out and talk to people in
order to gather information. For those reasons, we are
not able to use all of the information and the systems
as well as we wish we could. We are therefore taking
things step by step here in South Sudan. I think that
the first thing we have to do is to work to build the
capacity of the South Sudan National Police Service as
our main mandate here in the country. I think that my
good colleague Mr. Berethe is better placed to answer
with regard to the challenges of disinformation and how
to prevent it having consequences. I will leave it to my
colleague to better answer that question.
Those were the three questions that I understood
were meant for me. I am happy to respond further if
22-68901

14/11/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

there are any more questions. I once again thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Council.
The President: I thank Ms. Fossen for the
clarifications she has provided.
I now give the floor to Mr. Berethe to respond to
the comments and questions raised.
Mr. Berethe (spoke in French): I will try
to summarize the comments that I have on the
questions raised.
First, regarding the question from the representative
of Norway about the status of capacity-building, in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo we are in a
situation in which all our work must be shaped by socalled humility. As Council members know, it is a huge
country with numerous problems. We often forget the
fact that there are more than 100,000 individuals in the
police in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
Congolese police force has 138 police officers, while the
Congolese army has 150,000 troops. We are in a process
of transition, which has been a great opportunity for us.
When the Security Council established the parameters
for the transition by drawing up benchmarks, in terms of
the police we followed discussions at the political level
with strategic discussions with the police leadership. For
us, the strategy is to take into account the fact that any
transformation process is based on national leadership,
and, on that basis, whatever the political direction, we
must build on what already exists. In terms of capacitybuilding, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
therefore on its third five-year plan for developing
the police capacity. At the time of the transition, the
discussions focused on which elements of the current,
third five-year plan could help to improve the security
environment in order to meet the benchmarks, as well
as the capacity-building needs.
As the Council knows, for us that was more of an
exercise that allowed us to refocus on our priorities,
knowing that those priorities already existed. That
exercise was also a great opportunity for us to continue
with the directions and guidance provided by the
Security Council, whereby the transition process meant
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo should of
course be able to shoulder its responsibility for security,
but also that there should be greater integration between
the peacekeeping operation and the other United
Nations entities. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General therefore instructed us to set up a
joint police capacity-building programme, which means

S/PV.9189

that the United Nations Development Programme, the
International Organization for Migration, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United Nations
Mine Action Service and the United Nations Joint
Human Rights Office in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are now all working together in a number
of areas of engagement, the purpose and objective of
which are to build capacities so as to tackle the root
causes of the conflict.
The last aspect of that issue is that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo itself, in taking control of
its presence, remains very open to bilateral and
multilateral cooperation. That is how, while the United
Nations is working together, we also have the European
Union, which is providing assistance through a new
programme; the United States, which continues its
support through the Bureau of International Narcotics
and Law Enforcement Affairs; France, which also
supports the Congolese people through the police
forensic programme; very recently, the Republic of
Korea, which is strengthening its presence in new
technologies with regard to investigations; Japan,
working in community policing; and a new training
partnership that is being developed with the United
Arab Emirates.
On the second question from the representative of
Norway about the mindset of the population, I can say
that there is indeed a feeling of general distrust with
regard to the presence of the United Nations mission,
because we are associated with the problem or due to
the fact that the basic problems of the population in
terms of security have not been resolved. Against that
backdrop, I think that, as humbly and realistically as
possible, we can say that the assessment of the work of
the United Nations police (UNPOL) overall is positive.
As I was saying earlier, our assessment and evaluation
is made very specifically based on the kind of support
that we provide. When we have gone into communities,
whether it be places that we left, such as the Kasai or
now Tanganyika province, the operational strategies
that we implemented have in fact been opportunities for
the Congolese national police to carry out community
policing. People were able to use free access numbers
to telephone the police, and the police received fuel
and other support in order to answer those calls. That
meant that UNPOL’s presence and work received
positive feedback.
Our presence within the population and the various
investigations that we carry out in relation to our

22-6890127/30

S/PV.9189

United Nations peacekeeping operations

presence also mean that all those actions also look at
promoting human rights. In each area in which we are
present, we set up ad hoc committees to discuss the issue
of police violence. Whenever there are demonstrations,
we work with our human rights colleagues, who sit
down with local police to see, incident by incident, why
such a person was injured and what happened. By way
of a response, we also enter into discussions every time
that the police say that they were violent because they
did not have enough materiel or because they did not
have teargas. The police component mobilizes with the
mission leadership to find out what is needed.
The final positive assessment of us from the
population are the teams combating sexual violence,
which were initially in Goma and Bukavu. They are in
contact with the community. They carry out awarenessraising, and they show that the Congolese national
police is listening to victims of sexual violence. We
believe that that was an important step in the overall
strategy of our commitment to combating sexual
violence. The police component was able to report and
raise awareness, as well as change the behaviour of the
police towards communities.
Nonetheless, as was recalled by the representative of
India, we are the subject of attacks because, overall, we
are seen as the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). And very often we are also scapegoats
for the situation here in the country because — and by
way of conclusion on this part — the mandate requires
that we ensure the protection of civilians. When we talk
about the protection of civilians, we know that the United
Nations policy, as was recalled in this Chamber today,
is to take into account two thirds — that is, political
engagement and dialogue on protection, engaging in
physical protection against imminent threats, but also
creating a protective environment. All the work that we
do with regard to those two thirds is taken up with, and
often overtaken by, considerations linked to the second
third, which is that the violence is ongoing, and they
expect the United Nations to literally replace the State
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in protecting
the population.
With regard to the question from the representative
of Ireland on strategic communications in relation to the
anti-MONUSCO climate, which is my third response,
I think that — moreover, Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix reiterated this on several occasions — what is
happening with MONUSCO is unprecedented.
28/30

14/11/2022

The provisions that we have for MONUSCO
stipulate that the host State can help us with security
and support us in our efforts to protect ourselves.
Unfortunately, with regard to the most recent outbreaks,
at the end of July, the host State’s security services,
which we have been working with for almost 20 years,
failed to take action. Police components are therefore
considering some of the elements of our strategy for
engaging with the force and the Department of Safety
and Security when we set up contingency plans. We
always try to take into account the possibility that we
may have to make supplementary efforts if our partners
do not support us.
The police component is working in an integrated
way tO defuse the anti-MONUSCO sentiment. We are
in contact with the police and with the community.
We make use of early warnings, and every time we
receive information we make sure that the information
is passed on. We make sure the information goes up the
chain, and propose solutions based on the knowledge
that we have of the networks and actors on the ground.
I gave an example in my briefing of that as an effective
tool for addressing organized crime. We are continuing
to build capacities among the Congolese, where this
problem can be addressed at the level of the police, as a
crime that manipulates public opinion in order to carry
out attacks.
That leads me to the last questions posed by
the representative of the United States. The final
question was about the link between disinformation
and the manipulation of information. In UNPOL, we
believe that we must continue to equip the national
police in their investigations with tools, and those
are the same tools that can be used in preventing and
identifying misinformation.
In terms of our expectations for the Security
Council — in response to a question that was
asked — we need the police-contributing countries and
the Security Council to acknowledge the expertise that
is needed. The Congolese people are urgently seeking
new technologies. At the moment, South Korea, as I
mentioned, is partnering with the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, but we need new technologies to address
crime. The Congolese police have already asked us
if new partnerships could be initiated to monitor and
prevent disruptions of law and order, particularly in the
pre-electoral period in 2023. And we are thinking that
we can have partnerships with actors such as the United
22-68901

14/11/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.9189

States that already have programmes there, to see how
we might be able to build something with them.

Ms. Birikorang: I thank the members of the
Security Council for their interventions.

I would like to make a final point with regard to
climate change. The Mission is in a country where
every time we try to discuss the issue of climate
change, we talk about country solutions. We can point
to the discussions being held in Egypt around the
twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
However, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the real concern for us is the question of conflict and
violence, and every time the issue of climate comes up
people say the solutions are already there. But there
is a climate-change dimension in our efforts with the
Congolese police. The work we have done with the
police on natural disasters — for example, in Goma last
year when the volcano erupted and when we worked
with them two or three years ago managing an Ebola
outbreak in the Beni area — all those experiences and
our work with them are things we must capitalize on in
managing any disasters linked to climate change. So
we are conducting Action for Peacekeeping activities
with them to help to increase their training on the
concepts and the capacity-building needed to tackle
climate change.

There was one question directed to me by
the representative of Ireland, regarding adaptive
peacekeeping, to which I will respond. With respect to
that, I have two key responses.

Today I can say that the lessons learned in that
area have to do with dealing with the movement of
crowds — as we saw in Goma — and on establishing
containment measures when there are outbreaks of
disease or pandemics. We are also trying to capitalize
on that in terms of capacity-building, and that is what we
did during the Ebola outbreak. Finally, our commitment
in UNPOL means that within the Department of Peace
Operations and our police component we have officers
in charge of health and the environment. The police
officer who was named police officer of the year last
year was from MONUSCO. She was a Nepalese doctor,
and she had been working with the Congolese police
during the coronavirus disease, but she also undertook
many initiatives, including one of working with the
Congolese to plant a billion trees in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The President: I thank Mr. Berethe for the
clarification he has provided.
I now give the floor to Ms. Birikorang to respond
to the comments and the specific question posed to her
at this meeting.

First, adaptive peacekeeping should be flexible
and responsive to the environment within which
peacekeepers operate, and it should be country-specific.
However, there are a few challenges when it comes
to adaptive peacekeeping, which I am aware of as a
trainer of peacekeepers in Ghana, where peacekeepers
from several other countries go for peacekeeping
training. When interacting with peacekeepers, some
of the challenges that they tell us about is that some
of the rules of engagement, some of the rules that are
expected to make peacekeepers accountable, some of
the mandates that they are expected to abide by can be
really disabling rather than enabling them to perform
their tasks. So it is important that while we want
norms for peacekeeping and resolutions and we want
peacekeepers to be able to play their roles well, we also
do not want to tie their hands when they are expected
to adapt to certain operational environments. We all
know the complex environments that peacekeepers
work in. A lot of the time, they are expected to adapt
to certain situations that may not have been envisaged
in the rules that they were trained on. We need to make
sure that we give them the power to operate and interact
with local communities and other vulnerable groups
without worrying about the possible repercussions.
Again, adaptability is about training and preparation,
especially for the complex challenges within which
peacekeepers operate, and especially the police, who
often are at the forefront and interact with the locals.
We also need to make sure that they have the right tools
and equipment for the terrain in which they operate.
And we need to ask ourselves if we are giving them the
right tools to operate in those complex environments.
That is what I want to say with respect to being flexible
and responsive to operational environments.
The other point that I want to raise is about local
ownership when we want to be adaptable. Often as
peacekeepers, it is important that we trust in the local
actors to resolve their own challenges. We often go
into those environments seeking to spoon-feed them,
thinking that they may not necessarily know what they
are about. But sometimes we need to trust them and
trust in their judgments.

22-6890129/30

S/PV.9189

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The other thing that I also want to bring to bear is
that in a lot of the environments in which peacekeepers
operate, there are hybrid security mechanisms that are
already in existence. These hybrid security mechanisms
comprise local chiefs, traditional authorities,
community-based groups and civil society groups.
They are all part of a hybrid security structure that
ensures that the places in which we operate continue
to exist and that they function with a minimum sense
of order. It is therefore important that we bring these
hybrid security actors on board and integrate them into
policing of the local communities. That is where we
will attain the greatest success.
Successful peacekeeping missions are the ones that
have adaptable mandates, operational flexibility in their
actions, and consistent, innovative training methods.
They also need to have the right tools to operate in their
complex environments.
If I may, I would like to respond to the United
States representative’s comment on climate change

30/30

14/11/2022

and how it affects peacekeeping environments.
Climate insecurity in Africa is a major threat. Even in
countries that may not be experiencing conflict, they
are nevertheless affected because their neighbours
and countries of the region may be suffering from
climate change. Desperate young people are looking for
avenues to succeed and for ways to live, and often their
desperation leads them to crime, which brings them to
the forefront of the challenges that peacekeepers face.
Many of these young people threaten peacekeeping
missions, either through extremist activities or through
fundamentalism. I would urge that we strive to ensure,
pursuant to the Sustainable Development Goals, that
fragile countries are able to adapt to the dire effects of
climate change.
The President: I thank Ms. Birikorang for the
clarifications she has provided.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

22-68901
