A /68/PV.100

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

100th plenary meeting

Thursday, 10 July 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
High-level meeting of the General Assembly on
the comprehensive review and assessment of the
progress achieved in the prevention and control
of non-communicable diseases
Draft resolution A/68/L.53
The President: I warmly welcome the General
Assembly to this High-level Meeting, whose
overarching theme is “Taking stock of progress in
implementing the Political Declaration of the High-level
Meeting of the General Assembly on the Prevention and
Control of Non-communicable Diseases and scaling up
multi-stakeholder and national multisectoral responses
to the prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases, including in the context of the post-2015
development agenda”.
Permit me to make a statement.
I am pleased to welcome the General Assembly
to this High-level Meeting on the comprehensive
review and assessment of the progress achieved in
the prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases (NCDs). This review takes place against the
stark backdrop of the recognition that NCDs are now
recognized by the World Health Organization as the
largest single cause of death and disability worldwide,
responsible for some 36 million deaths, or 63 per cent

14-46211 (E)

of a total 57 million deaths that took place in 2008.
Furthermore, by 2020, the number of NCD-induced
deaths is expected to grow to 44 million per annum.
Simply put, NCDs are key determinants of human
health and thus represent a significant threat to human
well-being and our sustainable development.
Over the next two days, the General Assembly
will be turning its attention to this major development
challenge of the twenty-first century. At the same
time, we begin this meeting optimistically, buoyed by
the success of the informal interactive hearing with
non-governmental organizations, civil society, the
private sector and academia that took place exactly
three weeks ago today. Similarly, today’s broad
participation and interest in the topic bodes very well
for the prospects of preventing and controlling NCDs.
We are three years into the implementation of the
2011 Political Declaration on NCDs (resolution 66/2,
annex). In that time, much has been achieved at the
international level. Specifically, I refer to four positive
developments, namely, the endorsement by the World
Health Assembly, in May 2013, of the Global Action
Plan for the Prevention and Control of NCDs 2013-2020;
the adoption of a comprehensive global monitoring
framework, which includes 25 indicators for NCDs
and nine voluntary global targets to be achieved by
2025; the establishment, in July 2013, of the United
Nations Inter-agency Task Force on the Prevention and
Control of NCDs; and the establishment of a global
coordination mechanism for the prevention and control
of NCDs. I commend the World Health Organization

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U‑0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1446211*

A/68/PV.100

10/07/2014

for completing those important global assignments as
mandated in the Political Declaration.

aware of and address the very real risk that NCDs pose
to sustainable human development.

Yet, regrettably, and despite the increase in national
multisectoral plans and NCD units in many developing
countries, a significant number of those countries are
struggling to move from commitment to action. It
must be conceded, however, that this is not the result
of a lack of political will, but rather of the fact that
many developing countries have neither the technical
nor the financial resources to undertake the effective
multisectoral action and responses needed to address
the significant health and socioeconomic impacts of
NCDs. That lack of resources and uneven progress
are dismaying in the light of the many burdens that
NCDs place on individuals, families, communities and
countries, especially in the developing world, where
some 80 per cent of global deaths from NCDs occur.
The increasing incidence and impact of NCDs are of
particular concern as we seek to reorder the global
sustainable development agenda and prioritize the
issues that most constrain development within the post2015 development agenda.

Our efforts must also include children and
adolescents, as well as people over the age of 70, who
are affected by NCDs in various ways. The World
Health Organization reports that in 2010 the number of
overweight children under the age of 5 was estimated
to be more than 42 million, with close to 35 million
living in developing countries. The tragedy of the high
incidence of NCDs is not only the levels of morbidity
and mortality they cause but also the fact that they can
often be prevented. That raises one of the issues that has
not been fully addressed in the debates on the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
and post-2015 development — that of lifestyle and
sustainable consumption and production, which must
be part of any discussion and approach in reversing the
incidence and impact of NCDs.

It should also be noted that every year more than
14 million people between the ages of 30 and 70 die
prematurely from NCDs in developing countries. In
fact, despite rising life expectancy globally, a quarter of
the deaths from NCDs take place among people under
60 years of age. The reality we face, and the one we must
address, is that developing countries have the greatest
vulnerability and the least resilience in preventing and
controlling NCDs.
The rapid increase in aspects of unhealthy lifestyles
such as tobacco use, unhealthy diet, physical inactivity
and the harmful use of alcohol are affecting the
poorest people in the poorest countries. The health and
economic burdens of NCDs have severely undermined
development gains in many developing nations,
particularly low- and middle-income countries. The
high incidence of NCDs and the resulting morbidity
and mortality in the Pacific and Caribbean regions
is very troubling, since as many as 25 per cent of
the populations of both regions suffer from one or
more NCD. It should also be remembered that the
populations of the countries of those regions are very
small, and those in their most productive years, who
should be making the greatest contribution to national
development, are the very ones now being struck down
by these diseases. As we continue efforts to build a
healthier and more sustainable world, we must remain

2/26

In 2011, Heads of State and Government undertook
a tremendous historical commitment in global health
and development by raising awareness of the growing
incidence of NCDs. Yet as we wait for the seeds of
that commitment to bear fruit, the burden of disease
has grown in a world already struggling with new
and emerging challenges. I therefore urge the General
Assembly to join me in expressing the sense of urgency
that is now required in order to scale up and transform
those commitments into action, particularly at the
national level, where the fight against NCDs must be
won.
As I noted in my statement at the informal interactive
hearing on NCDs three weeks ago, it takes a village to
prevent and control NCDs. A broader commitment and
engagement on the part of all the relevant stakeholders
is key; however, it is critical that sustainable financing
and technical support be provided in order to build
and strengthen the capacity of health systems and
interventions, improve data collection in countries that
lack such capacity and build knowledge and awareness
programmes and strong primary health-care systems
that emphasize prevention. During the informal
interactive hearing, we learned that, while there is
currently approximately $31 billion in development
assistance dedicated to health, only $377 million of
that entire sum is directed towards NCDs. While we
can explore partnerships and cooperative relationships
such as North-South, South-South and triangular
cooperation, we must also integrate NCDs into bilateral
and international development cooperation, national

14-46211

10/07/2014

development agendas and prevention strategies. I am
pleased to note that tomorrow’s round-table discussion
will address the issue of partnerships in cooperation
and multisectoral responses.
Good human health is simultaneously a contributor
to and an outcome of human development and a reduction
in global deaths and disability from NCDs. It is pivotal
to good human development. Over the next two days, I
will ask the Assembly to help set this meeting apart as
an event that can put the world on a path to achieving
communities free of the avoidable burden of NCDs.
Let it be the beginning of a more robust and effective
implementation of the Political Declaration, in concert
with the Global Action Plan for the Prevention and
Control of Non-communicable Diseases 2013-2020,
and let it lead to better partnerships and cooperation
and more effective multisectoral approaches and
responses. This meeting, and the policies and actions
that will emanate from it, can and must be used to set
the global family on a more healthy, developmentoriented trajectory. Let us embrace and give effect to
that objective.
I now give the floor to Ms. Susana Malcorra,
Under-Secretary-General and Chef de Cabinet, to make
a statement on behalf of the Secretary-General.
Ms. Malcorra: I have the honour to represent
the Secretary-General and to convey this message on
his behalf. The Secretary-General had a last-minute
scheduling conflict due to an ongoing crisis, and has
asked me to represent him.
“I am pleased to send greetings to this
important gathering. The global epidemic of
non-communicable diseases (NCDs) is a major
and growing challenge to development. Each
year, in developing countries alone, strokes, heart
attacks, cancer, diabetes and asthma kill more than
12 million people between the ages of 30 and 70. It
is possible to prevent most of those deaths. We need
a set of simple, effective and affordable solutions
for all Member States that can be tailored to each
country’s needs. The draft outcome document
before the Assembly (A/68/L.53) helps chart the
way forward.
“Three years ago, we agreed that it was time to
act. We asked Governments to protect their citizens
from NCD risk factors, provide responsive health
systems and track the trends of this epidemic. We
also called on civil society and the private sector to

A/68/PV.100

help us implement new policies so that the scale of
the problem would not prevent us from achieving
the Millennium Development Goals. As a result,
more Governments are now providing institutional,
legal, financial and service arrangements aimed at
preventing and controlling NCDs.
“Last year, I established the United Nations
Inter-agency Task Force on the Prevention and
Control of Non-communicable Diseases, with the
World Health Organization (WHO) in the lead. It
assists countries to implement the WHO Global
Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of
Non-communicable Diseases 2013-2020, which
seeks a 25 per cent reduction in premature mortality
from NCDs by 2025. Improved global monitoring
and improved coordination will provide the
foundation for advocacy, policy development and
global action. This High-level Meeting can help to
frame the concrete actions that countries should
take between now and the third high-level meeting
on NCDs in 2018. Success will depend on finding
new ways to strengthen the ability of countries to
adopt bolder measures.
“The World Health Organization has a special
role to play. It has a proven ability to influence
policy and build capacity and a long-standing role
as a trusted partner working across sectors. The
WHO will continue to lead. However, the rapidly
growing demand for technical assistance means
that the United Nations system as a whole must
incorporate NCDs as a priority and must develop
innovative partnerships. We need strong leadership
and action by other sectors, including non-State
sectors. We need to improve access to affordable
medicines for NCDs. We must find new ways of
encouraging the private sector to stop marketing
unhealthy foods to children and to produce more
foods that are low in fat, sugar and salt.
“The actions identified in the draft outcome
document can help to remove the barriers to good
health that blight the lives of too many people.
Let us leave this meeting energized, inspired and
committed to the cause that we have embarked
upon. I wish the Assembly a productive and
successful engagement.”
The President: I thank the Chef de Cabinet for her
statement, delivered on behalf of the Secretary-General.

14-462113/26

A/68/PV.100

Pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution 68/271, I now
give the floor to Ms. Margaret Chan, Director-General
of the World Health Organization.
Ms. Chan (World Health Organization): I would
like to start by thanking the President and the SecretaryGeneral for their insightful and comprehensive
statements.
The 2011 Political Declaration of the High-level
Meeting of the General Assembly on the Prevention
and Control of Non-communicable Diseases (resolution
66/2, annex) was a watershed event. Heads of State
and Government formally recognized such diseases
as a major threat to health, economies and societies
and placed them high on the development agenda. The
projected trends provoked deep concern, especially as
poor populations, which are the least able to cope, are
being hit the hardest. Bold commitments were made to
act on multiple fronts. Prevention was put forward as
the cornerstone of the global response.
The Secretary-General transmitted my progress
report to the General Assembly last December (see
A/68/650). We are here to take stock of that progress and
to generate consensus on the next steps and the priority
actions needed to expedite progress. The Political
Declaration gave the World Health Organization
(WHO) a leadership role, together with several
time-bound assignments. Those assignments, which
have been completed, established global mechanisms
and a road map for coordinated multisectoral action and
the monitoring of results.
Progress within countries matters most. Some
striking achievements emerge from a survey conducted
by the WHO last year. Of the 172 countries reporting
data, 95 per cent have a unit or department in the
Ministry of Health responsible for non-communicable
diseases (NCDs). Half of those countries now have an
integrated operational plan with a dedicated budget.
The number of countries that have conducted recent
surveys of risk factors jumped from 30 per cent in 2011
to 63 per cent last year. In other words, an increasing
number of countries are putting the basics in place. As
shown in the progress report, some very cost-effective
and affordable interventions have worked well in many
countries.
However, the report found that overall progress
was insufficient and highly uneven, as the President
said. That should come as no surprise. I see no lack
of political commitment but a lack of capacity to act,

4/26

10/07/2014

especially in the developing world. Our most recent
data show that 85 per cent of premature deaths from
NCDs occur in developing countries. The challenges
presented by such diseases are enormous. They demand
some fundamental changes in the way that social
progress is measured, that Governments work, that
responsibilities are assigned and that the boundaries of
the different Government sectors are defined.
The fact that NCDs have overtaken infectious
diseases as the world’s leading cause of morbidity
and mortality has profound consequences. It is a
seismic shift that calls for sweeping changes in the
very mindset of public health. Most health systems in
the developing world were built for the management
of brief events, such as childbirth or acute infections.
They were not built for the long-term management of
chronic conditions, with their costly and demanding
implications and complications. Public health must
shift its focus from cure to prevention, from shortterm to long-term management, from delivering babies,
vaccines and antibiotics to changing human behaviour,
and from acting alone to acting in concert with multiple
sectors and partners.
The dynamics of socioeconomic progress have
changed. Much of human history has been shaped by
the struggle against infectious diseases, which have
gradually lost their hold as incomes have risen and
standards of living have improved. What do I mean by
that? Today, the opposite is happening. Socioeconomic
progress is actually creating the conditions that favour
the rise of non-communicable diseases.
Economic growth, modernization and urbanization
have opened wide the entry point for the globalization
of unhealthy lifestyles. Risk factors for NCDs are
becoming part of the very fabric of modern society. The
obesity epidemic has been getting worse, not better, for
more than three decades. Industry practices, especially
the marketing of junk food, or unhealthy foods and
beverages, to children play a contributory role.
Paragraph 44 of the Political Declaration, which
calls for collaboration with the private sector, has not
been fully implemented. Healthier food reformulations
are neither affordable nor accessible in large parts of
the developing world. Unfortunately, the unhealthiest
foods are usually the cheapest and most convenient.
Another concern is the fact that highly effective
measures for reducing the harmful use of alcohol, such
as raising taxes on alcohol and enforcing advertising
bans, are vastly underused in countries.
14-46211

10/07/2014

The health-care sector bears the brunt of such
diseases but has very little control over their causes.
The health-care and medical professions can appeal
for stronger tobacco and alcohol legislation, more
exercise and healthier diets. We can treat the diseases
but we cannot re-engineer social environments to
promote healthy lifestyles. That is another shift that
needs to take place. Governments cannot assume
that NCDs are a health problem that the health-care
sector can manage on its own. We cannot. We need a
broad-based multisectoral partnership to address the
multidimensional reasons for the rise in NCDs.
For prevention, which is the cornerstone of our
response, Governments need to assume the primary
role and their responsibility. Social environments need
to change population-wide and nationwide. That will
not happen without political commitment at the highest
level of Government. Ministers of agriculture will quite
rightly remain primarily concerned about the abundance
and safety of the food supply and the livelihoods of
farmers. Ministers of education will not automatically
improve school meals, remove vending machines that
sell unhealthy snacks or make programmes for physical
activity a part of the school curriculum. Ministers of
trade will of course continue to promote direct foreign
investment agreements that allow the tobacco industry
to take legal action against Governments introducing
strong anti-tobacco measures. We need to ask the
question as to why we see such policy inconsistency,
which is not conducive to a multisectoral and coherent
approach to addressing the NCD challenges.
Only high-level political commitment can
orchestrate the kind of broad-based collaboration
needed to make substantial progress, especially on
prevention. Heads of State and Government are best
placed to introduce coherent public policies, coordinate
actions and push for legislative support. Unprecedented
challenges need unprecedented commitments. I am
confident that, under the leadership of Heads of State
and Government, we are moving into a very positive
area of work, collaborating with all partners. Allow me
once again to thank the General Assembly for all its
support over the years and its continuing support.
The President: Pursuant to paragraph 3
of resolution 68/271, I now give the floor to
Ms. Helen Clark, Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and Chair of the United
Nations Development Group.

A/68/PV.100

Ms. Clark (United Nations Development
Programme): I am delighted to be speaking alongside
my colleague, Ms. Margaret Chan, at this High-level
Meeting of the General Assembly on the Prevention
and Control of Non-communicable Diseases, which
aims to assess the progress made in the prevention
and control of non-communicable diseases (NCDs)
since the September 2011 Political Declaration. As
both Chair of the United Nations Development Group
and Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), I want to fully acknowledge up
front that the major challenge that NCDs pose to public
health is also a huge challenge to human development
overall. Health is simply inseparable from human
development. The great health challenges of today,
among which are infant, child and maternal mortality,
malaria, HIV and NCDs, all impact on the capacity of
people to survive and thrive. Advancing better health is
a gateway to development progress, and development
progress is a gateway to improving health. It is vital
that the social determinants of health be addressed.
For too long, non-communicable diseases were
regarded as a problem of high-income countries,
which they are. However, not acknowledging them as
a broader problem has meant that the ways in which
they impede development progress and impact on
the lives of the world’s poorest people have yet to be
fully addressed. The 2011 Political Declaration of the
High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the
Prevention and Control of Non-communicable Diseases
(resolution 66/2, annex) did a great deal to correct
misperceptions about NCDs by noting explicitly that
developing countries are home to 80 per cent of the
world’s NCD-related deaths.
Today, low- and middle-income countries are
bearing the brunt of the NCDs. Understanding the
far-reaching development consequences of that is
therefore very important. For example, for lower- and
middle-income countries, the economic costs of the
four main NCDs — that is, cardiovascular diseases,
cancers, chronic respiratory diseases and diabetes — are
predicted to exceed $7 trillion between 2011 and 2025.
That is roughly equivalent to $500 billion per year, or
4 per cent of the gross domestic product (GDP) of lowand middle-income countries as measured four years
ago.
Looking ahead, it will be critical to understand
the changing patterns of NCD distribution and to
ensure that all the relevant actors are involved and

14-462115/26

A/68/PV.100

that adequate resources are made available to combat
the epidemic of diseases. With respect to disease
distribution overall, disparities in health outcomes tend
to mirror the existing inequalities and inequities within
and among countries. That also holds true for NCDs,
with the disease burden falling on the most vulnerable
and the least able to manage the long-term impacts of
such diseases. What may be a treatable or manageable
condition in a high-income setting can therefore be
life-threatening in a low-income one. The average age
of death from cardiovascular disease in sub-Saharan
Africa, for example, is at least 10 years below that in
developed countries. The death rate among women in
Africa as a result of NCDs is twice as high as the rate
in high-income countries.
The developmental costs of NCDs also have a
disproportionate impact on poor families and poor
countries. A study in the Sudan, for example, showed
that for a family with a child with diabetes, 65 per cent
of that family’s annual health spending was on the
child’s diabetic care. A 2012 report of the World Bank
estimates that dialysis for patients with diabetes-related
kidney failure cost the Government of Samoa $38,700
per patient per year in 2010 to 2011. That amount is
12 times higher than the country’s per capita gross
national income.
The key behavioural risk factors, including
tobacco and alcohol use, poor nutrition and physical
inactivity, are very strongly determined by broader
social, legal and environmental factors — for example,
the concentration of alcohol advertising or the absence
of parks in poorer areas. In this country I have seen
the term “food desert” coined for areas where there is
simply no ready supply of fresh food and vegetables for
people to buy. Tobacco use, which alone costs the world
1 to 2 per cent of its GDP every year, is concentrated
among the poorest people, whatever the income level of
the country.
Recognizing those very significant social
determinants of NCDs, UNDP advocates strong action
witin and beyond the health sector. Indeed, more
than half the recommended policy options and costeffective interventions included in the World Health
Organization’s Global Action Plan for the Prevention
and Control of NCDs 2013-2020 require action outside
the health-care sector. The good news is that measures
like those outlined by Ms. Chan today cost very little
in contrast to the mega-costs of NCD treatment. But the
measures she outlined require major political will and

6/26

10/07/2014

commitment from the very top leadership of countries.
We hope that very significant meetings like today’s will
help to generate that will.
Let us see health in the broader context of
sustainable development. Sustainable development calls
for integrated policymaking across the economic, social
and environmental spheres. That is an approach that
is highly consistent with the multisectoral approaches
required to address NCDs. To make progress, patterns
of trade and consumption will need to be revisited, as
will governance and urbanization, to name but a few
issues. We cannot just treat and manage those diseases
through medical interventions.
Discussions here today and with regard to the post2015 development agenda offer good opportunities
to ensure that NCDs are seen more broadly as a
development challenge — a huge health challenge and a
broader development challenge. At the United Nations
Development Programme, we welcome the ongoing
discussions on proposed targets to reduce NCD-related
mortality and to strengthen the implementation of the
World Health Organization Framework Convention on
Tobacco Control, the world’s first international treaty
on a health issue.
But accelerating efforts on NCDs cannot wait.
Those diseases are placing an enormous burden on
health systems now, accounting for approximately three
quarters of global health-care spending. Governments
in countries at all income levels can start cross-sectoral
interventions now. For example, zoning ordinances
that restrict the density of fast-food restaurants in
low-income urban areas can address inequities and be
implemented at little or no cost.
With no global financing mechanism for NCD
responses, innovation in the use of domestic sources
of revenues, such as through national trust funds
or higher taxes on unhealthy products, will also be
needed. Measures that incentivize the production, trade
and consumption of healthy food, as opposed to foods
high in processed sugars, salt and fat, should become
the norm. I commend Tonga, which recently raised
duties on unhealthy foods and decreased import duties
on fresh fish. It has also introduced higher excise tax
rates on tobacco products. More broadly, as national
incomes and revenue flows to State treasuries grow,
Governments need to direct more of the benefits of that
growth towards national NCD responses and work to
reduce the impact of unhealthy products.

14-46211

10/07/2014

But no country can fight the epidemic alone. The
2011 Political Declaration recognized
“the important role of the international community
and international cooperation in assisting Member
States, particularly developing countries, in
complementing national efforts to generate an
effective response to non-communicable diseases”
(resolution 66/2, annex, para. 4).
Managing the growing burden of NCDs is
especially challenging for already overburdened
health systems in countries where the battle against
preventable communicable diseases and low life
expectancy is ongoing. Some countries, including small
island developing States, have particular NCD issues
to address. For example, diabetes in Pacific Island
countries is almost 50 per cent more prevalent than it is
in lower- and middle-income countries globally. While
life expectancy across developing countries as a whole
is rising, in some where it appears to be dropping the
devastating impact of NCDs is playing a role in that
regression.
I believe that support for countries tackling
NCD epidemics must be seen as a broader global
responsibility, not just because of the inherent injustice
in persisting disparities in health across countries, but
also because patterns of globalization and international
trade contribute to those inequities. For example,
although lower- and middle-income countries bear the
brunt of NCD mortality, it is often the upper-income
countries, which are home to the largest producers
and exporters of tobacco and unhealthy foods, that are
contributing to the disease patterns.
At the United Nations Development Programme,
we stand ready to work with our close partner, the
World Health Organization, all other United Nations
agencies, civil society and other partners to support
Member States in accelerating the implementation of
comprehensive national responses for the prevention
and control of NCDs. Our collective responsibility and
action must match the scale of the challenge that NCDs
now present to countries rich and poor alike. Without
much more dramatic action, the threat to sustained
human development from those diseases is very high
indeed.
The President: Pursuant to paragraph 3 of
resolution 68/271, I now give the floor to the Presidentelect of the Union for International Cancer Control,
Mr. Tezer Kutluk.

A/68/PV.100

Mr. Kutluk (Union for International Cancer
Control): It is both an honour and a privilege to be here
today to represent civil society to convey the passion
we share in addressing non-communicable diseases
(NCDs) around the world. We are working together and
we are united for a common cause. We are reasserting
our global commitment to addressing NCDs together.
The NCD fight is our generation’s commitment to
ensuring that our children and our children’s children
have healthier, longer lives than the ones you,
Mr. President, and I can expect.
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. I also thank the dedicated Member States
present here today, the World Health Organization
(WHO) under the leadership of Director-General
Margaret Chan for its continued support, and the NCD
Alliance for its efforts to mobilize, unite and represent
a wide and diverse civil society movement.
NCDs cause more deaths than all other diseases
combined — an estimated 36 million every year — and
they strike hardest at the world’s low- and middle-income
populations. In my own country, Turkey, over 300,000
people die from NCDs each year, many without access
to the preventive interventions, treatment and palliative
care that they desperately need. Those diseases do not
discriminate. No country — rich or poor — is immune.
No country has those diseases under control. No region
is exempt.
At some point in time, history will demand an
explanation for why the international community
approached the crisis in slow motion; for the acceleration
in NCDs is largely a crisis of our own making. We have
created a world where more people are overweight than
underweight, and where children — even before they
are born — are at risk of disease because of factors
outside their control. A healthy start to life matters for
a lifetime. Economic transition, rapid urbanization and
our twenty-first-century lifestyle are coming at a huge
cost to the health and development of current and future
generations.
I know that everyone here, whether he or she
is from Government, civil society, academia or the
private sector, is passionate about his or her own cause,
be it cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, chronic
respiratory illness, mental and neurological health
or another NCD. My personal journey has been as a
paediatric oncologist, researcher and an advocate in the
global cancer community.

14-462117/26

A/68/PV.100

10/07/2014

As many participants may know, childhood cancer
exemplifies the gross inequity experienced by those
living with NCDs in low- and middle-income countries.
While we have the know-how to treat childhood cancer,
with over 80 per cent success rates in high-income
countries, success rates can drop to as low as 10 per
cent in other settings. Even in Turkey, where treatment
and care for childhood cancer exist, there are significant
challenges. In my hospital, we recently treated a 4-yearold girl, Alia, a refugee living in southern Turkey, who
presented with advanced retinoblastoma. When we met
Alia, her family told us that she had had a white pupil
for at least a year, but that it had not been brought to
medical attention. When the disease had progressed to
an advanced stage, she was diagnosed and treated, but
it was too late to save her eye. Although retinoblastoma
is a curable disease whose early diagnosis can preserve
sight, that was unfortunately not what happened in
Alia’s case, and she will have only one eye for the rest
of her life. That is only one example of a story that is
not unique to Turkey.

the United Nations and everyone in this Hall for those
bold steps forward. But they are not enough.

Another challenge we face is that, in many
settings, only a fraction of children are diagnosed
and treated — often with high rates of treatment
abandonment. Many others die without any formal
diagnosis, treatment or access to palliative care and
support, including pain relief. Children and adolescents
are an integral part of achieving a comprehensive,
lifelong approach to the global prevention and control
of NCDs. Those and other stories that I witnessed
personally all over the world compel me to stand up
for the inequity that exists in addressing cancer and
other NCDs. Health is a basic human right. We cannot
ignore those who are desperately in need. I am glad to
be able to share my perspective and to stand with the
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and others
that are making a difference by calling for an immediate
increase in action in order to prevent millions of
premature deaths from NCDs.

Secondly, NCDs are one of the major challenges
to sustainable human development in the twenty-first
century, and should therefore be central to the post2015 development agenda. We have always given our
full support to the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). In countries like my own, the MDGs have
driven impressive progress on many health issues. But
if we are not careful, we may let all that progress slip
away. If we do not work together to secure a stand-alone
target on NCDs, we will have missed an enormous
opportunity. For it is those future goals that will drive
global action and resources on health and development,
just as the MDGs have done until now.

Three years ago, the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Prevention and Control of
Non-communicable Diseases helped convert political
inaction into political leadership. It reaffirmed that
we know what works, and that cost-effective solutions
exist. It resulted in priorities and commitments. It led to
global accountability, with the first set of global targets
and a goal of reducing the number of premature deaths
from NCDs by 25 per cent by 2025. And it put NCDs
firmly on the global health and development agenda. I
applaud Member States, the World Health Organization,
8/26

The question this week, as we review the progress
that has been made three years on, is about what must
be done to carry forward the momentum. How do we
translate the progress made at the global level into
national action and implementation? We know there are
no magic bullets for this epidemic, and we will not see
any change overnight. That has certainly been evident
in the past three years. How do we unlock the power
of the Political Declaration at the national level for
the hundreds of millions of people with NCDs and the
millions more at risk?
Today I urge Member States to do the following.
First, Governments have rightly taken ownership of and
responsibility for the NCD response. We therefore call
for accelerated, coordinated and harmonized national
responses to NCDs, through funded multisectoral
national plans, multisectoral national NCD commissions
and country-level monitoring and evaluation systems.

Thirdly, Member States and the international
community should urgently address the global resource
gap in NCDs at both the global and national levels. The
struggle for funding for NCDs remains a monumental
challenge. The evidence tells us that NCDs are the
world’s number-one killer, and yet they receive only
1.2 per cent of the $31 billion in development assistance
allocated to health. That just makes no sense. By
investing up front in NCD prevention and control, we
can ensure that we will save not only human lives and
misery, but also the dollars currently spent on costly,
avoidable complications. We call on Governments to
maximize innovative financing mechanisms, notably
tobacco taxation, that have been proven to curb NCDs
and raise significant revenue, and we urge bilateral
development agencies to start taking NCDs seriously.
14-46211

10/07/2014

Finally, above all, we need a people’s movement
for NCDs, a movement led by people affected or living
with these diseases that is rooted in human rights and
social justice and that actively holds Governments to
account. We are not just fighting for people’s human
rights; we are fighting for people’s lives. We must join
forces, and not let silos get in the way. Collectively, we
must say enough is enough.
It is our generation’s responsibility to stem the tide
of NCDs. We must be able to look our children in the eye
and say that as parents we made every effort to ensure
that they do not face the fear of NCDs we are facing
today. It is simply not beyond us to make giant steps
on this journey. Together, NGOs, the private sector
and academia are committed to working with Member
States to mobilize action on NCDs. The time for talk is
over. Action is not an option, it is an imperative.
The President: We have heard the last speaker for
the opening segment of the High-level Meeting.
As members are aware, pursuant to resolution
68/271, this High-level Meeting consists of two plenary
meetings, which will take place today in this Hall,
two consecutive round-table discussions and a closing
plenary meeting, which will take place tomorrow in
the Trusteeship Council Chamber. Delegations are
encouraged to use the opportunity during the roundtable discussions to pose questions and respond in an
interactive manner to the comments and presentations
made by panellists and other experts. The plenary
segment will begin immediately following the
conclusion of this opening segment and will continue
until 1 p.m. The plenary segment will resume this
afternoon from 3 to 6 p.m.
The first round-table discussion, entitled
“Strengthening national and regional capacities,
including health systems, and effective multisectoral and
whole-of-Government responses for the prevention and
control, including monitoring, of non-communicable
diseases”, will be moderated by Mr. Fenton Ferguson,
Minister of Health of Jamaica, and will take place
tomorrow morning from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.
The second round-table discussion, entitled
“Fostering and strengthening national, regional and
international partnerships and cooperation in support
of efforts to address non-communicable diseases”, will
be moderated by Mr. Howard Koh, Assistant Secretary
for Health of the United States Department of Health

A/68/PV.100

and Human Services, and will take place tomorrow
afternoon from 3 to 5 p.m.
The closing plenary meeting, which will take place
immediately thereafter, will consist of the presentation
of summaries of the round-table discussions by the
respective Chairs.
Before we begin with the list of speakers, I would
like to turn to some organizational matters pertaining to
the conduct of the plenary meetings. First, concerning
the length of statements, I would like to remind
members that statements in a national capacity will be
limited to three minutes. When delivered on behalf of
a group, statements should not exceed five minutes. In
the light of that time frame, I would like to appeal to
speakers to deliver their statements at a normal speed so
that interpretation may be properly provided. To assist
speakers in managing their time, a light system has
been installed at the rostrum. I appeal to all speakers
for cooperation in observing the time limit for their
statements.
Delegations are also reminded that photographs
of speakers delivering statements in the plenary of the
General Assembly are taken routinely and are available
for download in high resolution from the United Nations
website, www.unmultimedia.org/photo, and from the
United Nations Photo Library, located in room S-1047
in the Secretariat Building.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Michel
Blokland, Minister of Health of Suriname, who will
speak on behalf of the Caribbean Community.
Mr. Blokland (Suriname): The group of countries
of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) makes the
following statement on the draft outcome document
of the High-level Meeting on the comprehensive
review and assessment of the progress achieved in the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases
(A/68/L.53).
Recalling the value of the United Nations Highlevel Meeting on the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases (NCDs) of September
2011 (see A/66/PV.3) and feeling pride that our small
countries catalysed the convening of that historic Highlevel Meeting, beginning with the 2007 Declaration of
Port-of-Spain of the CARICOM Heads of Governments,
entitled “Uniting to Stop the Epidemic of Chronic
NCDs”, and the actions contained therein for a broad
range of upstream and downstream promotion,

14-462119/26

A/68/PV.100

prevention and control measures, we recognize the
profound threat that NCDs pose to the development
of our small States, since NCDs are both a cause and
an effect of poverty. Furthermore, we recognize that
the problem is linked to other major development
challenges, such as food security, climate change and
poverty reduction. We recall that studies in our region
show that NCDs, such as hypertension and diabetes,
are alone responsible for the loss of 5 to 8 per cent of
the gross domestic product and represent significant
preventable impediments to our economic growth.
Within the overall challenge of NCDs, the
CARICOM countries are deeply concerned about
the rapid increase in overweight and obesity among
children in all our countries, including Haiti — it has
doubled or tripled in the past 20 years in several of the
countries for which we have the data. One quarter to one
third of children and adolescents are now overweight or
obese, with implications for higher lifetime health-care
costs, lower educational attainment, stigma, mentalhealth issues and greater difficulties in finding future
employment. It is a complex problem that requires a
life-course approach and intervention at multiple levels.
We are pleased about several aspects of the progress
in the countries of our region since 2011, which we know
from the annual monitoring of 26 progress indicators of
NCD prevention and control in 19 countries since the
Port-of-Spain Declaration of 2007. We would be happy
to share that experience with other States members
of the World Health Organization (WHO) and States
Members of the United Nations.
The NCD progress indicator scorecard was
developed in 2008 to track the progress of the States
members of CARICOM in relation to the tenets of the
Port-of-Spain Declaration. Over the past five years, it
has been a useful tool for assessing regional progress,
particularly by highlighting the areas of advancement
and those in need of greater attention. We will soon
begin an evaluation of the Port-of-Spain Declaration
with a view to learning lessons in order to accelerate
multisectoral action. It will be undertaken by the
University of the West Indies, the University of Toronto
and the Caribbean Public Health Agency. We thank and
acknowledge the International Development Research
Centre of Canada for the support that it has provided
for such essential work, which, we believe, is a sign
of leadership on the part of our countries in taking
stock of the progress and making course corrections to

10/26

10/07/2014

achieve the tenets of the Port-of-Spain Declaration and
the United Nations High-level Meeting on NCDs.
Since 2011, annual monitoring has shown that
there has been progress in the areas of commitment
to dealing with NCDs, as evidenced by national plans
and budgets, the convening of national multisectoral
meetings, tobacco control and physical activity. Four of
our countries, namely, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago,
Barbados and Jamaica, are now smoke-free despite
well-orchestrated industry opposition in each case.
We now aspire to a smoke-free Caribbean by 2020.
Education, promotion and surveillance have remained
the same, but there has been slippage in nutrition
and in the care and treatment of NCDs. Surveillance,
however, continues to be the area with the highest
attainment in our countries, anchored by the Caribbean
Public Health Agency and with the support of the Pan
American Health Organization and the World Health
Organization, followed by a commitment to NCD
prevention and control, tobacco control, physical
activity and treatment, with the least progress made in
the area of nutrition.
We are pleased that 14 countries have completed or
are carrying out the WHO STEPS risk factor surveys,
which provide essential data to educate our population
and to help drive policy development and action plans.
The surveys also inform us that we continue to face a
major problem, as a third to a half of adults have three
or more risk factors, and are therefore at a significantly
higher risk of cardiovascular disease, cancer or diabetes
and their complications, as well as higher lifetime
health costs.
Nutrition and a healthy diet remain the areas
with the least progress in relation to the Port-of-Spain
Declaration. We have seen little or no progress with
respect to removing trans-fats from the food supply,
enacting labelling laws, leveraging trade agreements to
reduce the obesogenic environments in which we live,
regulating the situation of school food or reducing the
bombardment of advertising of foods that are high in
fat, salt and sugar, in particular to children.
With the regional rising trends in obesity, especially
childhood obesity, and other nutrition-related chronic
diseases and the impact of poor nutrition on general
health, it is imperative that nutrition be prioritized for
urgent attention. With that in mind, we are taking steps
for a joint meeting of CARICOM health and trade and
economic development ministers.

14-46211

10/07/2014

The situation of a rapidly increasing body mass of
our populations underlines the vulnerability of small
States, in particular small island developing States,
which are highly vulnerable to external man-made
economic or environmental shocks. We hoped that the
draft outcome document will explicitly recognize such
vulnerability of our small countries and island States.
Many of them have graduated to an upper middle- or
high-income status but remain vulnerable due to their
small size, limited human resources and reliance on
imported food.
Pursuant to that, while recognizing the many
benefits of liberalized trade, we would have liked the
draft outcome document to include an explicit clause
that trade and foreign policy negotiations should take
into consideration how obesogenic environments can
be reduced and NCDs prevented and controlled.
While monitoring shows that we have made some
progress, there remain many challenges shared by many
countries around the world, large and small, developing
and developed. Indeed, that is why we are gathered
here at the United Nations, because the problem cannot
be solved by the health sector or the WHO alone.
Continuing attention to, and consideration of, this
issue is needed from development partners, such as the
World Bank, the European Union, the Inter-American
Development Bank and the Multilateral Investment
Fund, as well as our own Caribbean Development
Bank, in order to ensure that the prevention and control
of NCDs is included in poverty-reduction packages and
social protection policies.
We need recognition that the problem of NCDs
is linked to other pressing development challenges,
and that solutions can have multiple benefits. For
example, urban planning and transportation policies
that promote rapid mass transit and alternative modes
of transportation, such as biking and walking, are good
for health, through increased physical activity; good
for the planet and climate change, through a reduction
of greenhouse gases; and good for energy security and
foreign exchange costs for fossil fuels. That is a triple
bottom-line return, to which we should all aspire.
We need partnerships and technology transfers to
help produce healthier foods; we need the transnational
companies that supply most of our food to progressively
reduce its salt and sugar content, label its packaging
clearly on the front and provide education programmes
for consumers, among other measures. Above all, we
need investment to accelerate the implementation of

A/68/PV.100

the best-buys in the WHO Global Action Plan for the
Prevention and Control of Non-communicable Diseases
2013-2020. We need civil society to play its part in
advocating and acting as a watchdog for Government
and private sector alike. In that regard, we commend
the work of the Healthy Caribbean Coalition, which
was formed after the 2007 Declaration of Port-ofSpain as a 45-member alliance of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) dedicated to the prevention and
control of NCDs.
We need the private sector to bring its considerable
capacities to bear in the area of healthy workplace
programmes and policies that all employers, private
and public, can implement. We need the collaboration
of media and telecommunications companies in
supporting participatory surveillance approaches and
the education of our healthy populations, as well as
of those who are living with chronic diseases and risk
factors. We need insurance companies to invest in NCD
prevention and control, and to support the institutions
that are working in that area, thereby creating shared
value for us all. We need more integrated approaches,
such as some of our countries are already taking on the
ground in order to integrate chronic care of illnesses
such as NCDs and HIV/AIDS.
On behalf of Suriname, I would like to say that
over the next three years, until the next review takes
place, we must make more progress than we have done
during the past three. For that, we need action on the
part of our Governments, NGOs, the private sector
and development agencies. We are in this epidemic of
cardiovascular and other NCDs together, and we will all
suffer from their short- and longer-term consequences
unless we start working to create healthy nutritional,
living, working and recreational environments for
our citizens. We call for more commitment and more
financial and technical support for tackling NCDs and
their risk factors, in order to ensure that our generation,
and those of the future, can live healthier and more
productive lives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, who
will speak on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China.
We welcome the timely convening of this High-level
Meeting on the progress achieved in the implementation

14-4621111/26

A/68/PV.100

of the 2011 Political Declaration on the Prevention and
Control of Non-communicable Diseases (resolution
66/2, annex).
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on the subject (A/68/650). We would also like
to thank the Permanent Representatives of Belgium
and Jamaica, who capably steered the process that has
produced a successful result in the form of the draft
outcome document of this meeting (A/68/L.53), and
you, Mr. President, for finalizing the preparations for
this important meeting. I would also like to thank the
representative of Trinidad and Tobago for her efforts in
coordinating the work of our Group.
We should recall that in 2011, for the first time, we
tackled the issue of non-communicable diseases (NCDs),
which are the principal cause of death in many countries,
particularly ours. The burden of those diseases is not
just a critical health problem; it is also a significant
obstacle to our achievement of our development goals.
For that reason, the Organization must continue to play
a fundamental role in the treatment, prevention and
control of non-communicable diseases, and to ensure
that it is adequately addressed in the context of the
international development agenda. Since we are now
reviewing the progress that has been made since 2011,
we should once again commit to meeting the goals
established in the Political Declaration and to increasing
our efforts to prevent and control NCDs, particularly
cardiovascular diseases, cancer, diabetes and chronic
respiratory disease, as well as other non-communicable
diseases that have contributed to their overall increase,
such as neurological and mental disorders.
We recognize that, to a great extent,
non-communicable diseases are preventable, and there
are many measures that States can take to reduce
the risk factors that contribute to their development
and to premature mortality. Therefore, while we
acknowledge States’ primary role in meeting their
populations’ health needs, we would like to urge that
cooperation be strengthened at all levels and that all
those concerned intensify their relevant commitments,
in a truly multisectoral approach that involves areas
beyond that of health and that requires effective
control and prevention of the incidence and prevalence
of non-communicable diseases and mitigates their
economic and social impact.
Another important aspect of the fight against
NCDs is related to the establishment and strengthening
at all levels of effective systems aimed at evaluating
12/26

10/07/2014

its effect and monitoring advances in treatment,
prevention and control. In that regard, the Group of
77 and China welcomes the progress made by States
that have instituted policies at the national level and
provided the necessary resources for implementing
them. Nonetheless, it is clear that the progress made
since 2011 in treating non-communicable diseases
has been insufficient and unequal, owing to a number
of challenges, such as the need for building States’
capacities and providing adequate resources for
implementing strategies and programmes.
In that regard, while we are committed to reinforcing
efforts that have already been undertaken, we also call
for strengthening effective partnerships through NorthSouth, South-South and triangular cooperation and for
fulfilling all official development assistance pledges
aimed at helping national efforts to combat NCDs.
We also emphasize the fundamental role of other
international organizations, international financial
institutions, the private sector and civil society in the
work of the prevention and control of these diseases.
Since it is particularly crucial to monitor resources to
address non-communicable diseases as a part of the
supervisory and assessment framework, we call for
further support in that area to develop and strengthen
national capacities, as appropriate.
Although we have recognized that non-communicable
diseases are in large part preventable, there is also a
great need for treatment through vaccinations and
basic medicines. We therefore take advantage of this
opportunity to emphasize the importance of ensuring
access to affordable, effective, safe and high-quality
medicines and diagnostic and other technologies for
treating non-communicable diseases. We recognize the
fundamental role that generic drugs continue to play in
that respect, in particular in developing countries.
Consequently, we fully reaffirm our right to the
flexible use of the intellectual property rights agreement
pursuant to the Doha Declaration on the Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
and public health. Similarly, we recognize the need
to efficiently apply the Global Strategy and Plan of
Action on Public Health, Innovation and Intellectual
Property as an important tool to help to develop
national capacities in developing countries in order to
strengthen public health and guarantee universal access
to medicines and medical technologies.
Since 2011, the World Health Organization (WHO)
has finalized a series of strategies and tools useful
14-46211

10/07/2014

for helping to treat non-communicable diseases on
a global scale. We therefore welcome that significant
contribution, which includes the Global Action Plan
for the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable
Diseases 2013-2020, as well as the Action Plan’s indicators
for monitoring its implementation programme and the
global coordination mechanism for the prevention and
control of those diseases. Given the need for greater
and better multisectoral action and coordination in this
area, including, above all, the United Nations system,
we also welcome with satisfaction the establishment
of the United Nations Inter-Agency Task Force on
the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable
Diseases. We expect to participate actively in the Task
Force to that end. We also look forward with interest to
the assistance of the Task Force in supporting national
efforts and in developing adequate capacities for the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases.
In conclusion, the Group of 77 and China reiterates
its full commitment to addressing non-communicable
diseases and to working with all the relevant partners
at all levels and in all sectors in that respect. We will
also continue to firmly support giving priority to
non-communicable diseases and their treatment in
the international development agenda, with the aim of
guaranteeing that the important health-care challenges
we face are specifically and adequately addressed, as
are the issues of the productivity of our peoples and the
integral development of our countries.
The President: Members will recall that at
the outset I indicated that we had before us a draft
resolution issued as document A/68/L.53. Bearing in
mind the presence of ministers and heads of delegation
here with us, I shall now proceed to the adoption of the
draft resolution.
We have received the necessary information on the
budget implications, so we are ready to proceed with the
adoption of the draft resolution. For those who do care
about such matters, I can assure them that the adoption
of the draft resolution will have no budget implications.
The Assembly will therefore now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/68/L.53. I should now like
to propose an oral revision to the draft resolution,
inserting the phrase “to 13 June 2014” at the end of
paragraph 9 of the draft resolution. The last line of the
paragraph would therefore read “endorsement of its
terms of reference by the Economic and Social Council
on 13 June 2014”.

A/68/PV.100

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/68/L.53, entitled “Outcome document
of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly
on the comprehensive review and assessment of the
progress achieved in the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases”, as orally revised.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft resolution A/68/L.53, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/68/L.53, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 68/300).
The President: I would like to express my sincere
thanks to Her Excellency Ms. Bénédicte Frankinet,
Permanent Representative of Belgium, and His
Excellency Mr. E. Courtenay Rattray, Permanent
Representative of Jamaica, who so ably and patiently
conducted the discussions and complex negotiations in
the informal consultations on the outcome document. I
am sure members of the Assembly join me in extending
to them our sincerest appreciation.
I now give the floor to the Head of Delegation of
the European Union, its Commissioner for Health and
Consumer Policy, His Excellency Mr. Tonio Borg.
Mr. Borg (European Union): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries Turkey, Serbia
and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and the European Free Trade Association
country Liechtenstein, member of the European
Economic Area, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
First of all, I would like to convey our appreciation
to the Secretary-General, the President of the General
Assembly, the secretariat of the World Health
Organization (WHO) and the facilitators for their
commitment and hard work in preparing this Meeting
on the prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases (NCDs).
In 2011, here at the General Assembly, we
highlighted the growing burden of non-communicable
diseases and we identified the foundation stones that
needed to be put in place to facilitate and stimulate
action to prevent and control NCDs. We did that in
the knowledge that addressing NCDs could lead to
enormous gains for people’s health and for social and
economic development across the world.

14-4621113/26

A/68/PV.100

The burden of non-communicable diseases in
terms of preventable death, disability and the loss
of human potential, as well as in financial terms, is
too high. We know that a great deal of that burden is
preventable through action to deal with the risk factors,
such as tobacco, harmful alcohol consumption, an
unhealthy diet and the lack of physical activity, as well
as the underlying social, economic and environmental
determinants, such as air pollution. Such risk factors
are not equally distributed across the population. The
European Union and its member States recognize that
the international community, in particular the lowestincome countries, face extraordinary challenges. We
are ready to support them in addressing NCDs and the
risk factors in accordance with national priorities and
national and international commitments, including the
strengthening of health and regulatory systems and the
involvement of health non-governmental organizations
and other civil-society groups.
To achieve results, it is essential that national
Governments integrate the prevention and control
of NCDs into the overall strengthening of their
health systems and avoid fragmentation into separate
disease-specific activities. The EU and its member
States welcome the progress achieved. We continue
to look to the WHO for leadership, with the full
participation of Member States and civil society,
including non-State actors, with regard to the next steps.
Those include the implementation of the Global Action
Plan for the Prevention and Control of NCDs 20132020, monitoring the progress made and strengthening
international cooperation. We trust that the United
Nations Inter-Agency Task Force on the Prevention
and Control of NCDs and the global coordination
mechanism will further enhance coordination in that
respect. We applaud the focus on health promotion and
prevention and on strengthening the commitment to
addressing health determinants, in particular with the
aim of reducing health inequalities. We need to involve
all sectors in addressing NCDs, including all levels of
Government, and all the relevant stakeholders.
In conclusion, the European Union and its member
States believe that it is now time to act and to move
to implementation. We look forward to working closely
with the WHO, the global coordination mechanism,
the United Nations Inter-Agency Task Force agencies,
Member States, civil society and non-State actors in
addressing the global challenge of chronic diseases.

14/26

10/07/2014

Mr. Uribe (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Secretariat for
facilitating this important space for dialogue. I would
also like to underscore the importance of this initiative,
which began in September 2011 and brings us together
again today. This meeting is a great opportunity to
coordinate our efforts and to strengthen a global
response to a health problem that causes hundreds
of millions of deaths every year and, as has already
been emphasized this morning, is one of the main
development challenges of our countries.
I shall first talk about the situation in my country,
while emphasizing some of the achievements in recent
years. I will then touch on the challenges that developing
countries face with regard to non-communicable
diseases.
In Colombia, non-communicable diseases account
for more than 80 per cent of the total burden of disease
and 58 per cent of mortalities. They cause more than
100,000 deaths each year. Of those deaths, 30 per cent
are associated with diseases of the circulatory system,
20 per cent with neoplasms, 6 per cent with respiratory
diseases and 4 per cent with diabetes. I would like to
share a number of policies that we have undertaken
in the context of a national action framework for the
control and prevention of non-communicable diseases.
First, as a result of a participatory undertaking that
brought together hundreds of organizations in Colombia,
for the next 10 years we have an intersectoral national
public health plan that was drawn up in a participatory
way with a focus on the social determinants of health.
The plan outlines a set of policies that promote a
healthy lifestyle and access to comprehensive health
care with a differential focus. Under that framework, an
intersectoral commission was established to coordinate
the various sectors responsible for achieving the health
goals.
Secondly, apart from that 10-year public health
plan, the country has a 10-year plan for cancer control.
That plan provides for the development and adoption
of clinical practice guidelines, as well as vaccination
against human papillomavirus for all young people
in Colombia. We have achieved the highest level
of coverage in the second dose of the vaccination.
The cancer control plan has also made it possible to
reorganize the provision of cancer services and to
manage the resources necessary to ensure effective
coverage and quality care.

14-46211

10/07/2014

Thirdly, our country recently adopted a drug
policy in order to ensure access to medicines. We have
included 200 new drugs in the benefit package, which
today is available to 98 per cent of Colombians. We now
have almost universal health insurance coverage. At the
same time, we have implemented a policy to regulate
drug prices based on a comparison with international
prices. We have regulated more than 300 monopolies
or concentrated markets, which is equivalent to the
same number of active ingredients. The regulation has
facilitated access to expensive drugs for cardiovascular
diseases, cancer, diabetes and other illnesses. The
annual savings for the health-care system in regulated
drug prices exceed $2.5 billion.
Fourthly, in order to reduce risk factors, Colombia
has undertaken a series of regulatory actions to reduce
consumption and to prevent tobacco exposure. Those
actions have had very positive results. Over the past
six years, the prevalence of tobacco use has fallen by
5 per cent, from 17 to 12 per cent. That result clearly
shows that comprehensive prevention policies can have
a positive impact on public health.
Finally, we have implemented a comprehensive
health information system and have reorganized our
national system of surveys so as to have analytical tools
to monitor the overall situation with regard to health
and non-communicable diseases.
However, despite such achievements, we face
great challenges in continuing to move forward in the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases.
Most developed and developing countries also face
those challenges, as has been underscored several times
this morning. By way of illustration, I would like to
quickly share four of those common challenges.
The first challenge is sustainability. The growing
significance of non-communicable diseases increases
the technological constraints, and may therefore
jeopardize the sustainability of health-care systems. In
Colombia, spending on health care per capita is between
five and 10 times lower than in developed countries.
However, most of our citizens now insist on immediate
access to new and increasingly expensive technology
for the diagnosis and treatment of non-communicable
diseases.
The second challenge that I would like to emphasize
this morning is that of equity. The preponderance
of non-communicable diseases results in a large
proportion of resources for health being directed to the

A/68/PV.100

urban middle and upper classes, which have greater
access to diagnostic and treatment centres and to
medical specialists.
Sustainability and equity are therefore the first two
challenges that I wanted to underscore.
A third challenge relates to the way in which
health services are provided. As a result of the change
in epidemiological profiles, we need to redefine the
role of primary health services and the remit of health
professionals towards prevention and risk management
and towards comprehensive, timely and effective care
of diseases.
The last challenge, which is shared by everyone,
relates to the political economy of health policies. In the
context of non-communicable diseases, policies must
now have a broader scope. For example, regulatory
actions regarding taxes on tobacco, certain food items
and alcohol often go beyond the purview of health
authorities, and therefore require the support of other
sectors and of the international community.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
Since 2011, Colombia has been making
important progress in the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases. We are grateful for this
opportunity to share our achievements and concerns
with the Assembly. We believe that non-communicable
diseases should be a part of the post-2015 sustainable
development agenda. We therefore welcome this
opportunity to build together a global response to a
problem that concerns almost equally the entire planet.
Mr. Ferguson (Jamaica): Jamaica aligns itself
with the statements delivered earlier on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China and on behalf of the Caribbean
Community group.
I speak as a proud Jamaican and a Caribbean citizen.
Three years since 2011 is a short time for planning,
implementation and evaluation, but it is a good time
to review progress. The very nature of the epidemic of
non-communicable diseases (NCDs) presents us with
imperatives that make this review and a recommitment
to action both timely and necessary.
Jamaica is dedicated to the task of addressing both
the health and development impacts of NCDs. One
matter of focus in addressing the NCD epidemic is
access to health care. The challenge of confronting the

14-4621115/26

A/68/PV.100

NCD epidemic is magnified by the effect that a lack of
access has on life.
Historical and economic realities dictate a gradualist
approach to mitigation. The attainment of universal
health coverage is therefore a journey, not a destination.
It is the continued delicate balance between strategically
allocating resources for long-term goals and addressing
immediate needs. We already have good examples in
health, such as global immunization programmes and
the HIV response. Universal health care warrants a
similar approach. The question therefore is, how do we
move from policy to implementation? How do we fund
universal health care?
The resource question is particularly significant
for small island developing States like Jamaica, where
Governments fund the cost of health care for our
populations. Many may pontificate that 6 per cent of
gross domestic product spent on health is the magic that
is needed; but having lived that reality, I would humbly
ask that we think again. We must acknowledge that
the life course cost of treatment for NCDs, including
medicines, and the imminent danger of tiered pricing
models on inputs, such as vaccines, will undermine our
best efforts to realize the universal health care dream.
The world cannot treat itself out of the NCD
epidemic. We in Jamaica, while strategically targeting
risk factors, started with the main one, that of tobacco
use. Despite immense odds, we felt it was an attainable
prospect. I am pleased to report unprecedented public
acceptance of the regulations that limit the impact of
tobacco on health. Preliminary reports indicate fewer
admissions in our health facilities for respiratory
illnesses.
We have promulgated a national NCD strategic plan
for the period 2013 to 2018, which has been approved
by the Cabinet and introduced in the Parliament.
Importantly, it has benefited from broad stakeholder
consultations under the leadership of a national
multisectoral NCD committee established within a few
weeks of the adoption of the September 2011 Political
Declaration.
In addressing other risk factors, such as an
unhealthy diet and the harmful use of alcohol, we
have, in a principled way, constructively engaged
industry players. However, we look forward to agreed
guidelines for the engagement of all stakeholders
towards minimizing the effects of NCD risk factors.
Specifically, there also must be global commitment. We

16/26

10/07/2014

have seen the success of the Framework Convention on
Tobacco Control as a public health treaty, which can be
used as an example.
Jamaica subscribes to the view that health must be
an integral component of the post-2015 development
agenda and that NCDs must be adequately addressed
therein. The commitment to reducing NCD-related
premature deaths by 25 per cent by 2025 “will
remain but a fleeting illusion to be pursued, but never
attained” — in the words popularized by Jamaica’s
reggae icon Bob Marley — if we do not scale up our
responses. We must do everything in our power to avert
that possibility.
Ms. Juan López (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
It is an honour to participate in this exercise, which is
aimed at reviewing the progress made by our countries
in implementation of the commitments undertaken in
the Political Declaration of the High-level Meeting of
the General Assembly on the Prevention and Control of
Non-communicable Diseases, adopted by the General
Assembly in September 2011 (resolution 66/2, annex).
In consolidating the inclusive Mexico that has been
called for by the President of Mexico, Enrique Peña
Nieto, and in implementing the Political Declaration
before us, our Government has fully assumed its
responsibility in the face of the challenge posed by
non-communicable diseases (NCDs).
Mexico is in a process of demographic transition
characterized by an increase in life expectancy
and in the number of older adults. Chronic NCDs
relate basically to four common risk factors: tobacco
consumption, unhealthy diet, physical inactivity and
the harmful consumption of alcohol. These are complex
and multifaceted problems that affect all sectors of
society as well as the individual.
In Mexico, in order to control tobacco use, we
have promoted a law on tobacco control inspired by
the World Health Organization Framework Convention
on Tobacco Control, and 95 per cent of public places
such as restaurants are now tobacco-free. In a four-year
period, tobacco taxes have increased by 200 per cent.
We have also agreed with industry to decrease the salt
content of bread in order to combat high blood pressure.
We have also promoted the installation of alcohol
breathalyzers in 100 cities; over a five-year period,
that has led to a 20 per cent reduction in the number
of injuries and deaths from traffic accidents related to
alcohol consumption.
14-46211

10/07/2014

In order to prevent cervical and uterine cancer, we
have included in our universal vaccination system a
vaccine against the human papilloma virus, which for
the past three years has been given to all girls from the
ages of 9 to 11. In order to reduce the number of cases
of liver cancer, our universal vaccination system also
includes a hepatitis B vaccine.
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia is one the principal
childhood cancers. However, thanks to our universal
coverage of this illness, among the more than 1,500
children afflicted, the survival rate is 84 per cent.
However, the main public-health problem that we
in Mexico are facing is that of excess weight, obesity
and diabetes, of which we have one of the highest rates
in the world. In accordance with the national health
survey carried out in 2012, about 70 per cent of adults
and 30 per cent of our children are overweight or obese.
According to the same survey, diabetes now affects
9.2 per cent of our population.
Therefore the President of the Republic, Enrique
Peña Nieto, in October 2013 presented to Mexican
society a national strategy for the prevention and
control of overweight, obesity and diabetes. This is a
comprehensive strategy that has three pillars: public
health, medical care, and regulatory and fiscal policy,
approached from the perspective of social influences.
The strategy promotes the elaboration of a public
policy that brings about profound changes in lifestyles,
healthy food consumption habits and an increase
in physical activity among the population. For this
purpose, the political Constitution was amended to
prohibit the provision in schools of any food that does
not contribute to student health. We also promote
physical activity in various areas and have undertaken
an awareness-raising campaign in the mass media.
As regards medical care, we have developed a
comprehensive-care centre for diabetics involving
multidisciplinary interventions. This model is being
duplicated at the national level. Efforts are also under
way relating to a comprehensive-care model based
on active prevention that empowers system users
through technological innovation at the primary-care
level. We have also ensured free universal coverage
for prescription drugs for persons benefiting from the
national social security system as well as those who do
not.
The last pillar is the health and fiscal policy
regarding food and beverages, which mandates a front

A/68/PV.100

label on products stating the total calorie content of a
product, with both the calorie source and the percentage
in a 2,000-calorie daily diet. We have also created a
nutritional seal that will be granted to products that
meet the nutritional standards set by the Ministry of
Health.
As concerns marketing targeted to children, we
have prohibited commercials for chocolates, candy,
sodas and snacks at times of day when there is a large
child audience.
There is also a special tax on sugared beverages and
on high-calorie foods at the rate of 8 per cent for every
100 grams. Those taxes entered into force on 1 January
of this year. In order to evaluate the impact of our
actions, we have also designed a Mexican monitoring
centre on NCDs with the participation of the public
sector, the private sector and the social sector.
Following the guidelines of the Political Declaration,
we have shared this experience with the World Health
Organization, the Pan American Health Organization,
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development and the World Bank.
At the regional level, we recently established a
technical group jointly with Canada and the United
States, and at the bilateral level we are cooperating with
the Government of France.
I am certain that the aforementioned efforts
represent a strong foundation to reverse this difficult
epidemiological situation, so that Mexico can contribute
to the construction of a global society that enjoys
greater well-being.
Mr. Ibovi (Congo) (spoke in French): It is my
honour to take the floor in the General Assembly in my
dual capacity as Chairman of the sixty-third session of
the World Health Organization’s Regional Committee
for Africa and as Minister of Health of the Republic of
the Congo.
First of all, I should like to welcome the holding of
this High-level Meeting, which is the logical follow-up
to the summit held here in 2011 that brought together
Heads of State and Government as well as various
representatives of States and Governments of Members
of the United Nations, to take up the important issue
of the prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases throughout the world and in particular the
challenges that these present for the development of our
countries.

14-4621117/26

A/68/PV.100

Three years ago, the 46 States members of the
World Health Organization Regional Office for Africa
(WHO/AFRO) adopted the Brazzaville Declaration,
affirming that Africa was a continent already being
crushed by the very heavy burden of communicable
diseases, such as HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis.
Other non-communicable diseases — including
cardiovascular diseases, cancers, mental illness,
genetic diseases and haemoglobin disorders such as
sickle-cell anaemia — were sweeping the populations
with unusual force. To these diseases, we would add
the consequences of traffic accidents and those related
to climate change that some wrongly and ignorantly
attribute to witchcraft. The very high indicators related
to morbidity and maternal, neonatal and infant mortality
are of concern in numerous ways. The universal nature
of these diseases has led the international scientific
community to place humanity on the alert regarding the
challenge they pose not only to populations, but also to
development.
Since that time, all the health development plans
of WHO/AFRO member countries have undergone
significant readjustments in order to take into
account the epidemiological transition and its serious
consequences. This question now enjoys pride of
place аt each meeting of African health ministers.
The Luanda Declaration, adopted in November 2013,
is one example of our Governments’ commitment to
combating non-communicable diseases.
With respect to the growing reach of these diseases
throughout the world, this campaign should not be
limited to health ministries. Civil society and all
stakeholders working in the health sector must also
be involved; hence the interest and importance of
stepping up the public and private partnership at the
local, regional and international levels so as to better
coordinate action to combat disease in general.
In the Republic of the Congo, non-communicable
diseases are continue to spread and to pose major
containment problems in both technical and financial
terms. In our major hospitals, cerebral vascular
accidents are now the leading cause of death. The
number of patients with renal failure is rising sharply.
Sickle-cell anaemia in its heterozygous form affects
about 25 per cent of the population and 2 per cent in
its homozygous form. The number of new cancer cases
rises every year.
The Government, which has made a priority of the
fight against illness in general, and non-communicable
18/26

10/07/2014

diseases in particular, recently established general
guidelines on epidemiology and the fight against
diseases in the health-care system, in which hygiene is
the principal element of development. To allow for a
more intense mobilization of the efforts of civil society
and for the greater involvement of the private and
external health sectors, my Government, like others
in the region, is now preparing a legal framework for
cooperation that will help all health actors to work in
synergy.
The delegation of the Republic of the Congo
therefore supports the Global Action Plan for the
Prevention and Control of Non-communicable Diseases
2013-2020, adopted by the World Health Assembly.
We would suggest that future actions be focused on
the effective mobilization of resources by States; the
involvement of other sectors, aside from the health
sector, to ensure the containment and reduction of
risk factors; the promotion of health; prevention; the
screening of risk factors; equal access to health care;
the institutionalization of universal health coverage;
and the improvement of technical conditions for
treating patients.
Aware of the urgent need for all States to take
more effective measures to prevent and control
non-communicable diseases, my delegation would like
once again to underline the importance of prevention
and of an effective multisectoral response. We therefore
voice our support for resolution 68/300, which we have
just adopted and which enjoys our full backing.
Ms. Udval (Mongolia): It is a great honour to
participate in this important High-level Meeting to
address the most challenging public-health issues.
I welcome the adoption of the concise, focused,
action-oriented outcome document (resolution 68/300),
which will speed up the implementation of the Political
Declaration (resolution 66/2, annex). I wish to express
our gratitude to the United Nations, the World Health
Organization (WHO) and other global partners for their
efforts in helping to address the greatest challenges
facing the health sector in many countries.
Mongolia attaches great importance to the
full implementation of the Political Declaration on
the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable
Diseases, as well as the WHO Global Action Plan for
the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable
Diseases 2013-2020. With a view to achieving our
goals, my Government has been intensely implementing
a national programme on the control and prevention of
14-46211

10/07/2014

NCDs. For the past nine years, this has been a priority
issue for the health sector in my country.
Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) account for
72 per cent of the total disease burden in my country.
Thus, they are one of the most serious issues of public
health. Moreover, one third of the population is affected
by cardiovascular diseases, while one-fifth is affected
by cancer and its associated risk factors. Therefore,
Mongolia is strongly committed to fully implementing
the Political Declaration on NCDs and has been
striving to promote a multisectoral response through
all-stakeholder partnerships, including civil society.
As members of the Assembly may be aware,
in 2009 His Excellency Mr. Elbegdorj Tsakhia, the
President of Mongolia, initiated a nation-wide alcoholfree movement in Mongolia. This initiative was well
accepted by Mongolian society. We have seen its result
in the increased number of alcohol-free communities,
villages
and
provinces.
Non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) are actively contributing to the
prevention and control of harmful alcohol use and
advocating a movement to prevent heavy drinking. As a
result, three provinces of Mongolia has been registered
as alcohol-free and one province as tobacco-free.
I take this opportunity to recall our President’s
initiative to draft and adopt a framework convention on
alcohol control. In seeking to realize this initiative, the
Government of Mongolia has been conducting serious
discussions and dialogues at the national, bilateral and
international levels. We will continue our efforts to
deliver positive outcomes. We strongly believe that a
legal document, such as the framework convention on
alcohol control, would be the most powerful tool for
reducing NCDs in all countries, regardless of their
development level.
Allow me to briefly touch upon the actions
undertaken by the Government of Mongolia. This year,
the Government of Mongolia established a national
committee on health, headed by the Prime Minister,
and adopted a policy document for multisectoral
coordination. The policy document addresses
multisectoral commitments to reducing the risk factors
of NCDs, which are generated by malfunctions in
other sectors. A programme on early detection of five
common NCDs has been implemented and a life-course
screening programme has been developed.
In addition, in 2012 the Parliament of Mongolia
adopted major amendments to the law on tobacco

A/68/PV.100

control in order to meet its commitments under the
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. This year,
it also ratified the WHO Protocol to Eliminate Illicit
Trade in Tobacco Products. Hence, in accordance
with the amended law on tobacco control, smoking in
public places, including bars, restaurants and schools,
is prohibited. The size of the health warning sign on
cigarette packs has increased from 33 per cent to 50 per
cent on each side, and the penalty for the abuse of the
law has been raised.
In Mongolia, local Governments have been initiating
health-friendly community campaigns on maternal
and child health care and undertaking daily physical
activities to promote wider community participation.
Moreover, Mongolian NGOs have initiated a forum
on citizens’ participation in and ownership of health
care. They have been advocating nationwide public
awareness on issues including blood-pressure control,
health education and common health risk factors. Those
activities are financially supported by the Government
through a health promotion foundation that has been
generated from tax revenues on tobacco and alcohol.
As we all recognize that the global burden and
threat of NCDs constitute one of the major challenges
to development, we need to strengthen efforts to
achieve our common goals and commitments to a world
free of NCDs. Therefore, the Government of Mongolia
joins the call for including the prevention and control of
NCDs — especially alcohol and tobacco control — in
the post-2015 development agenda.
Mr. Bustos Villar (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I wish to note that Argentina aligns itself
with the statement made earlier by the Permanent
Representative of Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
In my national capacity, I would like to say, as
I noted in this Hall at the High-level Meeting on
the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable
Diseases (see A/66/PV.7), the growing epidemic of
non-communicable diseases is not a medical or a
public health problem; it represents a crossroads in
our countries’ development efforts and, as such, it is
a political problem. That is why we in the Argentine
Republic understand that it is on the basis of the
State’s regulatory power and the active participation of
multiple sectors of society that it will be possible to
find and sustain over time solutions that will ensure
that our citizens’ quality of life will not deteriorate or
be otherwise affected.

14-4621119/26

A/68/PV.100

In my country, through the resolute and active
involvement of President Cristina Fernández de
Kirchner, it was decided that the management of
non-communicable diseases (NCDs) would become a
priority issue on the public health agenda. That is why
substantive progress has been made from that moment
on and based on those precise instructions. We have
come here today to humbly share the progress made
since the 2011 summit in controlling NCDs in their
various forms.
We have formed a space for intersectoral
coordination. We have established an advisory
commission on the prevention and control of
NCDs, composed of governmental organizations,
such as the Ministries of Agriculture, Education
and Social Progress, Science and Technology, and
non-governmental organizations representing civil
society, scientific societies and food producers from
the private sector. Furthermore, it has helped to create
a space for the coordination, integration, development
and implementation of public policy.
We can say with satisfaction and pride that
the Argentine Republic is a regional leader in the
regulation of trans fats and that by December we will
be a country free of trans fats. Four years ago, we
modified the Argentine food code, which has the power
of law. To do so, starting with the space established
by the law and specific governmental entities, the fats
in question would be replaced in accordance with the
goal of ensuring that the State would neither produce
nor market products containing fats derived from
hydrogenated vegetable oils. We have also pursued a
policy of reducing salt consumption through specific
national legislation. We are enacting a national law on
tobacco control and have updated diabetes legislation to
expand coverage to all diabetic patients, including the
provision of all medication without charge and without
regard to type of diabetes.
As for tobacco use, I note that we started out
in 2003 with a 40 per cent usage rate among the
population over the age of 18. However, due to the
attention focused on the situation, the rate had declined
to 22.5 per cent by 2012, which is a major achievement.
We have strengthened the epidemiological monitoring
system for NCDs and accompanying risk factors,
including mortality studies, chronic illness registries
and national population surveys. Our national goals and
indicators have contributed to regional indicators and
the nine targets for 2025 regarding NCDs, established

20/26

10/07/2014

by the World Health Organization. In the near future,
the national registry of cardiovascular diseases will
begin operations; law 25.501, whereby the registry was
established, has already helped to promote not only
the collection of epidemiological data, but also the
provision of timely, quality care in cases of acute heart
attack before reaching a hospital and stroke.
The Argentine Republic is implementing a
comprehensive and integrated strategy and an action
plan for the prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases. We face huge challenges, and we are aware
that we need to broaden our policies in that area,
including to many other sectors. Today, we are close to
receiving the results of the third national survey of risk
factors. The first survey took place in 2005, the second
in 2009 and the survey that we are now processing and
for which we are receiving the reports is from 2013.
It will enable us to have a clearer picture of what is
happening with the obesity epidemic in our country.
We understand that that is a problem and challenge
facing every country in the world, which will therefore
require more robust and comprehensive public policies
at the national, regional and global levels.
On the basis of the legitimacy that the achievements
and developments in the health of Argentines bestow on
us, we urge the States Members of the United Nations to
draw up and implement policies that clearly include the
regulation of food advertisements, to undertake actions
that encourage the rational use of sugar, to promote
measures to reduce the intake of unhealthy foods and to
promote physical activity in our communities. We also
call for actions to control the excessive use of alcohol
and to deal with mental illnesses, such as that clearly
seen in dementia.
While we are making progress, the road ahead is not
easy. However, we know that we can succeed. We wish
to draw the attention of Member States to the need to
work vigorously for the prevention and early detection
of neurocognitive impairment, which is evident in
depression, dementia and other pathologies, as a result
of the increased life expectancy of the elderly. If we
fail to do that, we will miss an excellent opportunity to
combat ills, such as overweight and obesity, that have
affected our populations since the previous century
but that in the twenty-first century have become a true
epidemic with a serious impact on the harmonious
development of our countries. As Member States, we
cannot remain mere spectators of the demographic,
epidemiological, biotechnological and cultural changes

14-46211

10/07/2014

that jeopardize the preservation of a decent quality of
life for our citizens in the immediate future. We must
therefore act with creativity and innovation to respond
to those challenges, which are already a reality. The
future is now, and there will be no future if we do not
change our present.
In the Argentine Republic, we promote and call for
inclusiveness, social development and the strengthening
of the rights of our peoples through action on the social
determinants of health and the entire range of tools
that, together with civil society and the private sector,
we can jointly develop and bring about. It is not just
a health issue. It is an issue for each of us, since in a
society we are jointly responsible for what happens to
us. We have the ability to make decisions and to raise
awareness among our communities so that, with active
and concrete participation, we can together change
the reality. Member States must be strengthened
with a clear direction in integrated, comprehensive,
intersectoral and sustainable public policies. That is
how we can ensure that chronic non-communicable
diseases no longer threaten the health of our peoples
and their economies, forging a healthier, more equitable
and socially fairer future.
Mr. Kostennikov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): In 2013, Russia completed a two-year
health sector modernization programme, which, at
a total cost of $19 billion, was unprecedented for our
country in scale and financial support. The priorities
for modernizing the health system were to strengthen
primary health-care services and to develop preventive
care, including through the universal and large-scale
medical examination of adults and children for the
early detection of illnesses. Priority attention was
given to improving the system of compulsory medical
insurance.
The major result of all our efforts was an increase
in the average life expectancy to 70.8 years and, for the
first time since 1991, there has been natural population
growth. That has happened in the context of a modest
downturn in the birth rate. The population therefore
increased owing to a reduction in the mortality
rate. That instils confidence in us with regard to the
effectiveness of our efforts.
We are increasingly participating in global health
protection. Russia was one of the initiators of the
international programmes for the prevention and
control of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) and

A/68/PV.100

actively supports those international programmes.
A real contribution of the Russian Federation to
combating NCDs in low- and middle-income countries
was the investment of more than $3 million in financing
the WHO global project on healthy lifestyles and the
prevention of non-communicable diseases. With the
financial and technical support of the WHO and Russian
experts, those countries have developed national action
plans. Our upcoming plans include the opening of a
WHO office for the prevention and control of NCDs
in Moscow. The Government of the Russian Federation
has allocated more than $22 million for that project.
In the past few years, the international community
has made significant progress in combating NCDs
through the adoption of global targets on countering the
spread of NCDs, the development of a global monitoring
framework to track progress and the endorsement of
the WHO Global Action Plan for the Prevention and
Control of NCDs 2013-2020. The Action Plan links the
political commitments of Member States and the tools
for practical implementation at the country level.
The WHO has recently agreed the terms of
reference of the global coordination mechanism to
facilitate the implementation of the Global Action Plan.
It is important that the decision-making role within
the global coordination mechanism be the preserve of
Member States, which will involve the organizations of
the United Nations system and non-State actors in that
task. In our view, the global coordination mechanism
could convene its meetings as forums, whose outcomes
could be followed up and used as the main element of
the progress report of the Director-General of the WHO
on the implementation of the Global Action Plan. The
first meeting of that forum could take place in 2017, as
indicated in the terms of reference.
In the context of combating NCDs, we attach great
importance to the upcoming Second International
Conference on Nutrition, to be held in Rome from
19 to 21 November. We hope that its outcome will help
to achieve the agreed indicators with regard to the
prevention of obesity and the reduction in salt intake
and in harmful alcohol use.
In conclusion, I would like to note that the Russian
Federation fully supports the adoption of the outcome
of the High-level Meeting (resolution 68/300) and the
actions that it contains at the national and international
levels to resolve the problem of non-communicable
diseases.

14-4621121/26

A/68/PV.100

Ms. Rahateng (Indonesia): I am delivering this
statement on behalf of the Deputy Minister of Health
of Indonesia.
I would like to begin by expressing my delegation’s
appreciation for the President’s exemplary leadership
in organizing this High-level Meeting and thanking the
Permanent Representatives of Belgium and Jamaica
for their excellent facilitation of the consultations on
modalities and the outcome document.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
With
non-communicable
diseases
(NCDs)
accounting for more than 60 per cent of deaths in
my country, the Government of Indonesia is fully
committed to scaling up efforts to prevent and
control NCDs. At the national level, a national policy
framework on NCD prevention and control, which
includes promotion, preventive, curative, palliative
and rehabilitative programmes, was initiated in
2011. Through consultation and partnership with all
stakeholders at all levels, concrete action plans have
been developed. As NCD control and prevention have
now become an integral part of the development plan
at the national and subnational levels, indicators for
NCD prevention and control have also been included
in the draft of the national midterm development plan
of 2015-2019.
I take this opportunity to share with the General
Assembly some lessons drawn from Indonesia’s
NCD prevention and control efforts. First, the role of
community is key. NCDs play out in homes, in the
workplace and in communities. Therefore, awareness
and advocacy efforts begin at home and in ommunity.
Accordingly, community-based interventions have
been initiated throughout the country.
Secondly, providing access, services and coverage
is of utmost importance. The Government of Indonesia
reminds communities to ensure access for all to NCDrelated services by continuously improving the quality
and effectiveness of services at the primary, secondary
and tertiary levels. To ensure coverage for all citizens
for such services, beginning in January 2014, the
Government of Indonesia launched a national health
insurance scheme.
Thirdly, with respect to collaboration and
partnership, across sectors involving all stakeholders,

22/26

10/07/2014

several alliances have been formed, including national
and regional alliances for tobacco and NCD control.
Fourthly, regulatory and institutional frameworks
are imperative. Through cross-sector collaboration,
the necessary legislation to strengthen the regulatory
framework for NCD prevention and control has been
enacted.
Given that this is a moment of critical change
whereby Member States are being called further into
the design of a post-2015 development agenda, the
High-level Meeting is an opportune moment to further
dialogue and refine the targets and indicators for NCDs.
Forming the NCD targets in identifying its indicators
in the next development agenda should aim for
strengthening commitments and actions, in particular
of the global effort to support national efforts to prevent
and control NCDs, including by addressing the diverse
and complex causes of epidemics. They should also
be aimed at creating an enabling environment at the
national and global levels to allow the transformation
towards greater efficiency in NCD prevention and
control, as well as an enhanced partnership that allows
for better coordination and coherence across and within
sectors.
It is also important that the provisions for enabling
conditions for developing countries, including through
the full use of the flexibility in the Doha Declaration
on the Agreement on the Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights and Public Health, be
addressed in the context of the post-2015 development
agenda.
Mr. Acurio (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): Since
the new Government of the Citizens’ Revolution took
office, Ecuador has adopted a Constitution that has
brought radical change to the country, in particular in
terms of what we understand as development and the
conception of development we seek. We Ecuadorians
have asked ourselves what type of life we want and
how we want to achieve the well-being of society. We
have decided that no development can be described as
sustainable if it does harm to the health and well-being
of the human being. We have decided to change our
vision of development, giving priority to the human
being over capital.
It is impossible to speak of development if we do
not change our concept of it. Development must be
sustainable and focus on the well-being of the human
being. In the quest for good living, health is the starting

14-46211

10/07/2014

and the ending point. We need health to live well and
we need to live well for health. Using that approach,
and with the leadership of our President, Rafael Correa,
we have decided in our country to tackle, with an
intersectoral perspective, the different determinants of
health — improving access to basic services, housing
conditions, nutrition conditions, physical exercise and
environments — that can help to bring about a healthy
life. We have assumed that public health should be
cost-free and of high quality. It is a fundamental right;
mercantile goods are not.
We are facing new health challenges that test world
leaders seeking innovative ways of building societies
that are united and fair and that generate health. The
future demands that we have a different vision of
development; we therefore need to change the present
paradigm. We must broaden our vision of health.
Otherwise, how are we going to achieve good living?

A/68/PV.100

We cannot claim to give a systematic answer to the
new world health challenges without the leadership of
our health institutions and authorities. The health sector
needs to participate actively in intersectoral, national
and international spaces for decision-making. We will
thus be able to contribute to planning for sustainable
development.
We would like to draw attention to the obesity
epidemic that can be found today in all corners of our
continent, without distinction to ethnicity or social
condition. In our country alone, there are some 5 million
persons who are overweight or obese and almost 9 per
cent of our children under the age of 5 are showing
signs of being overweight or obese. In other words, the
situation is twice as bad as it was in 1986.

Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) are perhaps
one of the major challenges we face at the world level.
To confront them, we need first of all to expand the
availability of healthy food, which is related to food
sovereignty. Secondly, we need to promote fiscal
policies. Thirdly, we need to regulate trade and
marketing of products, such as tobacco and alcohol.
Fourthly, we need to control foreign investment in
processed foods and make the population aware of the
harm done by their unhealthy consumption.

We need to stop processed industrial foods with
little nutritional value and high in sugar, saturated
fats, trans fats, salt and additives from penetrating our
markets. The excessive use of those products and lack of
physical activity threaten the very development of our
populations. Ecuador would like to acknowledge the
actions undertaken by the Government and legislators
who have taken bold decisions to defend their citizens,
boys and girls, by establishing regulatory measures
such as taxes on sweet beverages, improvement of food
in schools, introduction of clear front-labelling and
control of abusive advertising of industrially processed
foods.

None of that will be possible if we do not recognize
and strengthen the regulatory power of the State and
its ability to govern, through regulations that see to it
that legislative and regulatory frameworks that promote
and protect health make health possible in all policies.
Ecuador has progressed considerably on that subject
by strengthening our national health authority and
developing standards to ensure universal access to health
care for the entire population, in which humanitarian
health care is universal, free, comprehensive and
equitable, based on a primary-care model and focusing
on individual care and collective intervention.

In Ecuador, we recently approved regulations
for labelling processed goods, allowing the user or
consumer to identify the fat, sugar and salt content in all
processed foods. We also have a new communication law
which prohibits the advertising of alcohol and tobacco,
which makes it possible for the health authorities to
limit or prohibit commercials or advertising of any
product that might affect public health. In addition,
we have undertaken intersectoral actions, such as an
interministerial agreement on school cafeterias. We
have established a daily hour of physical exercise in
schools.

Today in our country, we have a model of
comprehensive health care, in the framework of which
we have a national strategy for the prevention and
control of cancer in its different expressions. In addition
to that, we have implemented a policy that has allowed
us to reduce tobacco consumption, increase taxes and
absolutely prohibit tobacco use in all public spaces in
the country.

Ecuador and other countries have thus made great
progress in regulation, but a great deal more needs to
be done than what we have done so far. We must set
high goals; perhaps we will not be able to achieve our
goals in the short term, but that is no reason to lower
the bar of our aspirations. Chronic non-communicable
diseases and the consumption of healthy food cannot
just be a matter for the individual to decide; we must

14-4621123/26

A/68/PV.100

understand the structural nature of the consumption of
healthy food and the effect of the market, regulations,
advertising and foreign investment in food.
The prevention and control of chronic
non-communicable diseases requires that we turn to
action. We must act on the socioeconomic factors for
their existence and thus reduce the pressure that chronic
diseases have on health systems.
Mr. Al-Sahlawi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
great honour for all of us to come together at this Highlevel Meeting to transparently and objectively review
what has been achieved on the ground with respect to
our commitment to fighting non-communicable diseases
(NCDs) pursuant to the Political Declaration of the
High-level Meeting on the Prevention and Control of
Non-communicable Diseases (resolution 66/2, annex) in
September 2011.
Kuwait understands the reach of the NCD problem
and its ramifications for health systems and their impact
on the quality of life. Since the adoption of the Political
Declaration, we have started to implement the measures
necessary to fight non-communicable diseases,
integrating them into our national development plan
for our country. We have mobilized all resources and
stakeholders in order to wage the battle in all sectors.
We have formed a high-level multisectoral committee
under the auspices of the Ministry of Health, composed
of specialists from different Government agencies and
civil society, which has been dedicated to evaluating
potential objective and cross-cutting change based on
the Political Declaration and resolutions of the World
Health Organization (WHO), in addition to decrees
from the Ministers of Health in the Gulf Cooperation
Council and the regional office of the WHO in the
Middle East.
Through cooperation between the Ministry of
Health and the different sectors, Kuwait has begun to
reduce the salt content of bread by 20 per cent, which
will have a positive impact on cardiovascular diseases.
We have also taken a number of initiatives to deal
with such risk factors as smoking and lack of physical
exercise and other measures, and working with schools,
including issuing a health manual for schools and
encouraging sports activities in schools, continuing our
commitment with the WHO Framework Convention on
Tobacco Control and in application of our Law No. 15
of 1995.

24/26

10/07/2014

We have taken labelling measures and adopted
regulations on tobacco and cigarettes. We have
announced greater penalties for violations of those new
regulations. We have also stepped up efforts to assist
smokers in quitting the habit. Our Minister of Health
has cooperated with all partners in society in organizing
a conference on health awareness in that area.
We are also fighting non-communicable diseases
and have established early-warning systems for the
early detection of those diseases. We have established
various clinics to fight those diseases. We have universal
vaccination coverage against hepatitis. We have applied
primary and rehabilitative health-care protocols. As
part of our commitment also to addressing the leading
causes of death and chronic disease, in cooperation with
the WHO, we have undertaken surveys of adolescents,
students and the elderly, using the latest scientific
information to address causes of death and making
use of the available indicators to monitor and assess
progress.
Regionally, specifically at the level of the Arabian
Gulf region, since January 2014 we have been
implementing a document adopted to fight chronic
non-communicable diseases as a priority. That text
has been translated into reality as a vision for the
Gulf region as a region free of the burdens of chronic
non-communicable diseases. We were also proud to
increase the pace of work to implement the United
Nations Political Declaration through the regional
meeting for the Middle East held in Kuwait in April
2013.
Kuwait also reiterates its commitment to the
Political Declaration, to fighting non-communicable
diseases and to working together with the international
community. We are confident that we will fulfil the
commitments we have undertaken, maintain our strong
political will and make use of the lessons learned in
the different international forums so that we may all
achieve what we aspire to and mitigate the impact of the
spread of chronic non-communicable diseases.
Mr. Burrows (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank the President of the General
Assembly for having taken the initiative of organizing
this High-level Meeting on a subject which is common
to and affects the entire international community. My
delegation supports the statement made earlier by the
Permanent Representative of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.

14-46211

10/07/2014

Non-communicable diseases are a priority for
the Government of Chile, since, as in many countries
throughout the world, they are the main cause of death,
disease and lost years of healthy life. Non-communicable
diseases are a form of expression of social inequality
because they are concentrated in poorer and less
educated groups. It is possible, on the basis of gender,
age, socioeconomic status and education, among
others, to make differentiated assessments of the
physical appearance and the efforts to take care of our
bodies, strengthening the development of healthier or
less healthy lifestyles. Therefore, non-communicable
diseases cannot be considered and addressed only as
a health-care problem, but rather must be addressed on
the basis of the social factors, in accordance with the
concept of health throughout all policies.
For all those reasons, public policy to address
non-communicable diseases must consider its relevance
vis-à-vis different factors. Such relevance underscores
and values the community’s customs, heritage, world
views and ways of life, such as those associated with
practices related to eating habits, alcohol and tobacco
consumption, and physical activity, among others,
with a view to understanding and respecting their
sociocultural value, that is, the ways in which they
are desired or appreciated, obtained or disposed of.
Therefore, the effectiveness of public policies depends
on their relevancy.
In Chile, for more than 15 years we have been
implementing population and intersectoral policies
to promote health in order to generate changes
in behaviour and habits in a sociocultural and
environmental context which limits the possibility of
healthier choices. We have not achieved the desired
results. In that context, we welcome the initiative of
the United Nations to promote a more proactive role for
States, laying the structural foundation for the creation
of healthier environments, which are conducive to
behavioural changes, and making it possible to reduce
the prevalence of non-communicable diseases in the
medium and long term.
Chile has also made progress
​​
in developing a
regime of explicit health guarantees that ensures
access to timely medical care with high standards
and financial protection for 80 diseases, which have
been given epidemiological priority, including cancer,
diabetes, cardiovascular diseases and certain diseases
that affect mental health. Inspired by the World Health
Organization Global Action Plan for the Prevention and

A/68/PV.100

Control of Non-communicable Diseases 2013-2020, we
also have a national health strategy which guides our
health policies and programmes throughout the country
with a horizon of 2020 and which has given priority
to non-communicable diseases and their determining
factors.
In structural and demographic terms, we have made
progress on the commitments made in the Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control, improving the current
tobacco law to protect the rights of non-smokers through
greater restriction in public spaces where smoking is
allowed and by further restricting access to tobacco,
especially among the youth. We have also added a zerotolerance law for alcohol, reducing the permissible
blood alcohol levels for drivers and increasing the
penalties for violations. That has led to a decrease of
almost 30 per cent in deaths caused by traffic accidents
related to alcohol.
With regard to food, we have recently adopted a
law that improves the labelling of foods by including
warnings of excessive salt, saturated fat and sugar and
indicating the energy levels associated with them. The
labels are located prominently on the front of food
packages. The same law restricts the advertising and
sale of those foods in educational establishments.
Lastly, in order to improve the environment, today
we have more bike paths and recreation areas, although
significant gaps in coverage remain, especially in areas
of lower socioeconomic status.
One of the challenges our country is facing is related
to the achievement of a tax reform proposal, which is
to be introduced soon, with tax increases for tobacco,
alcohol, unhealthy foods and environmental pollutants.
We are also making progress on an intersectoral
agreement to strengthen the “Choose healthy living”
strategy, which includes social participation through
citizen forums and participatory dialogues to consider,
throughout the action plan, the opinions of those who
will be the subjects of the intervention, thereby avoiding
imposition and reflecting their needs and demands.
We appreciate the call to create a turning point in
the commitment to take action and to develop the global
agenda on non-communicable diseases. Chile accepts
that invitation and joins the political commitment that
the United Nations has called for.
Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): First
and foremost, my delegation would like to thank
Ms. Margaret Chan, Director General of the World

14-4621125/26

A/68/PV.100

Health Organization (WHO), for her report on the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases.
Nearly three years ago, our Heads of State
and Government adopted a fundamental Political
Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Prevention and Control of
Non-communicable Diseases (resolution 66/2, annex)
making it possible to highlight the scourge of our time,
namely, the epidemic caused by non-communicable
diseases — diseases which are primarily the result of
smoking, alcoholism, a poor diet and a lack of physical
activity, as well as the costs to which they give rise.
The WHO estimates that 85 per cent of the
premature deaths of individuals between the ages
of 30 and 70 years that took place in 2011 and were
recorded in developing countries were attributable to
non-communicable diseases, is simply frightening.
The fact that globalization is creating deadly
interactions between non-communicable diseases and
communicable diseases in developing countries is an
additional aggravating factor, while those countries
struggle to implement the Millennium Development
Goals. Added to the cost of human lives lost too
early is the exorbitant economic cost, which slows or
prevents growth and perpetuates the vicious cycle of
chronic poverty. It is therefore essential to help those
countries develop multisectoral strategies, as the report
of the Director General indicates. The fight against
tobacco and alcohol, the promotion of healthy eating
and physical activity, together with access to treatment,
makes it possible to reduce spending on public health.
The Global Action Plan for the Prevention and
Control of Non-communicable Diseases 2013-2020
and the creation of the United Nations Inter-Agency
Task Force on the Prevention and Control of

26/26

10/07/2014

Non-communicable Diseases will contribute to helping
countries develop specific policies to collect data and
to strengthen coordination at both the national and
global levels and to ensure the necessary funding and
cooperation.
The improvement of national capacity, as seen in
the 2013 WHO global survey, is encouraging. Monaco
recently participated in the first high-level meeting
of the small States of Europe aimed at implementing
the 2020 Health Plan. This new European framework
policy of the WHO will strengthen health systems and
revitalize public-health infrastructure and institutions
by ensuring the participation of all relevant stakeholders,
public and private.
We also welcome the initiatives undertaken
by the WHO to forge strategic partnerships with
the International Telecommunication Union, the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the
United Nations Development Programme and the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS. These
partnerships must contribute to data collection and
the implementation of multisectoral national policies.
Monaco has invested in public health both at the
national level and within its international cooperation
framework. The Principality has also partnered with
the IAEA in the fight against cancer.
The
prevention
of
and
fight
against
non-communicable diseases will be an essential element
of the post-2015 development agenda. The road map has
been drawn up, and the efforts already undertaken must
be intensified to guarantee that the 2018 comprehensive
review will yield substantive progress. The Assembly
can count on the commitment of the Principality of
Monaco.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

14-46211
