S/PV.9397

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9397th meeting

Wednesday, 16 August 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Boateng
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hauri
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki

Agenda
Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2022/688)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-24209 (E)
*2324209*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9397

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the
Permanent Representative of Armenia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2022/688)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Armenia, Azerbaijan and Türkiye to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ararat Mirzoyan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Armenia, to today’s meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Edem
Wosornu, Director of Operations and Advocacy, Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. Wosornu.
Ms. Wosornu: I thank the members of the
Security Council for giving me the opportunity to brief
them today.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) is not currently in a position to
independently verify information regarding the
movement of people or goods through routes that include
the Lachin corridor, or on the well-being of civilians
in the areas where Russian peacekeepers have been
deployed. We are aware, however, of ongoing reports
on those issues, including with regard to shortages of
food and medicines and disruptions to energy supplies
that are required to maintain critical infrastructure and
services, such as health and water facilities. We are
also aware of reports that some essential health-care
interventions, including surgeries, may have had to
be suspended.
2/19

16/08/2023

The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs is in regular contact with the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), which remains the
only international humanitarian body that has access to
the area. As the ICRC reported in a statement on 25 July,
it has been unable to transport humanitarian assistance
through the Lachin corridor to the civilian population in
the area, or by any other route, including Aghdam, for
several weeks. Although medical evacuations continue,
the ICRC has not been able to bring medical items into
the area since 7 July, and its food deliveries stopped on
14 June. The ICRC has highlighted worrying shortages
of essential food items and life-saving medical supplies.
The international humanitarian law is very clear.
The parties to conflicts must allow and facilitate
the rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian
relief for all civilians in need. They must ensure that
humanitarian relief personnel have the freedom of
movement required for their functions. What matters
is that passage for that relief is as rapid as possible in
the circumstances. It is therefore critical for the ICRC’s
delivery of humanitarian relief that it be allowed to
resume through any available routes.
The ICRC is doing everything it can, but as a
single organization, it can only cover the most urgent
needs. Other impartial humanitarian relief must
also be allowed to reach civilians who need it, and a
sustainable solution for the safe and regular transit of
people and goods must be found. In that regard, I would
like to reference the Secretary-General’s statement
from 2 August (SG/SM/21896), in which he expressed
particular concern about the reports of the deteriorating
humanitarian situation on the ground and called for
urgent steps to facilitate access. It is incumbent on
the parties not to impede or politicize any principled
humanitarian effort. Responding to humanitarian needs
is not an act of legitimization or recognition. It does not
take sides or yield to political influence. OCHA will
continue to engage with the parties on humanitarian
access aimed at meeting the essential needs of civilians
in the area. The United Nations country teams in both
Armenia and Azerbaijan also maintain open channels
with the authorities in those countries and are fully
ready to do everything they can to ensure a response to
the humanitarian needs.
The President:
her briefing.

I

thank

Ms.

Wosornu

for

23-24209

16/08/2023

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Wosornu for her briefing and welcome the presence
in today’s meeting of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Armenia, as well as the representatives of Azerbaijan,
Türkiye and the European Union.
We are concerned about the humanitarian situation
of the civilian populations living in the Karabakh
region. According to the latest report of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, they are facing shortages
of food, medicines and medical equipment, basic
hygiene products and essential services. The situation
is particularly urgent for vulnerable people — children,
the sick, pregnant women and the elderly — whose
survival depends almost exclusively on humanitarian
aid. My country reiterates that the humanitarian
situation must be addressed as a matter of priority,
urgently and without any politicization. The parties must
adhere strictly to their obligations under international
humanitarian law and in particular should not hinder
the access of humanitarian personnel or the movement
of people and goods. Access to the Karabakh region
must absolutely be guaranteed in order to prevent the
daily lives of its residents from becoming even more
precarious. It is also essential to ensure that the sick are
able to receive their treatments without any break in
care, and that all medical evacuations, where necessary,
are carried out under satisfactory conditions.
My country remains convinced that the crisis
between Azerbaijan and Armenia must be resolved
through dialogue, in compliance with international law.
To that end, discussions aimed at a political settlement
must continue with a view to preventing any resurgence
of large-scale armed conflict and ultimately achieving
a complete, definitive and irreversible resolution of
the conflict.
We call on the parties to implement the existing
agreements and to continue their negotiations on
the basis of the framework set out in the tripartite
agreement of 10 November 2021, as well as subsequent
joint declarations, in order to reach agreement on
crucial outstanding issues, in particular the signing
of a peace treaty and the demarcation of borders.
Whatever happens, there is clearly an urgent need to
reduce tensions along the border and pave the way for
successful results from the forthcoming negotiations in
Brussels. That will require the parties to demonstrate

S/PV.9397

responsibility by refraining from resorting to military
threats, inflammatory rhetoric or hate speech aimed at
stirring up historical fears.
In conclusion, I want to call on all parties to
capitalize on the positive developments in May and
July in order to move resolutely towards peace and a
normalization of relations between the two countries.
My country commends all the facilitators involved
in the process and encourages the regional initiatives
aimed at promoting the construction of a lasting peace.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank Ms. Wosornu
for her update on the situation in the Lachin corridor.
I also welcome the delegations of Armenia, led by its
Foreign Minister, and of Azerbaijan, Türkiye and the
European Union to this meeting.
We are concerned about the reports of a
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Karabakh.
The reports of a further tightening of the roadblock in
June, preventing assistance to the civilian population,
including vulnerable individuals and those in poor
health conditions, are particularly worrying.
Brazil reaffirms its commitment to respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Armenia and
Azerbaijan within their internationally recognized
borders. Measures to reinforce border controls,
however, must take into account the basic principles
of humanitarian law in order to prevent or limit the
suffering of innocent civilians. We want to emphasize
that the persistence of the current stalemate, regardless
of its causes, threatens the well-being and lives of
thousands of people. We urge the parties to explore
mechanisms to ensure unimpeded humanitarian access
to Karabakh, including the feasibility of the AghdamKhankendi route. We consider it essential to find an
urgent solution to the crisis, which may become even
worse in the coming months as winter approaches.
Brazil understands that the conflict originates
from a complex situation that extends over generations.
Thousands of people have lost their lives. We believe it
is essential to stop the cycle of violence, and that means
abandoning the aggressive rhetoric adopted by some of
those involved and strengthening confidence-building
measures. Brazil, which has a vibrant community of
Armenian descent, encourages the preservation of
dialogue channels between the parties and underscores
its support for the terms of the ceasefire agreement.
The trilateral declaration of 9 November 2020 offers
a road map for peacebuilding. It will be essential for

23-242093/19

S/PV.9397

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

the parties to adhere to the commitments they made
at that time and remain engaged in the pursuit of a
definitive solution to the conflict. The Council should
follow developments there with close attention and a
committed willingness to help where possible.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank the representative from the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs for her briefing. I also welcome the presence
among us today of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Armenia. I want to stress three points.
First, the restrictions and total blockade of traffic on
the corridor linking Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh,
which have now lasted for more than eight months, are
causing a humanitarian crisis. Azerbaijan’s blockade of
the Lachin corridor continues to isolate the population
of Nagorno-Karabakh from the rest of the world without
any legitimate justification for a situation that runs
counter to the principles of international humanitarian
law. Combined with the interruption of gas and
electricity supplies, the drying up of water resources,
the difficulties that the population has encountered
in obtaining seeds and the shortage of fuel, all of
which are hampering agricultural work, that situation
is now degenerating into a humanitarian crisis. The
risk of famine and widespread shortages, including of
medicines, is imminent.
France deplores the blocking of the humanitarian
aid convoy that the Armenian authorities sent in July in
an attempt to remedy a tragic situation. The restrictions
and obstacles imposed on the activities of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
humanitarian actors in violation of international law are
unacceptable. In view of the gravity of the humanitarian
situation, France calls for the unconditional and
immediate restoration of the free movement of goods,
persons and merchandise along the Lachin corridor in
both directions, and for an uninterrupted supply of gas
and electricity to the population.
After our last open meeting (see S/PV.9228),
the International Court of Justice issued an order on
22 February 2023 indicating provisional measures that
are binding and require Azerbaijan, in accordance with
its obligations under the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
to take all possible measures available to it to ensure the
unimpeded movement of persons, vehicles and goods
along the Lachin corridor in both directions. In its order
4/19

16/08/2023

of 6 July 2023, noting the precariousness of the situation
between the parties, the Court confirmed the need for
effective implementation of the measures indicated in
its February order. Echoing the statement issued by the
Secretary-General on 2 August (SG/SM/21896), France
once again calls on Azerbaijan to comply with its
international obligations and in particular to implement
the provisional measures indicated by the International
Court of Justice.
Given the seriousness of the situation, France
commends the action of the ICRC on the ground.
We will step up our support for its activities, and
we call for immediate, free and unhindered access
for humanitarian organizations and United Nations
agencies to the populations concerned and for a
reopening of the Lachin corridor. France also remains
fully committed to promoting a lasting and just peace
in the region. We therefore call for a resumption of
negotiations aimed at resolving all outstanding issues,
including rights and guarantees for the population of
Nagorno-Karabakh. That can be achieved only through
dialogue without any use or threats of force. Alongside
the European Union, France will continue to contribute
to efforts to promote dialogue between Armenia and
Azerbaijan. We fully support and actively participate
in the mediation efforts led by the European Union to
promote a normalization process.
We will support the quest for progress on all the
subjects under negotiation, particularly the draft peace
treaty, border demarcation, humanitarian issues and
the opening of communication routes. France is at the
disposal of the parties to contribute to those goals, in
liaison with all partners and stakeholders.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Ms. Wosornu,
Director of Operations and Advocacy at the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for
her briefing.
We have taken note of the letters from Armenia
and Azerbaijan distributed to the Security Council. The
arguments of the two sides offer different explanations.
However, safeguarding local livelihoods must be the top
priority. The lives of the most vulnerable — including
those who are sick and chronically ill, infirm or elderly
and women and children — must not be threatened.
We would like to emphasize the Secretary-General’s
concern about the reports of continued challenges to
freedom of movement along the Lachin corridor and
the deteriorating humanitarian situation on the ground.
23-24209

16/08/2023

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

The International Committee of the Red Cross is
currently facing difficulties in bringing humanitarian
assistance to the civilian population through the Lachin
corridor or any other routes.
It is calling on the relevant decision-makers to let
it resume its essential humanitarian operations in the
area. There must be no impediments to humanitarian
access for international organizations. We urge all the
parties to grant access as soon as possible. In addition,
the International Court of Justice indicated provisional
measures on 22 February related to ensuring the
unimpeded movement of persons, vehicles and cargo
along the Lachin corridor in both directions. We
reiterate our consistent position that the rule of law
must be upheld and that every nation must abide by
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations and international humanitarian law.
A final settlement of the conflict between
Azerbaijan and Armenia is crucial to peace and stability
in the Caucasus region. The Security Council, which
is tasked with maintaining international peace and
security, should be committed to the issue. Dialogue
between Armenia and Azerbaijan is important. We
hope that it will allow the issues related to their dispute
to be resolved peacefully and in accordance with
international law.
Mr. Boateng (Ghana): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Madam President, for convening this
meeting on the situation in Nagorno-Karabakh. We
listened carefully to the briefing provided by Ms. Edem
Wosornu, Director of Operations of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and we want to
encourage an enhanced United Nations engagement to
support the parties in finding a durable solution to the
long-standing conflict that continues to ravage peace
in the region.
Against a backdrop of fresh tensions, hate speech and
dangerous rhetoric regarding the situation, we welcome
the participation in today’s meeting of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Armenia and the representative of
Azerbaijan and look forward to hearing their views,
which we hope will help the Council in its efforts to
address the main challenges. We also welcome the
participation in the meeting of the representative of
Türkiye and the representative of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations. It is imperative
that our messages today enjoin the parties to engage
meaningfully with all regional and multilateral

S/PV.9397

processes in order to resolve the conflict peacefully,
based on established, mutually acceptable principles.
In that regard, we would like to point to previous efforts
by regional actors, including the ceasefire declared
in the trilateral statement agreed to by the leaders of
Armenia, Azerbaijan and the Russian Federation on
9 November 2020, and we emphasize the urgent need
for the parties to recommit to its full implementation.
As we have previously underlined, we encourage
strong international mediation efforts, appropriately
framed and supported, to help douse the flames of
intense animosity, mutual distrust and discontent
between the parties and facilitate an effective political
process for peace. We encourage the SecretaryGeneral’s good-offices role, urge the reactivated
engagement of the co-Chairs of the Minsk Group of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and note the positive role that has been played by the
Collective Security Treaty Organization. Moreover,
we encourage the parties to fully embrace the ongoing
mediation efforts and talks under the auspices of
the Council of the European Union. We believe that
the outcomes of those discussions, including the
demarcation and delimitation of borders, will help to
reduce tensions, facilitate the normalization of relations
and set the stage for negotiating a future peace treaty
between Armenia and Azerbaijan. We hold that open
military confrontation and war serve no one’s interests,
including those of the parties, but rather exacerbate the
suffering of civilians, particularly women, children, the
elderly and other vulnerable segments of the population.
On that score, it is paramount that we work with all
the parties and actors concerned to ensure unimpeded
access for humanitarian actors to the population in
the region as well as the people’s access to goods and
services. The Lachin corridor and other acceptable,
viable routes are vital in that endeavour and serve
as a critical link in ensuring the right of access to
health care and essential services and goods, and to
freedom of movement. We therefore urge the effective
implementation of the orders of the International Court
of Justice, including that issued on 22 February and
reaffirmed on 6 July, related to measures to ensure
the unimpeded movement of persons, vehicles and
cargo along the Lachin corridor in both directions.
We reiterate that actions that could potentially create a
humanitarian catastrophe and needlessly put civilians at
risk undercut our shared values and violate international

23-242095/19

S/PV.9397

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

16/08/2023

norms, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.

our view, that is what both countries need, what their
populations deserve and what the region must have.

For the sake of international peace and security,
we call on the parties to immediately de-escalate the
situation and to guarantee the security, rights and
freedoms of all ethnic populations and the right of all
others who have been displaced to return. Finally, both
parties must respect their obligations by refraining
from actions that foster mistrust, erode confidence and
complicate efforts to find an amicable settlement to this
cyclical conflict.

We are well aware that the road is still uphill and
bumpy and that a number of problems persist. As we
have seen in various reports and as we heard from
Ms. Wosornu, the parties continue to express serious
concerns, tensions have continued near the ArmeniaAzerbaijan border and there are important pending
issues that need particular and continued attention.
We have been following the recent developments
concerning the Lachin road very closely. We note that
the positions of the two countries on the issue differ
sharply. From January to August of this year, there have
been close to 60 letters addressed by both parties to
the Security Council. While each side develops its own
narrative on the situation, one aspect is more striking
than any other — a profound lack of trust between the
parties on the best ways to deal with the situation of
the Azerbaijani citizens of Armenian descent living in
the country, and the urgent need for the parties to get
together and work seriously to resolve all related issues.

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Allow me to thank
Ms. Wosornu for her briefing.
Since the last Security Council meeting on this
issue in December of last year (see S/PV.9228),
there have been new developments, some of them
positive and very encouraging. We welcome and
applaud the intensification of the Armenia-Azerbaijan
normalization process. Following the negotiations on
a peace treaty held in the United States in early May,
leaders of both countries have had meetings in Brussels
and other European capitals. The leaders of Armenia
and Azerbaijan have publicly reaffirmed their firm
commitment to the Alma-Ata Declaration of 1991 and
the territorial integrity of their countries. Given their
difficult past, that firm commitment by both countries
to respecting each other’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity as neighbours and their readiness to deal with
and resolve their disputes by peaceful means, on the
basis of respect for the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, are of paramount importance.
We welcome the commitment of both parties to a
long-term negotiation plan for a comprehensive peace
agreement, and as stated by Charles Michel, President
of the European Council, only a month ago, the current
efforts represent “one of the most comprehensive and
vigorous stages of negotiations between Armenia and
Azerbaijan”. In that respect, we welcome the plans for
the construction of a railway connection, which should
take place without delay. We want to believe that the
parties will be swift to accept the offer and the readiness
of the European Union to contribute financially to
the project. Establishing a rail link could prove a
strong confidence-building measure and symbolize
cooperation in advancing shared interests, laying the
groundwork for further diplomatic and economic
cooperation between Armenia and Azerbaijan. In
6/19

We reiterate our principled position that
humanitarian needs must not be politicized or used to
echo other grievances. Humanitarian needs anywhere,
including in the Nagorno-Karabakh region, should only
be met.
We are absolutely confident that there is enough
room to discuss openly and seriously all the issues
related to the expressed humanitarian concerns and
the freedom of movement through the Lachin road,
including by exploring other possibilities, on the one
hand, and any legitimate security concerns, on the
other hand. We believe that when humanitarian issues
are at stake, everything must be done, and every
option explored, including, in this respect, the use of
other roads, such as the proposed one from Aghdam
to Khankandi, for the same and only purpose, namely,
to respond quickly and responsibly and provide
delivery of goods to the region. We strongly encourage
efforts from both sides to ensure that the needs of the
population are met.
More broadly, we think that the parties should
work with the same sense of urgency to deal with all
other issues — to delimit the border and de-mine and
demilitarize it — through good-faith cooperation,
in order to provide the necessary sense of security
and avoid accidents and incidents, which, given
the volatility of the situation, could quickly lead to
23-24209

16/08/2023

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

heightened tensions and clashes. The parties should
avoid unnecessary speculation and heightened rhetoric
and, above all, serve the main purpose, which is to
make progress towards building a future in cooperation
and friendship.
We know that the legacy of 30 years of a painful
frozen conflict will not be overcome overnight, but
the new realities and the determination shown recently
by the parties must be fully exploited. In the most
friendly and sincere way, we urge both parties to,
instead of competing on the communication front in
an unproductive blame game, get together to work to
establish greater cooperation, make more contacts at
various levels, take steps to increase confidence and
help address all issues. Nothing should impede such an
approach, which in our view is the only way conducive
to bringing about a new and positive reality in ArmeniaAzerbaijan relations. In this respect, we also encourage
direct talks between the representatives of the Armenian
community in Azerbaijan and the Government.
Let me reiterate the importance of pursuing the
path of diplomacy as the best way to move forward
and overcome the bitter legacy of a conflict that has
kept the people of two neighbouring countries apart
with huge consequences. It is high time to invest in
shared benefits.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Director Wosornu for her briefing. I also welcome
the His Excellency Mr. Ararat Mirzoyan, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Armenia, and the representative of
Azerbaijan, to today’s meeting.
China takes note of the recent letters from Armenia
to the President of the Security Council and from
Azerbaijan to the Secretary-General on the situation
in the Lachin corridor. We also take note of the recent
statement by the spokesperson for the SecretaryGeneral (SG/SM/21896).
China has been closely following the developments
in the situation and consistently advocates that
disputes concerning the Lachin corridor should be
settled through dialogue and consultation. We hope
and believe that the parties concerned will properly
settle all issues, including the humanitarian situation,
through diplomatic efforts.
Armenia and Azerbaijan are neighbours. It is in
the fundamental interest of both countries to achieve
common security and common development through

S/PV.9397

cooperation. In recent years, Armenia, Azerbaijan and
Russia have successively issued four joint statements,
making arrangements, inter alia, for the cessation of
hostilities, economic and transport cooperation and
border issues, respectively. Recently, Armenia and
Azerbaijan carried out a series of engagements and
dialogues through the mediation of relevant parties,
demonstrating the political will and concrete actions of
both countries to resolve issues in dispute peacefully
through diplomatic means.
We encourage Armenia and Azerbaijan to continue
to meet each other halfway on the basis of the four joint
statements and the efforts made in the recent period
and under the mediation of relevant parties, including
Russia, and to properly settle the disputes between
them in accordance with universally recognized
principles of international law and the norms governing
international relations. China supports any diplomatic
efforts conducive to realizing this goal and will play a
constructive role in this regard.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Director Wosornu for
her briefing.
Malta is deeply concerned about the situation in the
Nagorno-Karabakh region, including the humanitarian
situation aggravated by the blockade of the Lachin
corridor. It is deplorable that citizens in the region
continue to be deprived of such essential goods as food,
medicine and fuel, which has affected the functioning
of medical and educational institutions. Malta calls for
the immediate and unconditional end to this blockade.
The implications of this situation on the local
population and the lack of humanitarian access to the
region are serious and will only worsen as time goes
by if there is no form of redress or remedy. Unimpeded
humanitarian access must be given. We appeal to the
Azerbaijani authorities to restore free access to the
Nagorno-Karabakh region and refrain from further
violations of the trilateral statement of 9 November
2020, international humanitarian law and orders of the
International Court of Justice. We also take note of the
expressed readiness of the Azerbaijani authorities to
supply goods via the city of Aghdam. Nevertheless, this
should not be seen as an alternative to the reopening of
the Lachin corridor.
Malta calls for an immediate de-escalation of the
situation and highlights the importance of reconciliation
between both parties in order to prevent unnecessary
hardship and loss of life. Everyone, especially society’s

23-242097/19

S/PV.9397

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

most vulnerable groups, including women, children,
the elderly and persons with disability, who should be
effectively protected and whose well-being should be
prioritized, must have easy access to basic and essential
goods. Women and girls who are internally displaced
or are in refugee-like situations often face intersecting
forms of discrimination, have limited access to
education, employment, health care and housing and
are inadequately protected from gender-based violence.
Malta strongly believes that humanitarian access must
not be politicized under any circumstance by any of the
actors involved and continues to support and commends
the work carried out by the International Committee
of the Red Cross in the region, and by local women’s
organizations that have provided services to victims of
domestic violence, psychosocial support, and sanitary
and hygiene products.
Malta remains fully committed to constructive
dialogue between Armenia and Azerbaijan and to longlasting peace and stability in the South Caucasus. We
encourage confidence-building measures by both the
Armenian and Azerbaijani leadership to overcome
differences and guarantee the safety and security of
citizens in the region. Armenian women in all their
diversity continue to be marginalized in all stages of
peace and reconstruction processes. Only inclusive
dialogue and diplomacy can ensure a peaceful
settlement to the situation and guarantee an outcome
that is beneficial for the people. In this context, Malta
encourages the direct engagement between both sides
in order to reach a quick resolution to the conflict.
Malta reaffirms its support for a negotiated and
comprehensive solution for the Nagorno-Karabakh
conflict and is supportive of the efforts by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s
Minsk Group in pursuing this objective. The continued
engagement by the European Union in facilitating
the peaceful resolution of issues between both sides
is strongly commended. There is no other viable way
forward but to continue working together to overcome
the differences and guarantee the safety and security of
citizens in the region.
In conclusion, Malta reiterates its call for the
immediate removal of the blockade imposed in the Lachin
corridor and for the restoration of freedom of movement
of people and goods in the Nagorno-Karabakh region
in both directions. We continue to fully support efforts
leading to sustainable peace, security and prosperity.
8/19

16/08/2023

Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks Ms. Wosornu for her briefing and
expresses its appreciation for the indispensable work
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. We welcome His Excellency Mr. Ararat
Mirzoyan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Armenia,
and the representatives of Azerbaijan, Türkiye and the
European Union, to today’s meeting.
Switzerland supports a peaceful settlement of
the differences between Armenia and Azerbaijan,
and it commends the efforts made by the parties and
several diplomatic players in this respect. We regret the
renewed tension that has been observed over the last
few months. In this context, we are deeply concerned
by the growing deterioration of the humanitarian
situation following the restrictions on access through
the Lachin corridor. Women, men and children are
finding themselves in an increasingly difficult position,
faced with a shortage of medicines and products
essential to their survival. Restrictions on access have
a profound impact on the most vulnerable, especially
children, the sick, the elderly, people with disabilities
and pregnant women. The situation is untenable and
must be resolved without delay.
It is vital to restore the free passage of civilians
and essential goods. We call on the parties to respect
the commitments made, notably in the trilateral
statement of November 2020. The International Court
of Justice has called on Azerbaijan to take all measures
at its disposal to ensure the unimpeded movement of
people, vehicles and goods along the Lachin corridor
in both directions. We call for compliance with the
Court’s decisions.
In addition, the parties must take urgent steps
to facilitate safe, rapid and unhindered access for
humanitarian actors to civilians in need, as required
by international humanitarian law. We join in the
call of the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) to the parties on 25 July to find a humanitarian
consensus to ensure that impartial humanitarian aid
reaches those who depend on it. The ICRC must be able
to resume its humanitarian operations in the region
without impediments.
We recognize the diplomatic efforts undertaken
to achieve a lasting peace between Armenia and
Azerbaijan. The pursuit of constructive dialogue and
the implementation of agreements on the ground, based
on respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity,
23-24209

16/08/2023

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

as well as the protection of minority rights, remain
fundamental to building confidence for a long-term
solution. We call on the parties to take de-escalation
measures and intensify their efforts to normalize
relations and reach a peace treaty. Switzerland remains
ready to promote those efforts through its good offices
if both parties so wish.
As a Council, we must do everything in our power to
support the efforts to resolve the remaining differences
peacefully and prevent a humanitarian catastrophe
from developing.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Director of Operations and Advocacy of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
Ms. Edem Wosornu, for her briefing. I acknowledge the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Armenia
and the representatives of Azerbaijan, Türkiye and the
European Union.
Ecuador takes note of the letters from Armenia
and Azerbaijan on the situation in the Lachin corridor,
circulated in the Security Council on 11 and 14 August,
respectively. We note with concern the briefings on the
problems related to freedom of movement in the Lachin
corridor, which seriously affects the humanitarian
situation and threatens to destabilize the region.
The implications of this situation for the supply
of basic necessities, such as food and medicine, to the
local population are of great concern. We call on the
parties to comply with the agreements expressed in the
trilateral statement of 9 November 2020, starting with
the Russian-mediated ceasefire, and to take urgent steps
to facilitate access for the delivery of humanitarian aid
to the civilian population.
We reiterate Ecuador’s position that in all cases the
parties must comply with the orders and decisions of
the principal judicial organ of this Organization. We
therefore recall the orders of the International Court
of Justice on this case, including those of February
and July, related to measures to ensure the unimpeded
movement of persons, vehicles and cargo along the
Lachin corridor in both directions.
We urge the parties to accelerate peace efforts
anchored in human rights and to refrain from any
actions that could exacerbate tensions and deteriorate
the humanitarian and security situation of the
civilian population.

S/PV.9397

Ecuador hopes that negotiation efforts will continue
in search of a sustainable solution to the conflict that
will allow for the de-escalation of tensions, will fulfil
the agreements reached in 2020 and will ensure the free
and safe movement through the Lachin corridor. To
that end, we reiterate our support for the revitalization
and strengthening of peace efforts in the framework of
the Minsk Group of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and in all available frameworks,
initiatives and tools for peaceful settlement, including
the peace efforts of the European Union.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Edem
Wosornu for her thorough briefing, and I welcome
the participation of His Excellency Mr. Ararat
Mirzoyan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Armenia,
and the representatives of Azerbaijan, Türkiye and the
European Union in this meeting.
The United Arab Emirates is closely following the
evolving situation along the border between Armenia
and Azerbaijan and took note of the letters sent in the
past week on developments in the region, both from
Armenia to the President of the Security Council and
from Azerbaijan to the Secretary-General. We also
took note of the Secretary-General’s statement dated
2 August (SG/SM/21896) and appreciate his call to
facilitate the passage of humanitarian aid to those in
dire need. Furthermore, we acknowledge the role of the
United Nations in providing humanitarian assistance as
stipulated in General Assembly resolutions 46/182 and
58/114.
The United Arab Emirates stresses the necessity
of providing basic goods — such as food, medicine
and fuel — and ensuring that they reach those in
need, as well as the necessity of providing medical
assistance and care in a timely manner. Moreover, we
commend the efforts of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, and we welcome the resumption of
medical evacuations.
We remain concerned about the tensions between
Armenia and Azerbaijan, and we call once again on all
parties to de-escalate and exercise restraint by avoiding
unilateral measures or rhetoric that could result in dire
humanitarian consequences or impede the achievement
of a lasting peace. We therefore call on the two parties
to continue resolving their differences peacefully
through dialogue and diplomatic means, in line with

23-242099/19

S/PV.9397

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

the principles of international law, international norms
and the Charter of the United Nations.
In that context, the United Arab Emirates
encourages Armenia and Azerbaijan to continue
engaging constructively and in good faith in the
ongoing mediation efforts. We welcome the ongoing
talks, including those held recently in Brussels,
Moscow and Washington, as such efforts are important
to establish lasting peace. We look forward to seeing
concrete progress in that regard that leads to meeting
the aspirations and interests of both peoples.
Now is the time for peace. Through its active
engagement with Armenia and Azerbaijan, the
United Arab Emirates will continue its support for all
efforts that promote stability, dialogue and peaceful
coexistence between the two countries.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique thanks
the United States presidency for convening this
important meeting. Our gratitude is extended to the
Director of Operations and Advocacy of Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Edem
Wosornu, for the updates she just shared with us. They
provide further insight into the difficult humanitarian
situation in the Nagorno-Karabakh region.
We welcome the participation in this meeting of His
Excellency Mr. Ararat Mirzoyan, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Armenia. We also welcome
the presence of the representatives of Azerbaijan and
Türkiye and the delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations.
We have taken note of the content of the letter
dated 11 August 2023 from the Permanent Mission of
the Republic of Armenia and the letter dated 14 August
2023 from the Permanent Mission of the Republic of
Azerbaijan, both addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council. In that
regard, Mozambique would like to express its deep
concern about the reported difficulties faced in the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need
in the Nagorno-Karabakh region. We believe that
it is the primary responsibility of all States under
international humanitarian law to protect civilians in
conflict situations by ensuring, inter alia, the provision
of essential services, including food and health care.
We therefore urge Armenia and Azerbaijan to ensure
that the vulnerable population has unimpeded access to
humanitarian aid.
10/19

16/08/2023

We also call on the parties involved to remain
committed to the agreements reached thus far, including
the trilateral statement of 9 November 2020 by
Armenia, Azerbaijan and the Russian Federation. More
importantly, we appeal to the parties to abide by the
relevant decisions of the International Court of Justice
on the matter. It is our strong belief that the bilateral
issues between the two countries must be resolved
through diplomatic means so as to foster mutual trust
and achieve a peaceful and lasting solution to the
conflict in full respect of their sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence.
Mozambique attaches great importance to the role
of the regional and international actors that have been
actively involved in supporting and facilitating the
peace process between the Republic of Armenia and the
Republic of Azerbaijan. In that regard, we encourage
their continuous and active engagement in seeking that
the parties return to negotiations and avoid hostilities
in the supreme interests of peace and for the benefit
of good neighbourliness between their two peoples and
countries. We highly value the continuation of the good
offices of the Secretary-General. In the same vein,
we strongly encourage the peace mediation efforts
of the Minsk Group of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the European Union
for the normalization of relations between Armenia
and Azerbaijan.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank
Ms. Wosornu for the helpful update. I also welcome the
participation of Armenian Foreign Minister Mirzoyan
and the representatives of Azerbaijan, Türkiye and the
European Union at this meeting.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the ongoing disruption to the Lachin corridor,
which threatens the supply of life-saving medication,
health care and other essential goods and services,
resulting in humanitarian consequences for the local
population. It is therefore crucial that the order of the
International Court of Justice of February 2023 be
respected to ensure unimpeded movement along the
Lachin corridor in both directions. We strongly urge
the parties to allow the International Committee of the
Red Cross access along all available routes, including
via the Lachin corridor, for the organization to be able
to undertake its vital work. All parties must refrain
from the politicization of humanitarian aid in order to
meet the needs of the civilian population.
23-24209

16/08/2023

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

We warmly welcome the ongoing, internationally
mediated negotiations between Armenia and Azerbaijan
towards a peace agreement, hosted most recently by
European Council President Michel last month. We
also welcome the efforts of the United States in that
regard, with the high-level engagement from Secretary
Blinken. We urge all parties to redouble their efforts
in those talks towards a lasting settlement. It is only
diplomacy, in the spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations, that will bring both sides closer to peace.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the Director of Operations
and Advocacy of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Wosornu, for her briefing.
We are concerned about the continuing blockade
of the Lachin corridor. Measures on the ground are
now needed more than ever to de-escalate the situation
surrounding Nagorno-Karabakh as soon as possible,
including lifting the blockade of the Lachin corridor
and using other humanitarian routes. With the support
of both sides, the Russian Federation is making every
effort to resolve the current crisis situation as soon as
possible and to facilitate the normalization of relations
between our friendly countries of Azerbaijan and
Armenia and in general. We are doing everything
possible through political and diplomatic channels at
all levels and through the Russian peacekeeping force
on the ground to avert a humanitarian disaster in the
region. We continue to remain actively engaged with all
parties involved to rapidly resume the stable provision
of food, medicine, other essential goods, electricity and
gas to Nagorno-Karabakh.
The series of statements by the President of Russia,
the President of Azerbaijan and the Prime Minister of
Armenia made from 2020 to 2022 remain the only road
map for reconciliation between Baku and Yerevan. The
potential of the trilateral agreements has hardly been
exhausted. Their key aspects consist in the delimitation
and subsequent demarcation of the ArmenianAzerbaijani border with Russia’s expert assistance;
unblocking transport links within the framework of
the trilateral working group, co-chaired by the Deputy
Prime Ministers of Russia, Azerbaijan and Armenia;
paving the way towards the negotiation of a ArmenianAzerbaijani peace treaty; and promoting dialogue
between parliamentarians and opinion leaders. In each
of those areas, there has been some progress. Russia is
determined to continue working to that end.

S/PV.9397

Achieving Armenian-Azerbaijani reconciliation
will be inconceivable until there are clear and reliable
security guarantees and respect for the rights of the
inhabitants of Nagorno-Karabakh, based on universally
recognized international principles in line with the laws
of Azerbaijan. That rationale is predicated upon the
repeated confirmation of recent agreements between
the leaders of Armenia and Azerbaijan on both sides’
mutual recognition of one another’s territorial integrity
in accordance with the Alma-Ata Declaration of 1991.
During the talks among the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Russia, Azerbaijan and Armenia in Moscow
on 25 July, we proposed realistic compromises to
de-escalate the tension, which both sides took under
consideration. This would entail the parallel opening
of corridors through Aghdam and Lachin to allow for
the movement of civilians and non-military goods.
That would create the necessary preconditions for the
early launch of direct talks between the authorized
representatives of the official Baku and the Armenian
population of Nagorno-Karabakh. The mutual
commitments of the parties to refrain from politicizing
purely humanitarian issues are no less imperative. We
trust that all participants in the process will find the
political will to overcome their differences in order to
alleviate the plight of the tens of thousands people living
in Nagorno-Karabakh and establish lasting dialogue in
the Baku-Stepanakert format.
We stand ready to work with all responsible
actors interested in the normalization of the situation
of Nagorno-Karabakh and Armenian-Azerbaijani
reconciliation, in general. Those who truly support
that scenario, based on the fundamental interests of the
Armenian and Azerbaijani peoples, should set aside all
geopolitical and domestic political considerations. We
also call for a responsible approach to the use of the
Security Council as a platform in this context. In any
case, these problems should be resolved between Baku
and Yerevan, and no externally imposed plans and
solutions can replace dialogue between them. For our
part, we will continue to encourage that and work to
bring the parties closer to a genuine good-neighbourly
solution, including by using the capabilities of the
Russian peacekeeping contingent.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States of
America.
Let me start by thanking Director Wosornu for
being here with us this afternoon.

23-2420911/19

S/PV.9397

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

The United States is concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Nagorno-Karabakh. We are
deeply troubled by the closure of the Lachin corridor,
which has cut off people’s access to essential goods
and exacerbated the humanitarian situation. Access to
food, medicine, baby formula and energy should never
be held hostage. We urge the Government of Azerbaijan
to restore free movement through the corridor so that
commercial, humanitarian and private vehicles can
reach the population of Nagorno-Karabakh. We also
note the possibility of compromise on additional routes
for humanitarian supplies and understand that since
December, the International Committee of the Red
Cross has facilitated medical transfers for more than
700 people in need of medical care, thanks to a critical
lifeline for medically vulnerable individuals through
the Lachin corridor. Neutral, impartial, humane and
independent humanitarian access and assistance,
including medical transfers, must not be hindered,
full stop.
I want to stress the need for the parties to continue
talks aimed at a lasting, peaceful resolution to the
conflict and the normalization of relations between
Armenia and Azerbaijan. Those peace discussions
require all the parties to exercise creativity, flexibility
and compromise. Let me be clear. Peace in the region
must include protections for the rights and security of
individuals in Nagorno-Karabakh. The United States
urges restraint and the immediate cessation of any
activities that undermine the peace process and calls on
all sides to fully meet their obligations under international
humanitarian law. The international community must
continue to engage diplomatically to facilitate dialogue
and a durable, dignified peace. Negotiations are vital to
a lasting peace, and we support any format that enables
Armenia and Azerbaijan to continue dialogue towards
a peaceful resolution to the conflict. We encourage all
the parties to engage in direct talks, including between
officials in Baku and representatives of the population
of Nagorno-Karabakh. The United States is committed
to promoting a peaceful, democratic and prosperous
future for the South Caucasus region, and we will
continue to engage bilaterally and multilaterally with
all partners to help build that brighter future.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Armenia.
12/19

16/08/2023

Mr. Mirzoyan (Armenia): I would like to thank
the Security Council for convening this urgent
meeting to discuss the humanitarian situation in
Nagorno-Karabakh that has resulted from the eightmonth-long blockade of the Lachin corridor, the vital
road connecting Nagorno-Karabakh with Armenia and
the outer world. I am here today to seek the support of
the Council in maintaining the prospect of reaching just
and comprehensive peace and stability in our region,
which has been seriously undermined by Azerbaijan in
the context of the humanitarian calamity on the ground
in Nagorno-Karabakh.
Over the past two years, with the help of the
international community, Armenia has spared no effort
to establish peace and stability in our region, and I
believe that today we still have the opportunity to
reach that aim. But the current humanitarian situation
in Nagorno-Karabakh has the full potential to worsen
the prospects for peace in the entire South Caucasus
region and beyond. Today I would like to elaborate
on that situation, and I ask Council members to make
judgments based not on justifications that they may
consider to be true or false but on values and facts.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights starts
with the recognition of the inherent dignity and the
equal and inalienable rights of all members of the
human family as the foundation of freedom, justice and
peace in the world. Regardless of where they live, all
human beings are entitled to their human rights and
dignity and should be treated with the greatest possible
respect and care even in times of war. The people of
Nagorno-Karabakh have unfortunately been deprived
of that and have found themselves in a situation of total
siege. I would now like to present the events, facts and
figures that show the current realities in blockaded
Nagorno-Karabakh.
On 9 November 2020, a trilateral statement
was signed by the leaders of Armenia, Russia and
Azerbaijan. According to its paragraph 6:
“The Lachin corridor (5 kilometres wide),
which will provide a connection between
Nagorno-Karabakh and Armenia […] shall remain
under the control of the Russian Federation
peacemaking forces.”
On 12 December 2022, Azerbaijan blocked the
Lachin corridor on a fake pretext of environmental
concerns. Since then, the gradual exhaustion of the
area’s limited domestic stocks has resulted in an acute
23-24209

16/08/2023

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

food shortage and closures of stores. Prior to the
blockade, around 90 per cent of all the food consumed
was imported from Armenia. With each passing day
the people of Nagorno-Karabakh are therefore deprived
of 400 tons of essential goods. There is currently a
severe lack of food, including nutrition for children and
staples such as flour and sugar, as well as medicine and
fuel. Moreover, due to the lack of fuel and Azerbaijan’s
targeting of workers, almost all agricultural work has
halted. As a result, approximately 10,000 hectares
of land adjacent to the contact line have remained
uncultivated. On 20 December 2022 the Council
discussed the issue for the first time (see S/PV.9228),
and the great majority of Council members called on
Azerbaijan to lift the blockade.
Since December 2022, periodically, and since
March 2023, completely — about 180 days in
total — Azerbaijan has disrupted the only supply of
natural gas to Nagorno-Karabakh. That has already
had a number of adverse humanitarian consequences,
such as disruptions to the work of hospitals, to the
educational process in schools and kindergartens and
the work of vitally important institutions and social
services, the inability of many to heat their homes
by gas and of many households to access hot water,
as well as a lack of fuel for vehicles. Since 9 January,
more than 210 days now, Azerbaijan has disrupted
the supply of electricity through the sole high-voltage
line between Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh. With
limited local sources of electricity to rely on since then,
Nagorno-Karabakh has had to implement rolling power
outages with only a few hours of energy supply.
On 22 February, the International Court of
Justice indicated a provisional measure in the ongoing
case concerning Application of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination (Armenia v. Azerbaijan), according to
which Azerbaijan shall:
“take all measures to ensure unimpeded movement
of persons, vehicles and cargo along the Lachin
corridor in both directions”.
On 23 April, Azerbaijan, in violation of the Court’s
decision and the trilateral statement of 9 November
2020, installed a checkpoint at the Lachin corridor.
On 15 June, Azerbaijan went further, fully blocking
the Lachin corridor by banning any access to
Nagorno-Karabakh, even humanitarian access,
including for the International Committee of the Red

S/PV.9397

Cross (ICRC), which could have provided some food,
medicine and fuel, among other things.
On 6 July 2023, the International Court of Justice
reaffirmed its provisional measure of 22 February 2023.
On 25 July, the ICRC — the only international
humanitarian organization that has been operating in
Nagorno-Karabakh for more than 30 years — stated:
“Despite persistent efforts, the ICRC is not
currently able to bring humanitarian assistance to
the civilian population through the Lachin corridor
or through any other routes.”
On 26 July, the Republic of Armenia sent a
humanitarian convoy which, even now, remains at the
entrance of the Lachin corridor, as the Azerbaijani side
denies it access.
On 2 August, the Secretary-General reiterated his
deep concern over the challenges related to the freedom
of movement along the Lachin corridor, recalling the
previous statement on the need to implement the orders
of the ICJ, “including the orders issued on 22 February
2023 and reaffirmed on 6 July 2023, related to measures
to ensure unimpeded movement of persons, vehicles
and cargo along the Lachin corridor in both directions”
(SG/SM/21896). The Secretary-General further
expressed particular concern about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation on the ground and called for
“urgent steps to facilitate access for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to people in need” (ibid.).
On 7 August, a group of United Nations human
rights experts — the Special Rapporteur on the right to
food, the Special Rapporteur on the right to education,
the Independent Expert on the enjoyment of all human
rights by older persons and the Special Rapporteur on
the rights of persons with disabilities — expressed
alarm over the ongoing blockade of the Lachin corridor
by Azerbaijan and the dire humanitarian crisis in
Nagorno-Karabakh, which “has left the population
facing acute shortages” and “placed the lives of
the residents — especially children, persons with
disabilities, older persons, pregnant women and the
sick — at significant risk”.
To sum up, owing to the blockade, there is no
longer any economic activity in Nagorno-Karabakh.
Thousands of people are left unemployed, as there is no
possibility of paying their salaries. Even those people
with money are unable to buy anything, as shelves in
stores are empty. Women, children and elderly persons

23-2420913/19

S/PV.9397

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

stand in long queues in order to be able to buy some
bread or fruit and vegetables. Sometimes they must
travel dozens of kilometres on foot to reach empty shops
and pharmacies. The authorities of Nagorno-Karabakh
had to issue ration coupons for certain food products,
including rice, porridge and sugar. There is a real of
threat of hunger.
Here are some other figures: there are 120,000
people living in Nagorno-Karabakh deprived of the
ability to exercise their basic human rights. There are
20,000 elderly people who are unable even to move
owing to the absence of public transportation. There
are 30,000 children living in Nagorno-Karabakh who
are struggling owing to malnutrition and the lack of
food. There are 270 children who are unable to return
and reunite with their families in Nagorno-Karabakh.
There are 2,000 pregnant women residing in
Nagorno-Karabakh who do not have even basic access
to health care. There are 9,000 people with disabilities
who are deprived of proper medical care. There are
4,700 people with diabetes and 8,450 people with
circulatory diseases, all of whom are running out of
essential medicine.
All those events have doubled the rate of deaths in
Nagorno-Karabakh in the past 8 months. Furthermore,
the absence of medicine, sanitizers and other hygiene
items is giving rise to the risk of epidemics. Throughout
the blockade period, there were 710 patients and their
accompanying persons evacuated by the ICRC who
had to go through a humiliating procedure of proving
their health condition in order to obtain permission for
evacuation. One was a man with a very concrete name
and surname — Vagif Khachatrian, who was abducted
at the checkpoint during his transportation by the
ICRC to Armenia for heart surgery. He was abducted
while under international humanitarian protection. It
is certainly not the only incident in which Azerbaijan
has intentionally obstructed the work of the ICRC.
There was another man with a very concrete name
and surname — Karо Hovhannisyan — passed away
yesterday. According to the autopsy report, he died
because of starvation and lasting malnutrition. Two
children — 3-year-old Leo and 6-year-old Gita — died
in Martakert after their mother had to leave them alone
to travel on foot to the nearby town with the hope of
finding some food for them.
In recent months, many Council members have
tried to address the issue of opening the Lachin corridor.
However, despite all their calls, the commitments
14/19

16/08/2023

undertaken in line with the trilateral statement of
9 November 2020 and the legally binding orders of the
ICJ, the situation on the ground has not improved. On
the contrary, Azerbaijan incrementally yet consistently
intensified the blockade to the degree of a complete siege
of Nagorno-Karabakh. Armenia raised its concerns
on the deepening humanitarian crisis as a result of
the closure of the Lachin corridor in all negotiations
with Azerbaijan, which were separately facilitated and
mediated by the United States of America, the European
Union and Russia, to no avail.
Throughout that time, Azerbaijan’s engagement
has been anything but in good faith. Going back to the
first discussions on the issue in the Security Council,
Azerbaijan has denied any responsibility for its actions
and even claimed that it was not controlling the Lachin
corridor. Over the past eight months, Azerbaijan has
offered a number of pretexts aimed at justifying its
actions. First, it blamed so-called eco-activists with
environmental concerns, then it levelled baseless
allegations of the transportation of arms through the
Lachin corridor and then it cited military provocations,
and so on.
The Lachin corridor has been agreed as a link
between Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh and has
no alternative. The Lachin corridor should be opened
and, when it comes to other possible communications,
that should be addressed through an international
mechanism through the Baku-Stepanakert dialogue.
Therefore, I am here today to seek the Council’s
support in addressing issues of a humanitarian nature.
We expect the Council to condemn the use of starvation
of civilians as a method of warfare, as prohibited by
international humanitarian law; to condemn the
unlawful denial of humanitarian access and deprivation
of the civilian population in Nagorno-Karabakh of
objects indispensable to their survival, including by
wilfully impeding relief supply and access for responses
to conflict-induced food insecurity; and to demand
full compliance with obligations under international
humanitarian law, including those related to the
protection of civilians, in particular women and children,
and critical civilian infrastructure. We also expect the
Council to call for the immediate restoration of freedom
and security pertaining to the movement of persons,
vehicles and cargo, in line with previously reached
agreements, through the Lachin corridor; to ensure the
full cooperation of the parties in good faith with the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the safe
23-24209

16/08/2023

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian assistance;
and to dispatch an independent inter-agency needs
assessment mission to Nagorno-Karabakh and provide
humanitarian assistance to the affected population.
Those humanitarian issues clearly need to be
resolved with the international community’s strong
intervention before the negative consequences result in
the ethnic cleansing of the people of Nagorno-Karabakh.
According to the elected representatives of
Nagorno-Karabakh:
“This is a deliberately engineered crime,
driven by evident genocidal intent. The Azerbaijani
authorities purposefully instigated the blockade of
the Lachin corridor with the knowledge that it would
subject the entire population of Nagorno-Karabakh
to a gradual demise, yet they chose to persist with
this course of action”.
At the same time, the report by Mr. Luis Moreno
Ocampo, former Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, reflects that a genocide is already
happening in Nagorno-Karabakh. According to
Mr. Ocampo:
“The blockade of the Lachin corridor by the
Azerbaijani security forces impeding access to any
food, medical supplies and other essentials should
be considered a genocide under article II (c) of
the Genocide Convention: ‘Deliberately inflicting
on the group conditions of life calculated to bring
about its physical destruction’. Starvation is the
invisible genocide weapon. Without immediate and
dramatic change, this group of Armenians will be
destroyed in a few weeks.”
The prevention of such a catastrophe is a core duty of the
United Nations and the Council. I believe that this body,
in spite of its geopolitical differences, has the capacity
to act to prevent genocide and not to commemorate it,
when it might be too late.
In conclusion, I would like to come back to the very
beginning of my statement. One of the most important
principles of the United Nations is leaving no one
behind, and Edwin, aged four, Anastasia, aged six,
Maria, aged seven, David, aged five, Tatev, aged five,
Samvel, aged eight, and many others still have the hope
that they will not be left behind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.

S/PV.9397

Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): Given the statement I
have just heard, I will start by categorically rejecting
all the unfounded and groundless allegations about
blockades and humanitarian crises propagated by
Armenia against my country. What Armenia is
trying to present as a humanitarian matter is in fact
a provocative and irresponsible political campaign to
undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
my country. It was Armenia that for almost 30 years
blatantly disregarded the relevant four resolutions and
the series of presidential statements of the Security
Council unequivocally demanding Armenia’s full,
immediate and unconditional of its occupying forces
from the territory of Azerbaijan. Against that backdrop,
Armenia’s actions are nothing but the embodiment of
purposeful political hypocrisy, and its appeal to the
Security Council is part of a campaign that it has been
pursuing for months to manipulate and mislead the
international community.
Had Armenia been sincere in its quest to help,
it would have happened immediately. It was indeed
within practical reach very recently, only days ago,
as a result of the active involvement of international
actors, including some Security Council members.
The reason it did not materialize was due only to
Armenia’s own refusal. Following a series of intensive
consultations and shuttle diplomacy, agreements were
finally reached on the delivery of humanitarian cargo
to the Karabakh region through various routes, as well
as on the organization of a meeting between a special
representative of the Government and representatives
of local Armenian residents.
In the first instance, concrete blocks and all the
other physical barriers installed by the Armenian side
on the Aghdam-Khankendi road should have been
removed in order to allow the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) to deliver humanitarian cargo
to the local residents. That should have been followed
by scaling up the usage of the Lachin road by the ICRC
within 24 hours. All of the parties involved, including
the Russian peacekeeping contingent and the ICRC,
were prepared to commence the implementation of the
deal more or less within an hour. Unfortunately, during
the briefing by the representative of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, we heard many
references to the ICRC, so I would like to hear about
these particular details from the ICRC and see them
proved through further communications.

23-2420915/19

S/PV.9397

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

In the second case, it was agreed to hold a meeting
between representatives of the central authorities and
local Armenian residents in the nearby city of Yevlakh.
Regrettably, on 5 August, Armenia, through its illegally
installed regime, reneged on both agreements at the very
last moment by introducing politically motivated and
illegitimate preconditions and various pretexts. There
should be no doubt that notwithstanding Azerbaijan’s
intensive engagement with the Russian Federation,
the United States, the European Union and the ICRC
to find ways out of the situation, Armenia has been
deliberately obstructing the diplomatic efforts. There
is only one explanation for that, which is that Armenia
is not willing to be a part of the solution. Instead, it
is artificially igniting tensions in the region with a
view to continuing to manipulate and mislead at the
international level.
The breach of the agreement on the ICRC’s delivery
of humanitarian goods on 5 August is not the only
obstruction. In fact, it is a continuation of Armenia’s
politicization of the presence and activities of that
humanitarian organization and its reckless attempt to
exploit humanitarian matters for political purposes by
challenging the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Azerbaijan and preventing the reintegration of
local ethnic Armenian residents. The facts speak for
themselves. Immediately after the war ended in 2020,
Azerbaijan offered its logistics and infrastructure to the
ICRC for the delivery of goods to the Karabakh region
of Azerbaijan. In 2021, those goods were transported to
the ICRC’s field office in the city of Barda to be delivered
to the area. The Armenians rejected it and prevented
the ICRC from delivering humanitarian assistance.
Immediately after the start of protests by
eco-activists on a section of the Lachin-Khankendi
route, Azerbaijan asked the ICRC to present the list of
goods that the local residents needed and expressed its
readiness to provide all the logistical and infrastructural
support for their delivery. The ICRC came back with
the response that the Armenian side did not want
any supplies through Azerbaijan. Armenia resorted
to the unprecedented action of abusing the ICRC for
smuggling dual-use technologies and other items such
as microchips to the Karabakh region. The ICRC had
to acknowledge that, which is a serious blow to its
humanitarian mandate and its reputation. Armenia
refused to accept the deployment of the ICRC’s Bakubased international medical personnel to Khankendi,
which the ICRC itself had proposed in order to facilitate
16/19

16/08/2023

medical evacuations and help deal with the medical
issues on the ground, and which was supported by my
country. Armenia’s abuse of the ICRC for its political
purposes also makes it crystal clear that the calls for an
increased international presence, including of United
Nations-affiliated organizations, have nothing to do
with humanitarian concerns. Instead, the aim is to
obtain more tools for manipulation.
The Karabakh region of Azerbaijan is an
international recognized territory of my country, and
the ethnic Armenians living there are considered
residents of my country — the Republic of Azerbaijan.
The Government of Azerbaijan is strongly committed
to guaranteeing and securing the access of these
residents to the goods they need and establishing
appropriate living conditions for them. These objectives
are fully in line with principles of international law
and international humanitarian law, underscoring
Azerbaijan’s unwavering dedication to upholding
these standards.
The so-called Lachin corridor is a road within
the sovereign territory of Azerbaijan without any
extraterritorial status. It is primarily intended for the
movement of citizens, vehicles and goods under the
trilateral statement of 10 November 2020. Adhering to
its commitments under this statement, my country has
allowed movement along this road, which remains intact
since Azerbaijan’s establishment of the checkpoint on
its border with Armenia. The border checkpoint was
established in exercise of Azerbaijan’s inherent right to
safeguard its sovereignty and security and to prevent
the consistent and blatant abuse by Armenia of this
route for illegal military and other activities.
Let me repeat that: the border checkpoint was
established to prevent the consistent and blatant abuse
by Armenia of this route for illegal military and other
activities. Examples of such illegal activities are the
rotation of its approximately 10,000 military personnel
illegally stationed in the territory of Azerbaijan,
transfer of weaponry, munitions and land mines,
the presence of foreign nationals and terrorists on
Azerbaijani territory and the unlawful extraction and
transfer of natural resources from this territory. Is this
humanitarian assistance?
The unanimous decision by the International Court
of Justice on 6 July this year to dismiss Armenia’s
request for an internal measure to remove the
checkpoint definitively rejected Armenia’s allegations
23-24209

16/08/2023

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

that the Lachin checkpoint is illegal. The establishment
of the border checkpoint has not impeded civilian
movement along the Lachin road. In fact, there was a
notable increase in such movement before 15 June this
year. On that date, another unwarranted provocation
by Armenia unfolded when its armed forces attacked
Azerbaijani border guards and Russian peacekeeping
forces accompanying them. This attack resulted in an
Azerbaijani border guard being severely injured and
concurrently poses a direct threat to the ICRC staff and
civilians passing through the checkpoint.
If Armenia were genuinely concerned about
the ordinary residents of the Karabakh region, it
would never have objected to the use of the AghdamKhankandi the roads for the delivery of goods to the
region. This road is connected to one of Azerbaijan’s
major transportation routes, known as Silk Road or
M2 Azerbaijan highway, which provides a reliable
connection to international markets. Compared to the
59-kilometre-long Lachin-Khankandi road passing
through mountainous and serpentine terrain, the road
between Aghdam and Khankandi is only 18 kilometres
long. Today, in their visit to Aghdam, representatives
of diplomatic corps accredited by Azerbaijan, including
the United Nations Resident Coordinator’s Office and
other United Nations entities, have also had a chance
to see that the road was functional and ready for the
transportation of goods. In this regard, I would refer
Council members to the map that has been distributed
to them, which clearly shows the logistics hubs, in
particular international airports, on the territory of
Azerbaijan that can be used to secure and provide all
required assistance to populations in need.
Equally unfounded are the false allegations on
genocide. At this point, Armenia’s manipulative
and deceptive campaign has involved the so-called
opinion by Mr. Luis Moreno Ocampo, who presents
himself as an independent expert. The flaws in
Mr. Ocampo’s assertions have been detailed by a
prominent international law expert, Mr. Rodney Dixon,
in his preliminary report that underlines that Ocampo’s
opinion lacks substantiation, is incomplete and displays
numerous inaccuracies. Accordingly, there is no
foundation for claiming that a genocide is currently
being perpetrated. Specifically, Mr. Dixon finds that
Ocampo’s opinion is patently selective in the facts,
in particular with his failure to mention Armenia’s
rejection of Azerbaijan’s proposal of alternative routes
to supply local Armenian residents.

S/PV.9397

Such manipulations under humanitarian pretexts are
not separate from the increased illegal and provocative
military activities. In recent weeks, the Armenian
armed forces illegally remaining in the territory of
Azerbaijan, in blatant violation of international law
and its commitment under paragraph 4 of the trilateral
statement signed by the leaders of Azerbaijan, the
Russian Federation and Armenia, have intensified the
military engineering works and other military build-up.
The use of radio electronic-warfare equipment
illegally deployed in the sovereign territory of Azerbaijan
is of particular concern. Not only have civilian aircraft
of the Azerbaijani airlines been subjected to radio
electronic interference in recent weeks, but also the
civilian aircraft of foreign countries, which poses a
serious risk to their safety. Today, a reconnaissance
group of Armenian armed forces attempted to infiltrate
the territory of Azerbaijan and carry out diversion
operations in the Kalbajar District was prevented from
doing so, and a member of this group, Voskanyan Gagik
Ashotovich, born in 1983 and armed with a machine
gun and ammunition, was detained.
Armenia must refrain from provocations, cease
actions that undermine the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of my country, abstain from meddling in our
internal affairs and genuinely engage in post-conflict
normalization negotiations. It is vitally important that
the historic opportunity for durable peace in the region
is not missed. Verbal statements by the leadership
of Armenia on the recognition of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, including the
Karabakh region, has established grounds for cautious
optimism that peace is indeed within reach. Now
Armenia has to transform this statement into real
deeds and refrain from questioning the sovereignty
of Azerbaijan, including under the pretext of the
humanitarian needs of the local Armenians, residents
of the Karabakh region of my country.
Over the past few months, concerted efforts
to intensify the normalization process with active
engagement of international partners have yielded
promising results. These diplomatic dialogues have
played a crucial role in bridging differences and
achieving tangible progress on several articles of the
future bilateral agreement aimed at establishing a
lasting peace and inter-State relations between the two
countries. Azerbaijan is pursuing a policy of integration
of ethnic Armenian residents of the Karabakh region as
equal citizens, guaranteeing to them all the rights and

23-2420917/19

S/PV.9397

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

freedoms envisaged in the Constitution of Azerbaijan
and all relevant international human rights mechanisms
to which Azerbaijan is signatory. Our adherence
to both these tracks is firm, just as we are firm in
protecting our sovereignty and territorial integrity by
all legitimate means enshrined in the United Nations
Charter and international law. We are confident that the
international community and, above all, the Security
Council will support this approach based on equal and
reciprocal respect for the legitimate interests of both
countries through mutual recognition and respect for
each country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and
the inviolability of borders.
I also have something to show to the Security
Council. Social media outlets are full of numerous
video clips and photos of local Armenian residents
in Khankendi celebrating birthdays, anniversaries,
weddings and every good occasion, and indeed,
we wish them well. That photo and video evidence
convincingly refutes the allegations of starvation,
famine and humanitarian crisis. People are happy. They
are dancing at their wedding party. That is a celebration
involving very tasty cookies and so forth. I am happy to
share this information with my neighbour to my right. I
ask that Council members use it in their work.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Önal (Türkiye): I thank you, Madam President,
for inviting us to this meeting.
As a country with vested interests in regional
peace and stability and actively engaged in initiatives
towards that objective, Türkiye is concerned about the
attempts of Armenia to exploit international platforms,
including the Security Council, to express politically
motivated and unsubstantiated allegations regarding
the Lachin road.
We need to address that issue in its proper context.
First and foremost, the legitimate concerns of
Azerbaijan have to be taken into account and its
inherent sovereign rights have to be respected.
Azerbaijan has been expressing concerns about the
abuse of the Lachin road for supplying armed groups
and illegal mine exploitation in Karabakh for a long
time. However, those concerns and sensitivities were not
taken into account, and Azerbaijan felt obliged to take
measures on its own territory as it deemed appropriate
within the framework of its sovereign rights.
18/19

16/08/2023

We know that Azerbaijan has exercised care to
observe humanitarian considerations while those
measures were implemented. As a matter of fact, medical
evacuations through the Lachin road are possible,
and Azerbaijan has already allocated the AghdamKhankendi route for use in delivering supplies to meet
the needs of the Armenian residents in Karabakh.
Moreover, Azerbaijan has demonstrated its willingness
to establish dialogue with the representatives of the local
Armenian people to address the issue in a substantial
manner. Unfortunately, Azerbaijan’s sincere efforts
have not been reciprocated.
We, as Türkiye, remain convinced that there is
a historical opportunity for comprehensive peace,
stability and cooperation in the region. To that end,
we expressed our commitment to a full normalization
process with Armenia and took steps in that direction.
We continue to strongly support peace talks between
Azerbaijan and Armenia.
It is our firm belief that regional normalization can
be attained only through dialogue and goodwill. We
will continue to take part in, encourage and support
efforts towards that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Gonzato.
Mr. Gonzato: I thank you, Madam President, for
giving me the opportunity to take the floor, and I also
thank Ms. Wosornu for her briefing.
The European Union (EU) is following with great
concern the serious humanitarian situation affecting
the local population in the former Nagorno-Karabakh
autonomous oblast. Movement through the Lachin
corridor has been obstructed for more than eight
months, despite orders by the International Court of
Justice to reopen it. Since 15 June, there has been a
blockage of the Lachin corridor, with the exception of
occasional medical evacuations. Medical supplies and
essential goods are reportedly in critically short supply
or have already run out with dire consequences for the
local population.
The EU deplores the fact that the activities of
the International Committee of the Red Cross in the
region have been heavily impacted and calls for their
full resumption, including medical evacuations and
humanitarian supplies. Humanitarian access must not
be politicized by any actors.
Movement through the Lachin corridor must be
reopened immediately. Based on the November 2020
23-24209

16/08/2023

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

trilateral statement and the February 2023 order of
the International Court of Justice, the Azerbaijani
authorities bear the responsibility for guaranteeing
safety and freedom of movement along the Lachin
corridor and ensuring that the crisis does not escalate
further. We have taken note of the expressed readiness
of the Azerbaijani authorities to also supply goods via
the city of Aghdam. That should, however, not be seen
as an alternative to the reopening of the Lachin corridor.
The population on the ground needs reassurances,
first and foremost, regarding their rights and security.
The EU reiterates its call for direct dialogue between
Baku and Karabakh Armenians. That dialogue should
build much-needed confidence for all those involved.
The EU has also been following the growing
tensions between Azerbaijan and Armenia over the past
month along their international border, with shooting
incidents reported on almost a daily basis. The EU
monitoring mission in Armenia is conducting patrols
along the Armenian side of the international border
with Azerbaijan to observe and report on the situation.
The objective of the mission is to contribute to conflict
resolution and build confidence between Armenia
and Azerbaijan. We call on all sides to avoid further
incidents and return to dialogue.
The European Union and in particular the President
of the European Council, Charles Michel, have been
heavily engaged in supporting the normalization

S/PV.9397

process between Armenia and Azerbaijan since the end
of 2021. At the most recent trilateral meeting hosted
by President Charles Michel with President Aliyev of
Azerbaijan and Prime Minister Pashinyan of Armenia
on 15 July, the leaders of the two countries reiterated
their strong commitment to the peace process. They
notably reconfirmed their full respect for the other
country’s territorial integrity and sovereignty and
their unequivocal commitment to the 1991 Almata-Ata
Declaration as a political framework for the delimitation.
As a matter of priority, violence, harsh rhetoric and
the spreading of disinformation should stop in order
to provide a conducive environment for peace and
normalization talks. A return to dialogue in good faith
remains as urgent as ever. That requires the genuine
commitment of all sides to negotiated outcomes and
a future built on common interests and mutual trust.
Unfortunately, the current deteriorating humanitarian
situation of the Karabakh Armenians is harming
the peace process. Humanitarian issues need to be
resolved and concrete steps should urgently be taken
to build trust.
The European Union remains fully committed to
facilitating dialogue between both sides in order to
ensure long-lasting peace for the benefit of all people
of the region.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

23-2420919/19
