S/2021/383

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 April 2021
Original: English

Situation in Abyei
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 33 of Security Council
resolution 2550 (2020), in which the Council requested to be informed of progress in
implementing the mandate of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). It covers the period since the issuance of my previous report
(S/2020/1019), from 16 October 2020 to 15 April 2021. The report provides updates
on, inter alia, political developments and intercommunal dynamics, the security
context, the humanitarian situation and UNISFA assistance to the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism and on interactions with the Governments of
the Sudan and South Sudan in relation to the implementation of the mission’s
mandate.

II. Abyei
Political developments
2.
The reporting period was marked by a continued rapprochement between the
Sudan and South Sudan. On 23 November 2020, the Minister for East African Affairs
of South Sudan, Deng Alor, met in Khartoum with Hassan Sheikh Idris Qadi, a member
of the Transitional Sovereign Council, to discuss the implementation of the Juba
Peace Agreement of 3 October 2020, as well as the question of Abyei. On 25 February
2021, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan, Mariam al-Sadiq al-Mahdi, chose
to go to Juba as her first visit upon assuming her duties in the new cabinet of the
Government of the Sudan. However, the détente has yet to positively impact the
situation in Abyei.
3.
Despite logistical constraints linked to the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic, UNISFA has remained fully engaged with the Governments of both the
Sudan and South Sudan. The acting Head of Mission/Force Commander visited
Khartoum to take part in the Joint Political and Security Mechanism meeting hosted
by the Government of the Sudan on 28 and 29 October 2020. The meeting was the
first since the meeting hosted by the Government of South Sudan in February 2020,
during which a number of important matters were agreed upon, including the
establishment of checkpoints in Abyei, the introduction of search and seize
operations, the deployment of joint military observer teams throughout the Abyei

21-04894 (E)

220421

*2104894*

S/2021/383

Area, the need for regular meetings of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism and
of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee and the need for progress on Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism and border-related benchmarks (see Security
Council resolution 2550 (2020), para. 3). During the meeting, the parties
recommended that “the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee resumes regular meetings
within two weeks … and urge it to hold at least one session before the next Joint
Political and Security Mechanism meeting slated for 15 January 2021”. The African
Union Peace and Security Council welcomed the outcomes of the meeting and called
for the Facilitator of the Committee to initiate consultations with the Governments of
the Sudan and South Sudan with a view to agreeing on modalities for the reconvening
of the Committee, as soon as possible. The African Union Peace and Security Council
held a meeting on the situation in Abyei on 24 November 2020, and subsequently
issued a communiqué calling for community reconciliation following the tensions
after the killing of Chief Kuol Deng Kuol of the Ngok Dinka.
4.
The acting Head of Mission returned to Khartoum again in late 2020 and early
2021, when he had the opportunity to discuss with senior officials ways to move the
Abyei peace process forward, including through support for inter-community peace
talks. The appointment of a civilian Deputy Head of Mission was also discussed, but
little progress was made in that regard, or regarding the operationalization of t he
Athony airstrip and the issuance of visas for the three formed police units and the full
complement of individual police officers.
5.
On 23 November 2020, the acting Head of Mission, together with the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
briefed the African Union Peace and Security Council on the situation in Abyei. The
former highlighted the need for enhanced engagement at the political level on the
question of Abyei as a way to mitigate rising inter-community tensions in the area.
6.
On 28 March 2021, the Khartoum-appointed Chief Administrator arrived in
Diffra. The mission interacted with him on 31 March and encouraged his own
interaction and coordination with the Juba-appointed Chief Administrator based in
Abyei town.
Conflict dynamics and the security situation
7.
The general security situation in the Abyei Area has been relatively calm, yet
tense and unpredictable. The most prevalent threats to security were shooting
incidents, the increased presence of unidentified armed groups, armed attacks on
civilians and violent confrontations between the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka
communities at the Amiet common market. The denial of access to a World Food
Programme (WFP) convoy and UNISFA contractor vehicles in Goli and Todach, in
Sector North, as well as general criminality, were also among the security challenges
that the mission had to face. Of a total of 47 incidents recorded, 23 were attacks on
civilians resulting in fatalities and serious injuries. The m ain supply route between
Abyei town and Goli, the Amiet common market and its surrounding villages have
been identified as the most volatile areas within the UNISFA area of responsibility,
despite regular patrols and constant presence along the route by UN ISFA troops.
During the reporting period, a total of five civilians were killed in gunfire or stabbing
incidents by unidentified armed elements, while 11 persons were severely injured in
attacks, also by unidentified armed elements, along the main supply r oute, in the
vicinity of the Amiet common market and the surrounding areas.
8.
On 2 December 2020, a UNISFA patrol was the target of an armed attack near
Doungab in Sector South. The troops returned fire and pursued the attackers, who
managed to escape. No casualties were reported. On 8 December, young Misseriya in
Todach demonstrated against UNISFA and the UNISFA contractor by blocking the
2/16

21-04894

S/2021/383

entrance to the Todach company operating base in Sector North. The protesters were
demanding “fair opportunities” for the recruitment of local workers. After several
hours of negotiations, the commander of the base was able to convince the young
people to vacate the area. Similarly, on 31 December, the UNISFA Sector South
Battalion commander and some of his officers were confronted by hostile young
people in Athony village, accusing UNISFA of failing to protect their community at
the Amiet common market. The commander held a meeting with the elders of the
community and with youth leaders, reassuring them of the commitment of UNISFA
to protect the entire population in the Abyei Area, without discrimination, and urging
them to remain calm.
9.
In another development, from 18 to 21 December 2020, 49 WFP trucks with
humanitarian supplies en route from the north towards Abyei tow n were denied access
by a Misseriya crowd at Dari village. The group demanded 50 per cent of the load as
a precondition for granting passage to the south. After two days of negotiations, it
was decided that the humanitarian convoy would return to Khartoum. In the process,
some 15 trucks were looted. The Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan had
been informed and had authorized the convoy’s movement.
10. There was a violent clash between the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities
on 30 December 2020 at the Amiet common market, stemming from heightened
tensions in the aftermath of an inconclusive traditional leaders’ meeting in
mid-December. During the clash, several shops and properties were destroyed, with
five Dinka and seven Misseriya sustaining injuries. On 15 February 2021, three armed
men, suspected to be Dinka, opened fire on a civilian vehicle about 4 km outside of
Abyei town along the Abyei-Banton road. Six civilians were severely injured in the
attack and taken to the UNISFA level II hospital for tr eatment. The motive and
identity of the assailants were uncertain, and investigations by the local authorities
are ongoing. On 26 November 2020, UNISFA troops apprehended a suspected armed
robber at Leu area, Sector South, and handed him over to the commun ity protection
committee. On 1 January 2021, seven Misseriya men were apprehended at a snap
checkpoint near the Amiet common market and handed over to relevant authorities.
Their arrest was preceded by a violent clash between the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka
communities at the Amiet common market two days earlier. On 20 January, a South
Sudan People’s Defence Forces team of eight armed members of the Special Forces
entered the Abyei Area and proceeded north towards Athony village, before turning
back south and leaving the Area. The Juba-appointed Chief Administrator of Abyei
explained to UNISFA that the incident was a mistake and promised that such acts
would not be repeated. On 2 February, two armed Dinka men were apprehended by a
UNISFA patrol team in Mijak area, Sector South. On 9 February, UNISFA foiled an
armed robbery incident along the main supply route near Goli and apprehended an
armed Misseriya man. During the reporting period, a total of 1 hand grenade, 4 knives,
4 AK-47 assault rifles, 1 RPG-7 launcher, 1 rocket and 97 rounds of small arms
ammunition were confiscated by the Force.
11. On 2 February 2021, during pre-flight inspection, a stone was discovered
wedged in the left wing aileron of the United Nations B-1900 aircraft. In the ensuing
investigation, it was concluded that it was an act of sabotage. To date, no suspect has
been apprehended. On 9 February, a multirole logistics unit convoy consisting of
11 Ural trucks travelling from Ethiopia to Abyei was denied passage by a Sudanese
Armed Forces unit affiliated with 22nd Division at a checkpoint in Kar’ama. They
were authorized to resume their movements the following day.

21-04894

3/16

S/2021/383

Inter-community dialogue
12. UNISFA engaged extensively with both the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka
communities to facilitate a resumption of the intercommunity grassroots peace
process, which had been stalled since the violent incidents at Nainai and Kolom in
January 2020. During the preceding dry season, UNISFA had facilitated two meetings
of the traditional leaders at Diffra, Sector North, in March and April 2020,
respectively. These were inconclusive and the mission in subsequent months
continued to call for intercommunity dialogue, to ensure a peaceful migration cycle.
13. After considerable engagement by UNISFA with both communities in the last
quarter of 2020, a third traditional leaders’ meeting was held at Todach, Sector North,
on 16 and 17 December 2020. However, the delegations, each led by their paramount
chiefs, failed to reach an agreement. One of the main disagreements revolved around
the use of the term “Ajaira”. The Misseriya object to the term in the Abyei dialogue
context, while the Ngok Dinka insist on calling the Misseriya “Ajaira”, considering
it more relevant, as only the “Ajaira” clan of the Misseriya uses Abyei for its
transhumance. Despite the efforts of UNISFA and the peacebuilding working group,
pre-migration conferences have not yet been held.
14. UNISFA continued to advocate for the two communities to recommit to the
peace process. As part of this, UNISFA, with the support of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the non-governmental organization (NGO)
Concordis International, facilitated the attendance of 11 Misseriya and 11 Ngok Dinka
observers at a peace conference between the Dinka Malual and Misseriya of Western
Kordofan, held in Aweil, Northern Bahr el-Ghazal State, South Sudan, from 1 to
4 February 2021. On 5 February, the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya requested the peace
coordinator of Northern Bahr el-Ghazal State to act as a facilitator for a week-long
peace conference on Abyei to be conducted in Aweil from 22 February. At the
conference, the sides again failed to sign an agreement because of their opposing
views on the term “Ajaira”. They did however agree to reconvene a restructured Joint
Community Peace Committee and to engage in localized pre-migration meetings in
the three transhumance corridors.
Law and order
15. Despite the absence of the Abyei Police Service and constraints stemming from
the COVID-19 pandemic, UNISFA continued to support the joint protection
committee and the community protection committees through daily co -locations,
patrols and mentorship. Efforts were made to enhance the capacity of local traditional
institutions and conflict-resolution mechanisms.
16. A total of 1,681 general crimes were recorded during the reporting period,
compared with 759 during the previous reporting period. United Nations police
conducted a total of 143 crime awareness-related activities, including meetings with
community protection committees and campaigns against drug abuse, on
environmental awareness and fire outbreak prevention, against sexual and gender based violence and on gender awareness, in schools, villages and marketplaces. In the
light of the increase in criminality in Abyei and the absence of an Abyei police
service, United Nations police conducted 76 crime prevention and reduction
awareness campaigns and road safety campaigns and 68 sexual and gender-based
violence awareness campaigns to minimize abuse of the rights of women and
children. The campaigns sensitized community members on issues of sexual and
gender-based violence, sexual exploitation and abuse, domestic violence, child
marriage, forced marriage and child abuse, and 14 sexual and gender-based violence
cases were reported. United Nations police also conducted conflict resolution training
for female community protection committee members, enhancing their ability to
4/16

21-04894

S/2021/383

prevent sexual and gender-based violence in their communities. Corrections experts
serving with United Nations police conducted 68 visits to the three detention facilities
in Abyei, Agok and the Amiet common market with members of the community
protection committees and the joint protection committee, advising and mentoring on
best practices in the management of detention centres.
17. United Nations police conducted 1,448 community interactive patrols to
mobilize members of the public to actively participate in peacebuilding initiatives.
United Nations police also conducted 559 joint patrols, 623 community activities,
including confidence-building mechanisms, 409 independent security observation
patrols and 8 air reconnaissance patrols in collaboration with the military observers
and national monitors from both the Sudan and South Sudan.
18. United Nations police trained 190 members of community protection
committees (124 male and 66 female) through a basic policing refresher course to
strengthen their capacities and assist in maintaining law and order and respect for
human rights. United Nations police continued to mentor the community protection
committees and the joint protection committee members on how to handle detainees.
With the COVID-19 outbreak, traditional leaders were encouraged to decongest
detention centres as a preventive measure. United Nations police conducted 21
sensitization events on COVID-19 each week.
19. United Nations police strength stands at 47 officers – 31 male (66 per cent) and
16 female (34 per cent). Entry visas to the Sudan were granted to 31 officers in
December 2020 and January 2021, increasing the number from 16 to 47 officers. Visas
for 77 individual police officers, requested in a note verbale to Khartoum, are
awaiting approval. The ceiling for individual police officers, as authorized by the
Security Council in resolution 2550 (2020), is 148.
20. The deployment of the Police Commissioner is still pending visa approval from
the Government of the Sudan. A note verbale was sent to the relevant authorities in
Khartoum on 20 October 2020 to request the necessary entry visa and work permit
for her deployment.
21. Concerning the three authorized formed police units, the process of deployment
of the units from China and the United Republic of Tanzania was interrup ted, mainly
owing to the non-issuance of entry visas for the delegation from the United Republic
of Tanzania and of travel permits to visit Abyei for the delegation from China. The
deployment of the advance party of the Ethiopian formed police unit is subj ect to visa
approval and the clearances for contingent-owned equipment.
Humanitarian situation and recovery activities
22. The Abyei Area continues to face significant humanitarian and recovery
challenges, coupled with high rates of inflation in the Sudan and South Sudan.
People’s living conditions are also impacted by very limited government -led services
and inadequate access to basic public health, water sanitation and hygiene (WASH),
education and protection services, including protection against sexual and genderbased violence and child protection. In 2019, the area was severely impacted by floods
and in 2020 and 2021 by drought, highlighting the high reliance on climate -sensitive
natural resources, in particular on a rain-fed subsistence agriculture. The COVID-19
pandemic added a further burden, significantly impacting the existing humanitarian
operations, as well as peace and stability, and resilience-building activities. On
8 February 2021, the Amiet common market, comprising more than 1,000 sho ps and
stalls and 360 living shelters, was partially destroyed by a fire, resulting in a
significant economic loss. This led to a temporary displacement of market traders and
residents south to Abyei town and north to Goli village. The humanitarian and
development agencies worked closely with the local population concerned, to address
21-04894

5/16

S/2021/383

the immediate and long-term needs of the affected population. A fire that broke out at
the Amiet market on 1 April 2021 destroyed an additional number of shops and
structures. The beginning of the dry season, however, enabled road rehabilitation
work to commence throughout the area, and the main roads and most of the feeder
roads are now operational.
23. The Abyei town internally displaced persons sites that hosted approximatel y
4,000 people who had been displaced from Kolom, Noong, Amiet and Dokura villages
in the aftermath of the Nainai-Kolom incidents of January 2020 were closed by early
February 2021, following the return of most internally displaced persons to their
places of origin. A small group of internally displaced persons was integrated in the
host community.
24. Despite all these challenges, including COVID-19, the United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, in coordination with NGOs and the local authorities and
communities, continued to provide humanitarian and recovery assistance to 220,000
vulnerable people within the area, including 100,000 people from the Ngok Dinka
community, 15,000 internally displaced persons from the Ngok Dinka community in
southern Abyei and Abyei town, 9,000 people displaced from the neighbouring states
in South Sudan, 42,000 people from the Misseriya community, 7,000 other South
Sudanese (mainly Nuer), 41,000 seasonal Misseriya pastoralists and 6,000 Fallata
nomads who entered the area in early October 2020 and are expected to leave in June
2021.
25. More than 115,000 vulnerable people benefited from various food assistance related interventions, including the supplementary feeding programme in the central
and southern sectors of Abyei. Efforts to support community livelihood activities
continued during the reporting period, and more than 100,000 livestock were
vaccinated and 20,000 livestock treated, benefiting more than 11,000 households. In
coordination with the local authorities and communities, training, infrastructures and
equipment in basic animal health provision services, the handling and processing of
fish, post-harvest handling, the establishment of local fruit tree nurseries, vegetable
production and small business skills for businesswomen were provided. Virtual
meetings on the impact of climate change and early warning for floods in Abyei were
held. Other key market-oriented livelihood initiatives included the provision of
assorted vegetable seeds, beekeeping equipment, start-up kits for bakeries and
restaurants, vocational training tools, fishing kits and cash -for-work activities.
26. A total of 18 primary and two secondary health-care facilities throughout the
Abyei Area remained operational. Humanitarian organizations provide d routine
immunizations and essential medicines, benefiting more than 200,000 people during
the reporting period. Mobile health clinics provided primary health services to the
communities in remote areas, including through the provision of two ambulances
supporting the northern areas. The Ameth-Bek referral hospital in Abyei town was
rehabilitated, provided with equipment and inaugurated on 29 October 2020. The
facility has since largely been used for COVID-19 related activities. Humanitarian
actors also rehabilitated two clinics in the central and northern parts of the Abyei
Area. The Abyei community, humanitarian organizations and UNISFA coordinated
their COVID-19 activities in the Abyei Area. The key activities included COVID -19
hygiene awareness campaigns, temperature checks at entry points and sensitization,
the production and distribution of 10,000 face masks, the maintenance of three
isolation centres and polymerase chain reaction testing. Nutrition screening and
support for patients with moderate and acute malnutrition reached a monthly average
of 10,000 children under five years of age, as well as pregnant and lactating women
in the Abyei Area. Awareness-raising on COVID-19 hygiene measures and capacitybuilding activities were conducted, including on-the-job training for clinical staff and
health awareness sessions.
6/16

21-04894

S/2021/383

27. A total of 7 new hand pumps and boreholes were drilled, 10 hand pumps were
rehabilitated and a new water yard in the Amiet common market was made
operational, benefiting 10,000 people throughout the Area. Other activities included
the construction of toilet blocks in Abyei town and Goli and the construction of the
Todach community meeting hall. Two cash-for-work cleaning campaigns in Abyei
town were organized. Some targeted communities were also provided with hygiene
kits.
28. Owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, schools operated with limited activities
during the reporting period. The food-for-education programme supported meals for
22,000 schoolchildren in 30 primary and secondary schools in southern and central
Abyei. In response to the pandemic, a key education activity was the broadcast on
Abyei FM Radio of recorded lessons. The learners received an additional 344 handset
radios to access their lessons. Other major activities included the construction and
establishment of child-friendly spaces in Diffra and central Abyei and the
rehabilitation of the Luise school kitchen in Abyei town. The rollout of the functional
adult literacy programme continued. It is run in eight facilities with a to tal of
500 beneficiaries enrolled, of whom 460 are female.
29. Protection, in particular of children, and against gender-based violence,
remained the key challenge because of limited resources. In February 2021, the
humanitarian community reactivated the Global Protection Cluster and its sexual and
gender-based violence, child protection and mine action subclusters to address the
protection needs in a more coordinated manner jointly with the community and
UNISFA.
30. In consultation with local authorities, traditional leaders, United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes and NGOs, UNISFA completed the selection of 17
quick-impact projects for the 2020/21 period. Projects in northern Abyei all address
water issues, while projects in southern Abyei are related to health, livelihood, rule
of law and social development. Procurement and transportation of construction
material to Abyei is under way, and construction will start soon.
Women and peace and security
31. UNISFA continued its efforts to promote women’s participation in community
decision-making and protect women and girls from sexual and gender-based violence.
The efforts translated into the participation of women in local peace processes and
broadened civic space for women to share their views. In positive developments, local
leaders in Abyei demonstrated their commitment to promote women’s participation
and protect their rights. During the reporting period, the local administration in
Southern Abyei appointed a Gender Adviser. On 19 November 2020, during a meeting
with UNISFA, the Sudan Abyei Joint Oversight Committee representatives in Diffra
noted their intention to appoint a gender focal point to follow up on gender issues in
the Misseriya community. Traditional leaders and local administrators also continued
to publicly commit to the protection of women’s rights and the promotion of their
participation at different levels of community decision -making.
32. A positive outcome was the participation of two women from the Misseriya
community and three from the Ngok Dinka community in the Aweil peace dialogue
held from 22 to 26 February 2021, as compared with a single female (Misseriya)
participant at the preceding Aweil conference of 1–4 February 2021, at which she
called on the Abyei traditional leaders to promote women’s participation in local
peace dialogues. At the second Aweil forum, the five women took a united stand
despite community divides to denounce conflict and call for peace, pledging their
readiness to support their male counterparts to find a peaceful solution to the conflict
between the two communities.
21-04894

7/16

S/2021/383

33. Ngok Dinka local authorities demonstrated their support for women’s needs and
priorities, as well as protection for their rights, when they relocated the Mul Mul
market of Abyei town to a non-residential part of the Nyinkuac area on 31 January
2021. The move was preceded by women’s advocacy to relocate the market owing to
cases of sexual violence in the vicinity of the market. It is noteworthy that previous
attempts at relocation had not materialized.
34. To strengthen women’s agency in the Misseriya community, UNISFA conducted
seven consultations with traditional leaders and women on the primacy of women’s
participation in community decision-making in Al Radaya, Diffra, Goli and Makines
on 23 March and in al-Askar, Farouk and Um Khaer on 24 March. In a follow-up
workshop held on 28 March with traditional leaders drawn from the seven localities,
the male traditional leaders committed to promote women’s participation and
expressed their appreciation to UNISFA for efforts to strengthen women’s agency in
the Misseriya community.
35. UNISFA continued to support community members and their leaders in
preventing and responding to sexual and gender-based violence through advocacy,
engagement with local leaders, awareness-raising activities, capacity development
and training on prevention. Fifty-two awareness campaigns on sexual and genderbased violence, women’s and children’s rights and HIV and COVID -19 were
conducted across Abyei. As part of the 16 Days of Activism against Gender-based
Violence, UNISFA undertook four training workshops on sexual and gender-based
violence and human rights and on the Sudan and South Sudan legal frameworks
relevant to the protection of women and children’s rights. The training targeted
community members working on prevention and response to sexual and gender-based
violence. Two training courses were conducted on 16 and 17 November and on
8 December 2020, respectively, for the Ngok Dinka community, and two others were
conducted on 2 and 3 December and on 6 and 7 December for the Misseriya
community.
36. UNISFA also supported the Abyei Women Association in the Ngok Dinka
community in launching the 16 Days of Activism through an event that highlighted
the impact of early and forced marriages on children by means of drama and poems
by schoolchildren. A radio awareness campaign which included broadcasting of
pre-recorded messages by prominent community members, children’s debates on
sexual and gender-based violence and a radio quiz in which UNISFA awarded prizes
were conducted by UNISFA in collaboration with the International Organization for
Migration (IOM). One thousand solar-powered radios were distributed to rural
women and select traditional leaders from both communities to promote their access
to information and news. UNISFA facilitated the appointment of community sexual
and gender-based violence focal points in four locations (Agok, Amiet, Banton and
Noong).
37. UNISFA, in collaboration with IOM and the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), conducted community outreach to commemorate International Women’s
Day. Activities were conducted in seven locations across Abyei for both communities.
The activities included a radio talk show on 7 March by local wome n on their roles
and challenges that they face in fighting COVID-19. Commemoration events were
conducted in Abyei town, Agok, Amiet, Banton, Diffra, Noong and Tejalei from 8 to
10 March.
Operations of the Mine Action Service
38. The Mine Action Service remained fully deployed to the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism headquarters, sector headquarters and all

8/16

21-04894

S/2021/383

active team sites, addressing all requests for support from the mission and enabling
52 ground monitoring Mechanism missions.
39. Twelve items of explosive remnants of war and three anti -tank mines were
recovered and subsequently destroyed in controlled demolitions. The Mine Action
Service also destroyed 28 weapons and 1,347 rounds of small arms ammunition
confiscated by UNISFA troops. In addition, the Service handed over to the Sudan
Police Force one item of explosive remnants of war discovered during operations in
support of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.
40. The Mine Action Service assessed 331,783 m 2 of land and 674 km of routes in
the Abyei Area as safe for movements by UNISFA, the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism, humanitarian actors and the local population. Areas assessed
included UNISFA temporary operating bases and patrol routes, in accordance with
the dry season deployment plan, two suspected landmine contaminated areas, an old
military trench and the establishment of new routes for enhanced Force mobility.
41. The Mine Action Service delivered 227 explosive ordnance risk education
sessions that reached 2,402 men, women, boys and girls living in the Abyei Area.
Twenty-two sessions on explosive remnants of war awareness were also delivered as
part of UNISFA induction training through online and video sessions, enh ancing the
awareness of 1,061 UNISFA personnel (958 men and 103 women). The majority
(88.9 per cent) of explosive ordnance risk education beneficiaries demonstrated an
increase in knowledge between safe and unsafe practices.

III. Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism:
progress on benchmarks
42. The situation in the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism area
of responsibility was relatively calm but remained unpredictable during the reporting
period. On 16 February 2021, a group from El Leri village, the Sudan, protested
against the positioning of team site 22 at Abu Qussa/Wunkur, some 55 km to the
south. Two days later, they demanded the removal of the Ethiopian flag from team
site 22. On 15 February 2021, a contractor’s convoy of 11 trucks conveying
construction material to team site 22 was blocked by residents of El Leri village and
subsequently taken into the custody of a unit of Sudanese Armed Forces
22nd Division for safekeeping. The convoy was composed of eight trucks carr ying
quarry stones and gravel, two trucks loaded with cement and another truck carrying
fuel. The national monitor from the Sudan gave the assurance that his office was
working to resolve the issue, but that it remains pending. On 10 February, the Force
Protection Unit from team site 21 (Tishwin) escorting military observers and national
monitors to Kadugli camp was denied passage by a Sudanese Armed Forces unit of
22nd Division, some 90 km from Tishwin. The Force Protection Unit was allowed
through later in the day.
43. With regard to team site 21 in Tishwin, during the meeting of the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism in Khartoum on 28 and 29 October, the parties requested
UNISFA to relocate its team site from its current temporary location to a perman ent
site. Accordingly, the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism requested
the national monitors of the Sudanese Armed Forces and the South Sudan People’s
Defence Forces to carry out reconnaissance of a new location for the team site
alongside military observers from the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism. However, the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces did not participate
in the reconnaissance mission. The Chief of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism wrote to the Co-chairs of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism urging them to commit to a permanent team site. The situation impacts
21-04894

9/16

S/2021/383

greatly on the health and morale of United Nations personnel. The temporary team
site will have to be closed during the upcoming rainy season, at a significant
budgetary expense.
44. The above notwithstanding, most of the planned ground and aerial monitoring
missions were conducted at the various team sites as planned. There were two border
demarcation activities by both the Joint Border Commission and the Joint
Demarcation Committee within the reporting period. A 14 Mile Area ad hoc
Committee meeting was conducted from 16 to 19 November 2020 at Sector 1
headquarters (Gok Machar), in line with the conclusions of the October 2020 meeting
of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism.
45. All requested aerial monitoring missions and ground monitoring missions were
approved by the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan in October 2020.
Freedom of movement within the Safe Demilitarized Buffer Zone was guaranteed for
the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. The general area of team
site 22, Abu Qussa/Wunkur was still under the control of elements o f the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army-in-Opposition (SPLA-IO), despite the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism calling again for the immediate withdrawal of
SPLA-IO during its meeting in Khartoum in late October. As a result, South Sudan
People’s Defence Forces national monitors did not deploy to Abu Qussa/Wunkur
within the reporting period.
46. With regard to the seven benchmarks set out in Security Council resolution 2550
(2020), progress has been modest. Standing clearance for all air and ground patrols
was granted, and occasional challenges were addressed with the support of the
national monitors. Regarding the operationalization of team site 22 in
Abu Qussa/Wunkur, while the team site is established, it has not yet been
operationalized, as South Sudan refuses to deploy national monitors owing to the
presence of SPLA-IO in the area.
47. Benchmark 3 required the holding of two Joint Political and Security
Mechanism meetings during the reporting period. A Joint Political and Security
Mechanism meeting was held in Khartoum on 28 and 29 October 2020, and its
decisions were widely disseminated. Regarding the withdrawal of residual troops
from the Safe Demilitarized Buffer Zone, UNISFA has not been notified of any such
withdrawal by the parties. A 14 Mile Area ad hoc Committee meeting was conducted
from 16 to 19 November in Gok Machar. In its report, the Committee recommended
that the Chief of Defence Force of the South Sudan People’s Defence Force s issue the
necessary orders for withdrawal of their Units from within the 14 Mile Area. Since
then, there has not been any confirmation from South Sudan of the withdrawal of its
elements and equipment.
48. The reopening of border crossing corridors (bench mark 5) has been achieved,
including the reopening of the Meiram-Aweil crossing, which was temporarily closed
owing to the COVID-19 pandemic. Four of the ten corridors are currently open and
functioning: Buram-El Murra, Higlig-Bentiu, Kosti-Renk and Meiram-Aweil. Only
the Meiram-Aweil crossing is manned. With regard to the border demarcation
(benchmark 6), two meetings of the Joint Demarcation Committee were held, one in
Juba from 3 to 9 November 2020 and the other in Khartoum from 12 to 19 November
2020.
49. In accordance with benchmark 7, with the exception of team site 22
(Abu Qussa/Wunkur), the parties have deployed national monitors to participate in
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism operational activities.

10/16

21-04894

S/2021/383

IV. Administrative aspects and mission support
50. UNISFA remains one of the most remote mission headquarters in an extremely
non-permissive environment with long and difficult supply chains. Force mobility,
improving operational resilience, responsibly managing the environmental footprint,
sustainable living conditions, real-life support and improved connectivity continue to
be the focus of mission support.
51. As at 1 March 2021, the overall female representation in UNISFA stood at
12.7 per cent, with women accounting for 20 per cent in the civilian component,
11.7 per cent in the military component and 34 per cent in the police component.
UNISFA routinely reaches out to female candidates for all vacancies to encourage
applications. Living conditions, opportunities for promotion, training and welfare
concerns are rigorously addressed in order to attract and retain female staff.
52. During the reporting period, the mission completed the repatriation of
295 personnel to maintain the troop ceiling at 3,550, in accordance with Securit y
Council resolution 2469 (2019). As at 1 March 2021, the UNISFA military
component, including the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, stood
at 3,419 personnel, comprising 3,016 men and 403 women (3,164 troops, 131 military
observers and 124 staff officers). The current troop deployment is below the
authorized ceiling of 3,550 by 131 (43 staff officers and military observers,
86 personnel of the Aviation Unit and 2 personnel from conting ent units yet to be
deployed).
53. The police component strength stood at 47 officers – 31 male and 16 female –
against an authorized total of 640 police personnel (148 individual police officers and
492 formed police unit personnel). The low rate of deployment is attributed to the
non-issuance of visas to the police personnel by the Government of the Sudan.
54. As at 1 March 2021, the number of civilian staff stood at 156 international staff,
33 United Nations Volunteers and 80 national staff, against an authorized total of 174
international staff, 36 United Nations Volunteers and 88 national staff. The vacancy
rate stood at 10.34 per cent for international staff and 6.10 per cent for national staff.
55. The Government of the Sudan issued 237 visas for UNISFA personnel during
the reporting period, while 163 visas remained pending (15 for international staff
members, 13 for military personnel, 77 for police personnel, 2 for consultants and 56
for other contractors).
56. Company operating bases remained deployed at Farouk, Diffra, Goli and Todach
(Sector North); Dokura/Rumajak, Noong and Abyei (Sector Centre); and Marial
Achak, Athony, Banton, Tejalei and Agok (Sector South). Temporary operating bases
for dry season deployment were established at Dokura 2 (Sector Central); Rumamier
and Leu (Sector South); and Um Khariet (North Sector).
57. UNISFA also supports four Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism team sites, namely team site 11 (Kiir Adem/Safahah) and team site 12
(Sumayah/War Abar) in Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
Sector 1 (Gok Machar). In Sector 2 (Kadugli), UNISFA supports team site 21
(Tishwin) and team site 22 in Abu Qussa/Wunkur. However, the mission has suffered
from localized opposition at both these latest sites, resulting in contractor trucks and
drivers being blocked from accessing team sites 21 and 22.
58. Infrastructure and environmental installations continue to be upgraded at all
UNISFA camps. Priority is given to improving old troop accommodation that is no
longer fit for purpose, putting in place flood mitigation measures and constructing a

21-04894

11/16

S/2021/383

new heliport. The new level II hospital has been completed and preparations are under
way to move the medical operation to the hospital.
59. The mission continues to face shortages in laterite, gravel and other materials,
and its contractors are often subjected to delayed road clearances from the Sudan,
leading to the suspension of essential infrastructure works, including those in support
of Force mobility.
60. A third fixed-wing long-term air charter is being sourced by United Nations
Headquarters in support of medical evacuations, passenger operations and cargo on
the northern route to Khartoum (see S/2020/308, para. 46). Following the two military
helicopter accidents in February and May 2019 and the subsequent suspension of their
operations by Headquarters and repatriation of the personnel, the mission continues
to operate with civilian helicopters only. However, the redeployment from the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to Abyei of two
Chinese helicopters and associated personnel under letter of assist is at an advanced
stage, awaiting final clearance from the Government of the Sudan.
Culture of performance
61. UNISFA is the pilot mission for the smart camp initiative, having been piloting
its enabling Internet of things platform and the field remote infrastructure monitoring
system. UNISFA has already piloted the installation of smart meters for the
consumption of power and water as well as alert systems for critical infrastructure,
such as wastewater treatment and power generation plant. The success of the original
pilot has led to a significant uptake in field remote infras tructure monitoring system
among field operations globally. The current pilot builds on this experience to develop
truly smart camps. To that end, UNISFA is finalizing six proofs of concept in the
following areas: (a) automation of reporting – real time verification of assets for
management and financial reporting; (b) automation of reporting – environment
parameters for power and water usage, as well as solid waste management, into the
mission-wide environmental action plan; (c) predictive analysis – automated alerts
predicting failure of critical infrastructure such as generators and wastewater
treatment plant; (d) automation of function – refuelling of generators and refilling of
main feeder tanks; (e) automation of function – irrigation using recycled wastewater,
which improves the survival rate of saplings for carbon offset and ensures that the
oxidation pond is depleted before the wet season; and (f) monitoring and metering of
well-water abstraction.
62. All the smart camp functions will be fully rolled out at one military camp near
the Abyei headquarters in the coming months. The collection, collation and curation
of the data, as well as the installation methodology, will be optimized and documented
as a model for all camps.
63. Performance of contractors is closely monitored for productivity and quality
using data from the UNISFA call centre and quality management application. This is
in turn used to manage the performance of the staff in these supervisory roles.
Managers are increasing their use of productivity data from various systems,
including Umoja, to devise workplans and improve performance.
COVID-19 response
64. The UNISFA COVID-19 task force has charted a contingency plan and a
medical plan to respond to the pandemic. There had been 198 cas es of COVID-19
reported in the local community, as at March 2021, based on the polymerase chain
reaction test, with 10 confirmed deaths. From the beginning of 2021 to 9 April,
UNISFA had 79 positive cases, which were mostly mild and asymptomatic. The
outbreak was confined to UNISFA headquarters in Abyei. Of the 79 cases that tested
12/16

21-04894

S/2021/383

positive, 16 were still active, of which 5 were uniformed personnel and 11 civilian
personnel (international staff, international contractors and national staff). Since the
beginning of 2021, there have been two cases of contingent personnel testing positive
for COVID-19. All necessary infection prevention and control measures were in
place, and maximum efforts have been exerted to ensure that all staff comply with the
use of the personal infection preventive measures. All United Nations Headquarters
guidelines regarding the COVID-19 outbreak measures in the field missions are fully
adhered to, and the mission is obtaining all available support and guidance in
controlling this moderate outbreak. The rotation of troop-contributing country
personnel proceeded seamlessly. The quarantine facility, with 220 beds, where
incoming troops are quarantined before being dispatched to their locations, is
contributing towards infection prevention, control and monitoring. To monitor
compliance with COVID-19 measures and guidelines, the task force has entrusted its
subcommittee on compliance to conduct checks at all mission camps, company
operating bases and team sites. The findings are presented to the task force and
subsequently submitted to the mission leadership for decision -making. The mission
has circulated compliance measures using posters, news briefs and broadcasts to
enhance the awareness of personnel and inform them of possible disciplinar y actions
and other consequences that they may face in case of non-compliance. Inter-office
memorandums have been used to emphasize the significance of compliance with the
infection prevention and control measures against the spread of COVID -19 and to
point out the consequences of non-compliance. In late 2020, UNISFA signed a
memorandum of understanding to support local hospitals in managing the pandemic.
65. UNISFA acquired ventilators and personal protective equipment through the
global systems contract of the Global Service Centre. As an interim measure,
whenever the mission encountered supply chain challenges, it procured personal
protective equipment on local markets in Khartoum and Entebbe, Uganda. Currently,
the mission has an adequate stockpile of all components of personal protective
equipment. The task force has a subcommittee on supply that holds weekly stock
monitoring meetings to discuss stock levels and reorder and plan the distribution of
the equipment to UNISFA personnel. Given the mission’s l imited medical
capabilities, supportive medical care can be provided to patients with mild and
moderate cases of COVID-19 only. As at the beginning of 2021, the mission had
established a 16-bed capacity isolation unit which is equipped to monitor and manag e
all mild and moderate infection cases. There is no level III intensive care facility
within the mission or in the local community, and there is therefore no capability to
handle severe and critical cases. All such cases, especially those with underlying
comorbidities, are evacuated to specialized designated centres in Addis Ababa or
Nairobi. The mission established COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction testing
capability in October 2020. The laboratory has since been accredited by the
Government of the Sudan, and the test certificates are valid and acceptable for travel
to the countries within the region. From the beginning of the pandemic, the mission
counselling unit has provided input for the contingency plan on ways to address the
psychosocial aspects of the pandemic. UNISFA personnel who were outside the
mission and not able to return are now able to do so, as commercial airports in the
region are now fully operational.
66. Owing to the remoteness of the mission and the non-permissive operational
environment, UNISFA faces many challenges that affect the timely provision of
effective medical care to both COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 patients. There is no
airport in Abyei for fixed-wing aircraft that could be used for urgent medical and
casualty evacuation. The lack of night flying capability can add several hours of delay
in life-threatening emergencies. No higher-level medical facilities with level III
intensive care capability are available nearby to handle emergencies. The nearest such
facilities are in Khartoum, Nairobi, Addis Ababa and Kampala, with a flight time of
21-04894

13/16

S/2021/383

more than five hours during daylight. Flight clearances must be secured from the
relevant Governments, and the mission has experienced several delays in obtaining
clearance for medical evacuation flights, as well as normal passenger and cargo
flights with medical supplies. Furthermore, the World Health Organization is not
represented in the mission area. Logistics and customs clearance procedures are
difficult and lengthy. The mission is dependent on the Sudan, South Sudan or Uganda
for clearance of goods and supplies. The restriction on air and surface transport is
affecting the mission’s supply chain and operations, as well as the movement of
personnel within the area of operations. The lack of diagnostic testing capability for
the community, in particular the lack of polymerase chain reaction and diagnostic
testing equipment, makes it difficult to realistically assess the impact of the pandemic
in the Abyei community.
67. The mission’s Conduct and Discipline Unit continued to highlight the
importance of zero tolerance for sexual misconduct. The mission has recorded one
allegation of sexual exploitation during the reporting period. UNISFA continues to
remind all staff members of the critical need to maintain the highest standards of
integrity, professionalism and respect for diversity in the face of the current
challenges.
68. The Strategic Communication and Public Information Office focused on
sensitizing staff and members of the Abyei communities with regard to observing
hygiene and other mitigating measures.

V. Financial aspects
69. By its resolution 2550 (2020) of 12 November 2020, the Security Council
extended the mandate of UNISFA until 15 May 2021. The General Assembly, by its
resolution 74/283 of 30 June 2020, appropriated the amount of $263.8 million for th e
maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021. Should the
Council decide to extend the mandate of UNISFA beyond 15 March 2021, the cost of
maintaining the mission would be limited to the amounts approved by the General
Assembly. As at 30 March 2021, unpaid assessed contributions to the special account
for UNISFA amounted to $61.7 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $2,723.9 million.
Reimbursement of troop costs were made for the period up to 31 December 2020,
while reimbursement of the costs of contingent-owned equipment and
self-sustainment has been made for the period up to 31 December 2020 in accordance
with the quarterly payment schedule.

VI. Observations and recommendations
70. I welcome the continued strengthening of relations between the Sudan and
South Sudan, as exemplified by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan, Mariam
al-Sadiq al-Mahdi selecting Juba as her first visit upon assuming her duties in the new
cabinet of the Government of the Sudan, as well as the engagement between the
parties on the final status of Abyei and the demarcation of the border.
71. I am encouraged by steps taken by the two parties to convene and participate in
joint bodies related to the management of the border. In particular, I welcome the
holding of a meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism in Khartoum on
28 and 29 October 2020. I urge the parties to effectively follow up on the agreed
written conclusions of the previous and earlier Mechanism meetings, including the
decisions deferred to the respective presidencies. Those include not only the issue of
protection of the Diffra oil fields, but also the formation of a joint team to investigate
14/16

21-04894

S/2021/383

the attacks that occurred in Nainai and Kolom on 19 and 22 January 2020. I am
concerned that, in spite of the clear direction expressed by the Mechanism, the parties
did not organize a meeting of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee during the
reporting period. The Committee has not convened since November 2017.
72. I am also concerned that no progress has been made regarding the
operationalization of the Athony airstrip, the deployment of a civilian Deputy Head
of Mission and the issuance of outstanding visas for the three formed police units and
148 (the authorized ceiling) individual police officers. I would also urge the Sudanese
and South Sudanese authorities to permit the deployment of human rights expertise
and to strengthen local capacities to assist with management of law and order, ensure
the humane and dignified treatment of suspects and other detainees and facilitate
accountability for serious violations.
73. The rapprochement between the parties has yet to be felt in Abyei, where the
relations between the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities remain tense. In this
connection, I am encouraged that both communities took part in a peace conference
in February 2021, in Aweil, South Sudan, a location they both agreed on. Although
the communities did not sign an agreement as the outcome of the conference, they did
express commitment to further engage with each other to ensure a peaceful
transhumance. To further inter-community dialogue, I call for enhanced engagement
between the parties in the local peace process, including on the issue of the grazing
entitlements of the pastoralists and other issues of mutual concern. I also encourage
the continuation of progress in the inclusion of women in local peace dialogues.
74. I welcome the communiqué adopted by the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union at its 966th meeting, held on 24 November 2020, on the situation in
Abyei. In this connection, I count on the commitment of the African Union to enhance
its efforts to promote a political mediation, including through possible support to the
parties in resuming the meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, and wish
to reiterate that the United Nations stands ready to support the organization of such
meetings. I further echo the request of the African Union Peace and Security Council,
in paragraph 11 of the communiqué, that “the African Union Commission and the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel … develop modalities for releasing
the report on the killing of Chief Kuol Deng Kuol of the Ngok Dinka, and … ensure
that the report is used as a basis for community reconciliation, sensitization and peace
process in Abyei”.
75. I thank my Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa, Parfait Onanga -Anyanga, for
facilitating consultations with the Governments of the Sudan, South Sudan and
Ethiopia and relevant stakeholders, including the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel, to discuss the exit strategy of UNISFA, which should prioritize
the safety and security of civilians living in Abyei and take in to account the stability
of the region. As noted in my letter of 1 April (S/2021/322), the consultations have to
date been inconclusive on the future of UNISFA, and no options that would be
minimally acceptable to the parties have yet been formulated.
76. UNISFA will continue to support, alongside the humanitarian and other actors,
the communities in Abyei handling the COVID-19 pandemic.
77. In conclusion, I wish to extend my gratitude and appreciation to the acting Head
of Mission/Force Commander of UNISFA, Major General Kefyalew Amde Tessema,
and all UNISFA personnel for their tireless efforts to maintain peace and security,
often under very difficult conditions. I also commend my Specia l Envoy for the Horn
of Africa, Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, the African Union, including the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel, and the Government of Ethiopia for their active
engagement in support of the stabilization of the Abyei Area.

21-04894

15/16

S/2021/383

16/16

21-04894
