IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reporCI of the Sixth Committee

in so far as States Parties to this Convention are bound under
those conventions to prosecute or hand over the hostage-taker,
the present Convention shall not apply to an act of hostagetaking committed in the course of armed conflicts as defined in
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the Protocols thereto, including armed conflicts, mentioned in article 1, paragraph 4, of
Additional Protocol I of 1977, 27 in which peoples are fighting
against colonial domination and alien occupation and against
racist r6gimes in the exercise of their right of self-determination,
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations.
Article 13
This Convention shall not apply where the offence is committed within a single State, the hostage and the alleged offender are nationals of that State and the alleged offender is
found in the territory of that State.
Article 14
Nothing in this Convention shall be construed as justifying
the violation of the territorial integrity or political independence
of a State in contravention of the Charter of the United Nations.
Article 15
The provisions of this Convention shall not affect the application of the Treaties on Asylum, in force at the date of the
adoption of this Convention, as between the States which are
parties to those Treaties; but a State Party to this Convention
may not invoke those Treaties with respect to another State
Party to this Convention which is not a party to those Treaties.
Article 16
Any dispute between two or more States Parties concerning the interpretation or application of this Convention
which is not settled by negotiation shall, at the request of one
of them, be submitted to arbitration. If within six months from
the date of the request for arbitration the parties are unable to
agree on the organization of the arbitration, any one of those
parties may refer the dispute to the International Court of
Justice by request in conformity with the Statute of the Court.
1.

2. Each State may at the time of signature or ratification of
this Convention or accession thereto declare that it does not
consider itself bound by paragraph 1 of this article. The other
States Parties shall not be bound by paragraph 1 of this article
with respect to any State Party which has made such a reservation.
3. Any State Party which has made a reservation in accordance with paragraph 2 of this article may at any time withdraw that reservation by notification to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations.
Article 17
1. This Convention is open for signature by all States until
31 December 1980 at United Nations Headquarters in New
York.

2. This Convention is subject to ratification. The instruments
of ratification shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations.
3. This Convention is open for accession by any State. The
instruments of accession shall be deposited with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
Article 18
This Convention shall enter into force on the thirtieth
day following the date of deposit of the twenty-second instrument of ratification or accession with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations.
2. For each State ratifying or acceding to the Convention
after the deposit of the twenty-second instrument of ratification
or accession, the Convention shall enter into force on the thirtieth day after deposit by such State of its instrument of ratification or accession.
1.

Article 19
Any State Party may denounce this Convention by writ•
ten notification to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
2. Denunciation shall take effect one year followina the date
on which notification is received by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.
1.

Article 20
The original of this Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally
authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary-Oeneral of tbo
United Nations, who shall send certified copies thereof to all
States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized
thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this Convention, opened for signature at New York on ... .a•

34/147.

Report of the Special Commfflee o■ die
Charter of the lfnJted Nations and oa ...
Strengthening of the Role of the Orpnlwflo■

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its support for the purposes and principles
set forth in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 992 (X) of 21 November
1955, 2285 (XXII) of 5 December 1967, 2552 (XXIV)
of 12 December 1969, 2697 (XXV) of 11 December
1970, 2968 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972 and 3349
(XXIX) of 17 December 1974,
Recalling also its resolutions 2925 (XXVII) of 27
November 1972, 3073 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973
and 3282 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 on the strengthening of the role of the United Nations,
Recalling especially its resolution 3499 (XXX) of 15
December 1975, by which it established the Special
Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on
the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization, and
its resolutions 31/28 of 29 November 1976, 32/45 of
8 December 1977 and 33/94 of 16 December 1978,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee,29
Noting that progress has been made in fulfilling the
mandate of the Special Committee,
Recalling its decision, adopted at its 4th plenary
meeting on 21 September 1979, to include in the agenda
of its thirty-fourth session the item entitled "Settlement
by peaceful means of disputes between States",
Noting the importance that pre-session consultations
among the members of the Special Committee and other
interested States may have in facilitating the fulfilment
of its task,
Considering that the Special Committee bas not yet
completed the mandate entrusted to it,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee
on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization;
2. Decides that the Special Committee should continue its work in pursuance of the following tasks with
which it is entrusted:
(a) To list the proposals which have been made or
will be made in the Committee and to identify those
which have awakened special interest;
2s

The Convention was opened for signature on 18 December

1979.

Official Records of the General A.1,embl)', Thlrl)'•fOMrth
Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/34/33).
29

ar A/32/ 144, annex I.

247

248

General Aasembly-Tlllrty-fourth Session

(b) To examine proposals which have been made or
will be made in the Committee with a view to according
priority to the consideration of those areas on which general agreement is possible;
3. Requests the Special Committee at its next
session: 30
(a) To continue its work on the proposals made by
Member States regarding the question of the maintenance of international peace and security with a view to
listing and examining those proposals;
(b) To consider proposals made by Member States
on the question of rationalization of existing procedures
of the United Nations and, subsequently, any proposals
under other topics;
4. Further requests the Special Committee, in the
light of the progress it has achieved concerning the question of the peaceful settlement of disputes, to continue its
work on this question with a view to developing and
recommending a means of bringing the work to an
appropriate conclusion on the basis of the list prepared
by the Special Committee in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 33/94;
5. Requests the Special Committee to be mindful of
the importance of reaching general agreement whenever
that has significance for the outcome of its work;
6. Urges members of the Special Committee to
participate fully in its work in fulfilment of the mandate
entrusted to it;
7. Invites Governments to submit or to bring up to
date, if they deem it necessary, their observations and
proposals in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3499 (XXX);
8. Requests the Secretary-General to render all assistance to the Special Committee;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to bring up to
date as quickly as possible the Repertory of Practice of
United Nations Organs, as mandated in resolutions 796
(VIII) of 27 November 1953, 992 (X) of 21 November
1955 and 2968 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972;
10. Requests the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly at its thirty- •
fifth session;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Report of the Special
Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and
on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization".

105th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34/148.

Report of the Committee on Relations with
the Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country, 31
Considering that the problems related to the privileges
and immunities of the missions accredited to the United
Nations, the security of the missions and the safety of
their personnel are of great importance and concern to
the Member States as well as the primary responsibility
of the host country,
30
81

See also sect. X.B.8, decision 34/432.

Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Seuion, Supplement No. 26 (A/34/26).

Deeply concerned at the recent acts of violence against
permanent missions to the United Nations that endanger
their security and the lives of their personnel,
1. Accepts the recommendations of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 42 of its report;
2. Strongly condemns the acts of violence against
missions accredited to the United Nations and their personnel as incompatible with the status of such missions
and their personnel under international law;
3. Urges once again the host country to take without
delay effective measures to ensure adequate security for
all permanent missions to the United Nations and their
personnel;
4. Decides to continue the work of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country, in conformity with
General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971, with the purpose of examining on a more
regular basis all matters falling within its terms of reference, and requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Committee with all necessary assistance;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Report of the Committee on Relation's with the Host Country".
105th plenary meeting
17 December 1979

34/ 149.

Registration and publication of treaties and
intemational agreements punuant to Ardcle
102 of the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/141 A and B of 19 December 1978,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his report32 and takes note of the information contained therein;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts in order to eliminate, at the earliest opportunity,
the current backlog in the registration and publication of
treaties and international agreements;
3. Notes that, in order to achieve better co-ordination
of international action in this matter and to prepare, if
needed, new modifications of the General Assembly
regulations to give effect to Article 102 of the Charter
of the United Nations, 33 the Secretariat, on 9 October
1979, sent to Governments and certain intergovernmental organizations a questionnaire regarding activities
in the matter of international agreements;
4. Expresses the hope that by 31 March 1980, the
date envisaged in the questionnaire, sufficient information will have reached the Secretariat to permit the
preparation of a report;
5. Decides to include in the ~rovisional agenda of its
thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Registration and
publication of treaties and international agreements
pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter of the United
Nations".
105th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
82 A/34/ 466.
83
Adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 97

(I).
For the text of the regulations as modified by resolutions 364
B (IV) and 482 (V), see United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 76,
p.XVIIl.
