S/PV.8405

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8405

th meeting
Monday, 19 November 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Adom
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Amde
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Clay
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-38644 (E)
*1838644*

S/PV.8405

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

including a Hamas-affiliated television station and a
hotel, resulting in the killing seven Palestinians — at
least four identified by the Israeli army as members of
armed groups.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, to
participate in this meeting.
Mr. Mladenov is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Jerusalem.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: In recent days, we have
witnessed another dangerous escalation of violence
in Gaza that risked unleashing an armed conflict with
catastrophic consequences for 2 million impoverished
Palestinians — people who live under the control of
Hamas and have endured three wars and crippling
Israeli closures. The Secretary-General warned that a
new war in Gaza would bring forth another unbearable
tragedy and urged all parties to exercise maximum
restraint. My team and I worked closely with Egypt
and all concerned parties to ensure a return to the
2014 ceasefire arrangements. Thankfully, a precarious
restoration of calm has now been achieved. We must all
work to ensure that this calm is maintained.
The period of 11 to 13 November saw one of the
fiercest exchanges of fire since the 2014 Gaza conflict.
The escalation was triggered by an operation Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) inside the Gaza Strip in which
a local commander of Hamas Al-Qassam Brigades and
six other Palestinians were killed. One IDF officer was
also killed and a second injured in an incident. In the
following two days, militants in Gaza launched some
450 rockets and mortars at Israel, including at the towns
of Ashkelon, Sderot and Netivot, killing one Palestinian
civilian and seriously wounding one Israeli civilian. An
IDF soldier was also seriously wounded by a targeted
anti-tank guided-missile strike on a bus transporting
military personnel in Kfar Aza. The IDF responded in
turn with a series of air strikes on 160 militant targets,
2/18

19/11/2018

The fragility of the situation underscores the urgent
need to fundamentally change the dynamics on the
ground that address the underlying political issues. Two
million Palestinians in Gaza cannot be held hostage to
political grandstanding and brinkmanship. Their lives
matter and they deserve real leadership that addresses
the real problems of Gaza.
The latest outbreak of violence came just as the
United Nations and its partners were intensifying
efforts to alleviate Gaza’s deepening humanitarian
and economic crises and, critically, to provide
space for ongoing Egyptian-led efforts to advance
intra-Palestinian reconciliation. This is essential
to ending the occupation and resolving the wider
political conflict.
Significant headway has already been made on the
implementation of the package of urgent interventions
endorsed by the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians at its September meeting, held in New
York. In October, the United Nations started importing
and monitoring the delivery of donor-funded fuel to
Gaza’s power station. This resulted in the greatest
supply of electricity since March 2017 — a minimum of
11 hours per day. I reiterate the United Nations sincere
gratitude to the Government of the State of Qatar for
the generous funding to this end.
The impact has been immediate. Water supply
has increased, the risk of sewage overflow has been
reduced, hospitals are less dependent on precarious
generators, street lights are on again, children can
study and play, and families have more cash in hand to
meet their daily needs. These improvements, however,
are temporary. They provide much-needed relief, but
can do little to reverse the long-standing, structural
problems affecting Gaza, driven by years of crippling
closures and Hamas control.
The implementation of the other urgent
humanitarian interventions in Gaza must also be
expedited. My team and I will continue to engage with
the Palestinian Government, donors and partners on
the ground to support several initiatives. These include
finding a sustainable solution to Gaza’s electricity
and health problems, increasing the supply of potable
18-38644

19/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

water and medical supplies, and sewage treatment.
These should take place alongside concerted efforts to
rescue the economy through cash-for-work and other
emergency measures.
Yet, the international community cannot bear
the burden of addressing Gaza’s problems alone. The
primary responsibility falls on the parties themselves.
The clock on intra-Palestinian reconciliation is ticking.
I urge all Palestinian parties to not waste time and
engage in earnest and achieve visible progress in
the coming six months. This is in the interests of the
Palestinian people. It is in the interests of peace. The
success of international efforts in Gaza depends on the
parties’ willingness to confront the inevitable hurdles,
withstand the internal political consequences and stay
committed to the reconciliation process over the long
term. If any side fails, every side fails.
Hamas and militant groups must stop all provocations
and attacks. Israel must significantly improve the
movement and access of goods and people to and from
Gaza as a step towards the lifting of the closures, in line
with resolution 1860 (2009). The Palestinian Authority
must strengthen its engagement in Gaza, which is an
integral part of the Palestinian territory.
In earlier incidents, before the most recent
escalation on 26 and 27 October, 34 rockets were
launched by Palestinian Islamic Jihad towards Israel.
In response, the IDF targeted 95 Hamas and Palestinian
Islamic Jihad military sites across the Strip. A hospital
in the vicinity of one of the targets was damaged, as
were several homes in Gaza City. On 28 October, the
IDF struck and killed three Palestinian children aged
13 to 15 in the southern Gaza Strip, who they said were
placing improvised explosive devices at the security
fence — a claim refuted by the Palestinian Centre for
Human Rights. Protests the next day saw some 3,000
participants, with 1 Palestinian killed and another 15
injured by IDF live fire.
I remain very concerned by Israel’s persistent use
of live fire against protesters. I call on the authorities
to exercise maximum restraint and refrain from using
lethal force, except as a last resort. I also urge Hamas
and other Palestinian militants to end the indiscriminate
firing of rockets into southern Israel and to stop all
violence near the fence, including attempts to breach it.
Overall in the reporting period, Israeli security
forces killed 31 Palestinians in Gaza, including
four children. One IDF soldier was killed during the

S/PV. 8405

11 November operation. Meanwhile, in the occupied
West Bank, Israeli security forces killed four
Palestinians. On 22 October, Israeli security forces
shot and killed a Palestinian man in Hebron after he
was reported to have stabbed and injured an Israeli
soldier. Three other attempts against Israeli civilians
or Israeli security forces personnel were reported near
the Kiryat Arba and Kfar Adumim settlements on
5 and 6 November, and in Jerusalem on 14 November.
On 24 October, a 21-year-old Palestinian man was
shot and killed by the IDF during clashes following an
IDF weapons search near Tubas in the northern West
Bank. On 26 October, in the context of clashes between
Israeli settlers and Palestinians near Ramallah, Israeli
security forces shot and killed a 33-year-old Palestinian
and injured nine others; another 28-year-old Palestinian
subsequently died of his wounds later in November.
Israeli settlement activity continues to advance,
eating away at the viability of a contiguous future
Palestinian State. I reiterate that all settlement activities
are illegal under international law and an obstacle to
peace, and must immediately cease. On 5 November,
Israeli authorities advanced two plans for a total of 264
housing units in the East Jerusalem settlement of Ramot.
The demolition and confiscation of Palestinian-owned
structures also continue, with a total of 31 structures
demolished or seized by the authorities, citing a lack
of building permits, which are nearly impossible for
Palestinians to obtain in the Israeli-controlled Area
C and East Jerusalem. As a result, some 25 people
were displaced and, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the livelihoods
of 200 others were affected.
Meanwhile, on 4 November the Israeli authorities
informed the High Court of Justice of their decision
to demolish an illegal outpost comprising some dozen
Israeli families that had been established in recent
months in an abandoned military base in the Jordan
Valley. I welcome the announcement by the Israeli
authorities on 21 October to delay the demolition
of Khan Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu and reiterate the
call of the international community for plans for the
demolition of that community and all others facing
similar pressures to be annulled.
On 28 and 29 October, the Palestine Liberation
Organization Central Council held its thirtieth session
in Ramallah. In its final statement, the Central
Council reaffirmed recent decisions taken to suspend
its recognition of the State of Israel until the latter

18-386443/18

S/PV.8405

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

recognizes the State of Palestine, based on 4 June
1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its capital, as
well as to end security coordination in all of its forms
and disengage economically from Israel. A follow-up
committee chaired by President Mahmoud Abbas was
established to discuss the implementation of those
decisions.
The situation in Lebanon will be considered by the
Council this week. As we speak, the political actors
have yet to find an agreement on a national unity
Government. The delay hampers Lebanon’s ability
to address issues essential to its stability, including
the economy. We again encourage all stakeholders to
put national interests first and expeditiously reach an
agreement that preserves Lebanon’s stability and ability
to deliver on its international commitments.
In closing, let make two important points.
First, on Gaza, it is vital that all stakeholders work
to de-escalate the deteriorating situation and seize
the current window of opportunity to advance urgent
humanitarian and economic interventions, in line with
the conclusions of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee. I
would also like to reiterate the importance of sustained
support to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and extend
our gratitude to the State of Kuwait for the swift
disbursement of its $42 million contribution to the
Agency.
Palestinian factions must seize the opportunity to
engage in earnest with the Egyptian-led efforts to bring
Gaza back under the control of the legitimate Palestinian
Government. We in the international community must
do all we can to support those efforts. Israel must also
recognize that Gaza is about to explode, and in order
to prevent such an explosion, people must also see a
normalization of their lives, for which the closures need
to be relaxed and ultimately lifted.
We cannot stand idle and allow the division between
the West Bank and Gaza to be further entrenched. The
Palestinian people are demanding that their leadership
finally reunite Gaza and the West Bank, advance the
goal of peacefully ending the Israeli occupation and
establish a viable Palestinian State based on the relevant
United Nations resolutions. That is what people desire;
that is what they deserve.
Secondly, on the broader peace efforts, it is
essential that we prevent the further collapse of the
4/18

19/11/2018

foundations that must underpin any future agreement.
We must continue to consistently push back against
the entrenchment of the military occupation and the
erosion of international consensus on the final status
issues. Together, we must work with determination
and vigilance to establish an environment conducive
to the return of negotiations that will end the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, in line with the recommendations
of the Middle East Quartet report of 2016 (S/2016/595,
annex). The United Nations remains firmly committed
to advancing all efforts towards a just and lasting
Israeli-Palestinian peace, based on the relevant Council
resolutions.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. His presentations on
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict are always detailed
and well-considered. But, as we have pointed out, as a
survey of the threats to peace and security in the Middle
East, Mr. Mladenov’s briefings are, by their mandate,
very incomplete. While the Council remains focused
on the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians, it
ignores other, very serious conflicts in the Middle East.
One such conflict has in recent months come to the
doorstep of Europe and the United States — that is the
continued evidence of increased international terrorist
activity by the Iranian regime. Iranian assassinations
of political opponents are as old as the Islamic Republic
itself. While United States diplomats were still being
held hostage by Islamic revolutionaries in the United
States embassy in Tehran, Iranian agents and proxies
began a campaign of political murder in Europe, North
Africa and across the Middle East.
Iranian malign behaviour does not target one
country alone; it targets us all. We have seen that no
more profoundly than over the past months, in which
multiple European countries have publicly decried
Iranian attempts to murder dissidents on their own soil.
Since Mr. Mladenov’s previous briefing, on 30 October
Danish officials revealed a plot by Iranian intelligence
agents to murder three exiled Iranian dissidents on
Danish soil. The Danish Government arrested an
Iranian regime assassin in Norway on 21 October.
Danish officials are outraged, and rightly so. The
Iranian plot was such a blatant violation of Denmark’s
18-38644

19/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

sovereignty that one Danish politician compared the
plot to Russia’s attempted poisoning of the Skripals on
British soil earlier this year.
But Denmark is not the only country that has been
targeted by the regime. The Danish allegations came
just days after the French Government accused Iranian
intelligence of plotting a bomb attack on an Iranian
opposition rally in Paris in June. In that plot, a Belgian
husband and wife of Iranian origin were arrested, along
with a high-ranking Iranian diplomat in Austria. The
diplomat provided the directions and explosives for the
husband-and-wife team to bomb the Iranian resistance
gathering, which included United States citizens. All
three were arrested. Of course, all of that follows an
Iranian-backed attack on the United States consulate
in Basra, following months of the Iranian regime’s
violations of Iraqi national sovereignty.
Those attempts to murder their political opponents
on foreign soil reflect the true nature of the Iranian
regime. Those attacks are precisely the sort of behaviour
that led the United States to reimpose sanctions against
Iran on 5 November. That was the largest sanctions
action against Iran ever undertaken by the United
States. Our Administration long ago came to the
conclusion that much more needed to be done if there
was to be any chance to prod the Iranian Government
into the community of peaceful, law-abiding nations.
We have seen the tragic legacy of appeasement
before. The Council was, in many ways, created as a
counter to that failed diplomatic strategy. The Tehran
regime has proven itself to be the same violent and
predatory group of murderers that it was in the 1980s.
Our European allies are increasingly finding proof
of that in their own front yards. We must unite in our
efforts to stop that behaviour before it reaches more
innocent people across the world.
In fairness to Mr. Mladenov, his briefing on this
month’s events in the Middle East did touch on the
current violence in Gaza, but his reporting misses the
mark when he calls for restraint from both sides. Yes,
Israel launched air strikes on military posts, weapon
depots and intelligence assets in Gaza, but it did so
in response to the over 400 rockets and mortars that
were fired indiscriminately from Gaza into Israel.
Neighbourhoods were targeted. A bus was bombed by
an anti-tank missile. Families were forced into bomb
shelters to escape the barrage.

S/PV. 8405

Even if those present accept the Hamas excuse
that it launched its missiles in response to an Israeli
covert operation, the fact cannot be escaped that the
Gaza militants targeted civilians in response. Their
actions were the actions not of a nation exercising selfdefence, but of a terrorist group seizing a pretext to kill
civilians. Neither can the fact be escaped that the group
responsible for the rocket attacks, Palestinian Islamic
Jihad, is an Iranian-supported group. Palestinian
Islamic Jihad is yet another terrorist proxy that Iran
calls on to stoke violence and instability in the region,
and those missing facts are crucial. The fact is that there
is only one side that attacks indiscriminately; one side
that targets civilians; one side that terrorizes to achieve
its objectives.
But I will close by agreeing with Mr. Mladenov on
one point. Both sides must work to resolve the conflict
in the Middle East. Neither side can get everything that
it wants. Both sides must compromise, and compromise
can begin only with a clear, honest and complete
appraisal of the facts on the ground. Without that, this
monthly discussion is doomed to fail in its objective of
helping to achieve peace.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
for the painful briefing he delivered, which echoes what
many among us have repeated time and again in this
very Chamber — that the situation in the Gaza Strip
remains on the brink of another potential destructive
conflict.
There is international consensus that we need to
strengthen multilateralism and the role of the United
Nations, while reaffirming its role in preventing a third
world war, especially in the light of the great losses in
lives and property during the first two. We renew our
commitment to supporting multilateral mechanisms in
the face of the pressures to which they have recently
been subjected. We support the Secretary-General’s
statement to the effect that the Security Council has
dealt with the Middle East peace process in a way that
has helped to diminish people’s trust in the international
community’s ability to provide solutions. That is
especially true given the fact that the Charter of the
United Nations confers the authority and responsibility
to deal with such crises upon the Security Council,
which has allowed Israel, the occupying Power, to

18-386445/18

S/PV.8405

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

continue to violate international law and disregard the
Council’s resolutions with impunity.
Jointly with Bolivia, last Tuesday we submitted
a request for the convening of a meeting under the
agenda item “Other business”, given the situation on
the ground and its dangerous escalation, which equals
in intensity the events of the 2014 conflict, when the
Israeli special forces pushed three kilometres into the
Gaza Strip. That was a blatant violation and evinced
a total disregard for the safety of civilians in order to
commit a crime in violation of international law and
international humanitarian law. The incursion led to
the deaths of 14 people. Israel did not stop at that point.
After it began another cycle of violence on Sunday,
Israel launched widespread air strikes for two full days
against various areas in the Gaza Strip, which killed
unarmed Palestinian civilians and damaged civilian
infrastructure.
The Israeli approach is known to all. Israel’s
ongoing targeting of civilians in the Gaza Strip did
not begin on Sunday and will not end on Tuesday,
but regrettably it is clearly escalating. Since March,
the Israeli occupying forces have continued to use
excessive, disproportionate and arbitrary force to target
civilian demonstrators with live ammunition. Since
the beginning of the Great March of Return, a total of
228 have been martyred, including 41 children, and the
number of injured has exceeded 24,000 individuals,
many of whom have suffered permanent disabilities.
Israel’s actions constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity, in accordance with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
In that regard, we reiterate our condemnation of
the targeting of innocent civilians by anyone, anywhere
and at any time. We hold Israel, the occupying
Power, fully responsible for the acts of violence it
has committed and the escalation it has caused. We
call on the Security Council to implement its relevant
resolutions on the protection of Palestinian civilians,
especially resolutions 605 (1987) and 904 (1994), on
the need to implement the Fourth Geneva Convention
in the occupied Palestinian territory. Israel would not
have continued to act that way — similar to what we
witnessed over the past few days, with its provocative
acts against the Palestinian people — if the Security
Council had stood firm and united against such acts.
Once again, we reaffirm the importance of the
Council’s playing a complementary role to the United
6/18

19/11/2018

Nations efforts led by Mr. Mladenov. We highly
value his role and that of Egypt in putting an end to
those aggressive acts. We hope that those efforts will
bear fruit and lead to a sustainable ceasefire and the
protection of civilians in the Gaza Strip.
It is unfortunate that not only does the dangerous
security situation facing civilians in the Gaza Strip
threaten their safety and security, but also that the
blockade imposed on the Gaza Strip, now entering
its eleventh year, has led to the deterioration of
the humanitarian, economic, security and political
situations there. As expressed clearly in the warnings
issued by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, the situation in Gaza
will lead to an explosion. Half of the population in the
Gaza Strip is living below the line of poverty. That is
why he calls on the international community to take
decisive action to address that deteriorating situation.
Israel is legally and materially responsible for the
crimes that it is perpetrating. We call on Israel to lift
the unjust blockade against the Gaza Strip, which has
led to this unprecedented and dangerous deterioration
in the humanitarian situation and living conditions
of Palestinian civilians. We call on the international
community and international organizations to bring
pressure to bear on Israel to lift its blockade of the Gaza
Strip and open the crossings under its control.
Israel unfortunately continues its violations
against religious sites in East Jerusalem. Every day,
it organizes two rounds in which heavily armed
Israeli soldiers protect Jewish settlers who break into
the Al-Aqsa Mosque yards and hold religious rites.
Moreover, on 25 October Israeli forces assaulted and
arrested Coptic priests at the entrance of the Church of
the Holy Sepulchre in East Jerusalem. We renew our
rejection and condemnation of all Israel’s violations
concerning the holy sites, especially its attempts to
change the historic and legal status of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and to divide it spatially and temporally, as
well as to undermine the freedom of the religious rights
of Muslims there.
On Wednesday, the State of Kuwait gave its
donation of $42 million to the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), represented by Mr. Peter Mulrean in
New York. The State of Kuwait has provided UNRWA
with a total of $50 million in assistance this year in
order to enable it to provide basic services in its areas of
operations with a view to alleviating the humanitarian
and economic suffering of the Palestinian people. That
18-38644

19/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

will help guarantee the dignity of about 5.3 million
Palestinian refugees and assist over 500,000 Palestinian
refugee students.
In conclusion, we emphasize our principled and
steadfast position on achieving a comprehensive and
just solution of the Palestinian question in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions, the
principle of land for peace, the Quartet road map and
the Arab Peace Initiative adopted by all Arab States
at the Beirut summit in 2002. That solution would be
based on the withdrawal of Israel from all occupied
Palestinian territories to the borders of 4 June 1967 and
on the resolution of all final-status issues.
The leadership, the Government and the people of
the State of Kuwait fully support the Palestinian people.
We pay tribute to their steadfastness and support their
legitimate struggle against the Israeli occupation to
acquire all their legitimate political rights, including
the right to self-determination and to establish their
independent State on their land with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Allow me first
to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his informative
briefing and for his tireless efforts and those of his team,
working sometimes under very difficult circumstances.
Today, I will address three points: first, the situation
in Gaza: secondly, the developments in the West Bank:
and thirdly, the way forward.
First, on Gaza, we are deeply concerned by the
flare-up of violence that we witnessed at the beginning
of last week. We welcome the efforts of the United
Nations, Egypt and others that led to an agreement to
restore calm. It is now up to the parties to maintain that
restoration of relative calm. All parties must exercise
maximum restraint. They must refrain from any action
that could provoke an escalation, that would put civilian
lives at risk and that would jeopardize recent efforts
towards reducing tensions and a long-term truce.
We reiterate that all parties must comply with their
obligations under international law. We condemn the
indiscriminate firing of rockets. We reiterate that Israel
must ensure that all its responses are proportionate and
necessary at all times, in line with its obligations under
international law.
It has been said many times that the recent
escalation cannot be seen in isolation and only reminds
us that a sustainable solution for Gaza is needed, as

S/PV. 8405

Mr. Mladenov has also just said. The humanitarian and
economic situation must be improved. In that regard,
the opening of crossings and easing of restrictions on
the movement of goods and persons in and out of Gaza
are also needed, while taking into account Israel’s
legitimate security concerns. We continue to express
our full support for the efforts of the United Nations and
Nickolay Mladenov to improve the situation in Gaza.
We welcome the recent improvement in the electricity
supply.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains
committed to doing its part. Let me give three examples:
first, an additional contribution of €6 million to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East for this year; secondly, our
continued investment in the Gas for Gaza project; and
thirdly, through our trilateral meetings on water, energy
and crossings. A sustainable solution also includes the
need for intra-Palestinian reconciliation, which should
result in the return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza.
My second point is on the developments in the
West Bank. Rising tensions and an increase in violent
incidents in the West Bank, leading to the loss of life
on both sides, are highly concerning. The suspension of
the demolition of the community of Khan Al-Ahmar is
a positive development. However, the demolition plan
must be withdrawn definitively for it to no longer pose
a threat to a two-State-solution. Also in that regard,
we are very concerned about the announcement of new
settlements in East Jerusalem and Hebron. We reiterate
that settlements are illegal under international law and
are a violation of resolution 2334 (2016).
That brings me to my third point, on the way
forward. The current situation is a painful reminder
of the lack of progress on the peace process. Yet the
goal on which we all agree is bringing an end to the
conflict. Positive steps are now needed for the parties to
return to the negotiation table and to restart a genuine
peace process leading to a two-State solution, based on
the well-known parameters. That is the only way to a
sustainable solution, fulfilling the aspirations of both
sides.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his
briefing and his commitment day in and day out, and to
reiterate France’s support for him.
Every day that passes reaffirms something that
we regularly condemn before the Council: the false

18-386447/18

S/PV.8405

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

status quo that we are witnessing and which in fact
masks a daily deterioration of the situation, which may
at any time degenerate into an open crisis, as we have
once again seen in recent days in Gaza. Today, I will
specifically focus on Gaza, which is once again on the
brink, by highlighting three main elements.
First, between 11 and 13 November, the Gaza Strip
was on the point of toppling into a new deadly conflict,
such as the territory has experienced three times over
the past decade. Given the potential consequences of a
new conflict for the populations concerned, we join the
Secretary-General in calling for calm and restraint on
all sides. In a particularly tense context, we also stress
the need to avoid any initiative and action likely to
provoke an escalation.
Between 12 and 13 November, nearly 500 rockets
were launched towards Israeli territory in less than
24 hours. The fact that there were several victims is
to be condemned. The intensity of those strikes is
unprecedented, even during the conflict of 2014. We
have condemned in the strongest terms such firing of
rockets by Hamas and other armed groups at Israeli
territory.
The return to calm that we have now seen for
almost a week needs to be perpetuated based on the
2014 security arrangements in order to prevent a new
cycle of violence, of which the civilian populations
would again be the primary victims. In that regard,
we commend the efforts of Egypt and the United
Nations Special Coordinator. The restraint seen since
13 November should be noted. It must be preserved
regardless of the political cost for each side.
Secondly, the most recent peak in tensions, the
third since the summer and the most serious, is part of a
context of humanitarian collapse and political stalemate
in the Gaza Strip. For more than six months, there has
been a succession of violent incidents in Gaza against
the backdrop of a humanitarian crisis of unprecedented
severity. The number of protests that have taken
place and that continue along the separation fence is
terrible: 170 Palestinians killed and nearly 6,000 shot
since 30 March in the context of rallies fuelled by the
desperation of the population. France has condemned
the disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force
and called on Israel to respect the right of Palestinians
to demonstrate peacefully, as well as its obligation
to protect civilians under international humanitarian
8/18

19/11/2018

law. We have also condemned the manipulation of the
protests by Hamas and other armed groups.
To give immediate hope to the people of Gaza,
we must first address the humanitarian emergency.
The efforts of the Special Coordinator and all United
Nations agencies to rapidly improve the humanitarian
situation contribute significantly to such a response.
All actors must coordinate their efforts to that end.
Ultimately, only lifting the blockade, accompanied by
the necessary security guarantees for Israel, will make
it possible to meet the needs of the population.
Lastly, there can be no lasting solution to the crisis
in Gaza without a reconciliation agreement, which
must enable the Palestinian Authority to regain all its
prerogatives in the territory. We support that goal in
the framework of the efforts of Egypt and the Special
Coordinator. We call on all parties to resume the
dialogue to relaunch the process of inter-Palestinian
reconciliation, as an extension of the agreement reached
in Cairo a year ago.
Let us also remember that Gaza is not a stand-alone
territory and cannot be dissociated from the Palestinian
question as a whole. There will be no lasting peace in the
region without agreement between Israel and Palestine,
no viable Israeli-Palestinian agreement without a
Palestinian State, and no Palestinian State without an
agreement that allows for unity between Gaza and the
West Bank under the aegis of the legitimate Palestinian
authorities.
Given the situation in Gaza since last March, the
Security Council has never been able to speak with one
voice. That deafening silence more incomprehensible
by the day to the populations of the region, as it is to the
world watching us.
I would like to expand on my remarks regarding
the Palestinian question as a whole. Twenty-five years
after the signing of the Oslo Accords and 30 years after
the Algiers Declaration, we are close to the point of no
return. The promise of two States threatens to fade away
before our eyes, like a desert mirage. That promise is
deteriorating on the ground, as a result of settlements
and the political and territorial fragmentation of
Palestinians. But it is also vanishing from our minds,
in the absence of a political horizon. Generation after
generation, despair and fatalism are overcoming
Palestinians and Israelis, who live in two parallel
worlds and do not talk to one another. Accordingly, the
dynamics can only be negative.
18-38644

19/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Therefore this point must be hammered home:
there is no viable or realistic alternative to the twoState solution. The unique territorial reality, which is
taking shape before our eyes, would ultimately mean
that the Palestinians give up their national aspirations
and that the Israelis relinquish their democratic project.
It is therefore essential to fill the current political
vacuum. But I would like to remind our American
friends, as the President of the Republic has said to
President Trump on several occasions, that a peace
plan that fails to recognize the internationally agreed
parameters, particularly with regard to Jerusalem,
would be condemned to failure. Those parameters are
not options or a menu from which we can choose. They
are the indispensable foundation of any peace plan and
any future negotiations. Throwing off those parameters,
in particular where it concerns Jerusalem, is to take
the risk of transforming a conflict of a territorial and
political nature into an identity and religious conflict,
which would make any compromise impossible and
open a space into which all radical groups in the region
would seek to rush.
Allow me to revisit those parameters. They provide
for two States living in peace and security, along safe
and recognized borders, drawn on the basis of the 1967
lines, with possible territory swaps as agreed by the
parties. In that respect, the decision announced last
month to suspend the demolition of the Bedouin village
of Khan Al-Ahmar is a first step, but one that remains
tentative and revocable at all times. We therefore ask
the Israeli authorities to renounce it definitively. Khan
Al-Ahmar is in an area that is essential to the viability
of the two-State solution.
Jerusalem would be the future capital of the two
States. Nearly 600 housing units in settlements in
East Jerusalem — Ramat Shlomo and Ramot — were
approved earlier this month. Those advances further
weaken the project of a viable, sovereign and contiguous
Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its capital. With
nearly 5,800 approvals, the year 2018 is close to
reaching the record of 2012 in terms of settlements in
East Jerusalem.
There must be a fair and realistic solution for
Palestinian refugees. In the wait for a negotiated
solution, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East plays a key
role, which is crucial to preserve. The goal must be to
sustain the exemplary mobilization of the international

S/PV. 8405

community following the United States decision to
suspend its contribution to the Agency.
France is a friend to both Israelis and Palestinians.
It has no other interest than peace in the region and
the possibility for the populations concerned to live
in safety and dignity. The events that occurred a
week ago must be a warning: in Gaza as elsewhere,
the same causes always produce the same effects. If
we do not deal with those causes, we will not succeed
indefinitely in avoiding a new conflict. We therefore
have a collective responsibility within the Council to
act before it is too late. France will continue to spare no
effort in that regard.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): This is the second-to-last
meeting concerning the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, that my delegation
will be attending, and I have only to express the
profound feeling of frustration at the almost total lack
of movement towards a solution to the illegal Israeli
occupation to which the Palestinian people are subject.
Although the Security Council has adopted more
than 80 resolutions — 86 to be exact — that should
each constitute the unequivocal certainty that the State
of Israel and its allies are fully committed to peace
and security in the world, we are now witnesses to the
exact opposite. Let us take as an immediate reference
resolution 2334 (2016), on the illegality of Israeli
settlements in occupied Palestinian territories.
An example of the expansionist policies of Israel
are the demolitions in what is called Area C, or the
recent threat of demolition of the buildings in the
village of Khan Al-Ahmar, located in the heart of the
West Bank, where approximately 250 Palestinians
live. If that demolition is not permanently suspended,
it will swell the lists of Palestinians men and women
who are displaced from their homes. We again call on
the international community, including the Security
Council, not to recognize any alteration or modification
to the borders established in 1967.
We have also seen in the past few weeks how
Israel has increased its violent military actions against
the Palestinian civilian population. Last week Israeli
bombings killed seven Palestinians amid a brutal
military action that, due to the disproportionate use of
force and violence against the population of the Gaza
strip, has been compared to the 2014 attacks. In that
regard, my delegation categorically rejects the firing

18-386449/18

S/PV.8405

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of rockets into areas inhabited by civilians in Israeli
territories. We deem it inadmissible that heavy artillery
and lethal warfare machinery in general should be used
to target places inhabited by civilians who are not part
of the conflict.
During armed conflicts, it is the women and
children who are most affected, even more so if they
do not have the only intangible tool that can help them
get out of the situations of violence that oppress them:
education. It is for that reason that Bolivia has decided
to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration, an instrument
of a political nature that echoes our principled position
and reflects our commitment and advocacy when it
comes to the human right to education, on which our
future and the future of children depend, particularly
those who are victims of war.
In that order of priorities, we express our optimism
at the announcement of the ceasefire made by the
Government of Israel and Hamas militants on the
side of the Gaza Strip. We hope that the praiseworthy
mediation efforts that the Government of Egypt is
carrying out together with the Special Coordinator will
lead to the pacification of the area so that negotiations
can recommence with a view to resolving tensions
definitively. We cannot allow the military apparatus of
the Israeli Defence Forces to continue killing innocent
Palestinians, and we demand compliance with the
ceasefire between the parties in the terms agreed upon
in 2014.
On this occasion we again bring to the attention of
the Security Council the painful humanitarian situation
in Gaza. That situation has worsened as a result of the
latest attacks against the Palestinian population, which
has already been living under a dire Israeli blockade
for almost 12 years. In that context, we express our
deep concern for the nearly 20,000 people injured in
Gaza during the Great March of Return, which began in
March, who have still not received proper attention due
to the lack of medicines or basic surgical equipment in
the city’s hospitals and emergency centres.
The Israeli Government must lift the blockade
on the Gaza Strip, which for more than 11 years has
been living under a regime of collective punishment
that denies Palestinians access to water and sanitation,
restricts their human rights to health care and their
access to decent work and the freedom of movement.
That Government is responsible for a long list of
10/18

19/11/2018

violations, which all of us in this Chamber have been
witnessing month after month and year after year.
As it has done on other occasions, Bolivia demands
that Israel, the occupying Power, refrain from such
actions and fully comply with its legal obligations and
responsibilities under the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949.
We renew our firm commitment to all international
efforts seeking a peaceful solution conducive to ending
the situation of the Palestinian occupation. In that
regard, we endorse initiatives such as the Quartet road
map, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative
and others that aim to ensure a just and lasting peace so
that both peoples can live within recognized and secure
borders.
We reaffirm our conviction that the only longterm solution to the occupation suffered by the
Palestinian people is the two-State solution, which at
last provides for the establishment of a free, sovereign
and independent Palestinian State within the pre-1967
international borders and East Jerusalem as its capital,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his very
comprehensive and insightful briefing.
Unfortunately, despite our constant calls for
de-escalation in the Middle East, there has not been any
progress at all. On the contrary, last week’s escalation of
violence in and around Gaza resulted in casualties and
many wounded. After weeks of a relatively calm period,
we are facing a very alarming situation — one of the
most violent escalations since the last war in Gaza, in
2014. Nearly 470 rockets were fired into Israeli territory
by Hamas and the Islamic Jihad’s affiliated factions.
At the same time, Israel conducted approximately 70
retaliatory air strikes within the Gaza Strip.
Poland condemns in the strongest terms the rocket
attacks carried out by Hamas and other militant groups
from the Gaza Strip targeting civilian communities
in southern Israel. There is no justification under any
circumstance for indiscriminate and deliberate acts
of violence against the civilian population. They are
unacceptable. They must stop and never be repeated.
At the same time, Israel’s response should respect
the principle of proportionality and be carried out within
18-38644

19/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the framework and limits of international humanitarian
law. We strongly urge the parties to exercise the utmost
restraint and to refrain from any actions that may lead
to further escalation. I would also like to take this
opportunity to personally thank the United Nations and
Special Coordinator Mladenov, as well as the Egyptian
authorities, for their unprecedented efforts to put an
end to the recent hostilities.
Both Israelis and Palestinians have a right to live in
peace and safety. Poland supports a two-State solution,
which would incorporate the national aspirations of
both parties to the conflict, including the Palestinian
right to self-determination and independence as well as
the Israeli right to ensure its security and to normalized
relations with Arab States.
On the political track, we have to acknowledge
that currently the process is almost entirely blocked.
That clearly influences the situation in Gaza, which
is not taking place in a vacuum. We stress that the
humanitarian situation of 2 million people in the Gaza
Strip grows more desperate with each passing day.
Limited access to basic services, including health care,
and chronic energy and water sanitation crises are their
daily reality on the ground. All of that could easily lead
once again to an escalation of social tensions that may
destabilize the situation in the region even further.
We must sustainably address the root causes and
improve the situation of the people in Gaza. In order
to do so, we must see progress in efforts to reunite the
West Bank and Gaza under one single and legitimate
Palestinian Authority. That is why we underline our
strong support for the Egyptian-led efforts to achieve
intra-Palestinian reconciliation.
Advancing
urgent
infrastructure
projects — as proposed by the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians — aiming to improve
water, electricity and health system, and creating
employment could have a quick impact on the ground.
In our opinion, infrastructure remains a key element of
sustainable de-escalation. The importance of practical
steps is crucial, as we strongly believe that, in the
absence of hope and real prospects, the inhabitants of
Gaza, especially the younger generation, might resort
to inflammatory rhetoric.
On the subject of youth, let me briefly touch upon
the situation of United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Although the

S/PV. 8405

Agency recovered from major financial deficit this year,
it will face the same problem in 2019. In the absence of
a lasting political solution, the international community
must do its utmost to ensure the continuation of the
Agency’s work on a sound financial basis.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): My delegation thanks
Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his
comprehensive and objective briefing, as always, and
his unfailing commitment to the region.
First of all, we welcome the decision taken by Israel
and Hamas in Gaza to observe a ceasefire based on the
terms of the agreement the two sides reached in 2014.
We appreciate the political will of both sides, which has
resulted in the finalization of the truce. We hope that it
will lead to a full-fledged peace treaty between the two
sides and thereby prevent a relapse, which should be
averted at all costs.
We sincerely welcome the efforts of Egypt and the
United Nations since the beginning of the crisis to pull
Israel and Gaza back from the brink of war and bring
about some calm. Astana also appreciates the measures
of the international community and different entities
to secure a ceasefire. Confidence-building measures
and political-diplomatic measures are at the core of
our foreign policy and we always urge our partners to
utilize them.
Astana encourages both sides and Member States
with influence to help work towards a solution by
encouraging Israel and Palestine to return to the
negotiating table. Such efforts should seek to reach
mutually acceptable principles for the coexistence of
two States based on international law and Security
Council resolutions, as well as address the blockade of
the Gaza Strip, where an acute food shortage persists.
However, we are glad to learn that the fuel shipments,
under the Organization’s supervision, continued to flow
into the Strip unhindered. It is equally essential that
both parties uphold the ceasefire, exercise maximum
restraint and not indulge in any hostile or provocative
actions, and do so by liaising with the United Nations,
Egypt and other countries of influence.
In order to do so, it is important to consolidate
the Palestinian ranks together on a common Palestine
Liberation Organization political platform as a necessary
condition to realizing the legitimate aspirations of the
Palestinian people for their own independent State. That
means paying attention to reaching intra-Palestinian

18-3864411/18

S/PV.8405

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

consolidation to create constructive mechanisms to
resolve other problematic issues, such as unemployment
and the difficult humanitarian situation in the Gaza
Strip.
Kazakhstan would like to underscore the
responsibility of both sides to prevent an escalation
of the conflict and to resume negotiations without
any preconditions. My country’s position remains
unchanged and is very clear. It is based on the
principle of two States for two peoples, with the
rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and the creation of a free, sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within the international borders of
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. At the same
time, we fully understand the aspirations of Israel to
live in security. The fundamental concept, as we have
always said in the Council, is rooted in the inalienable
rights of Palestinians to statehood and the right of Israel
to security and recognition.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you for convening this meeting, Mr. President,
and we are grateful to Mr. Mladenov for his valuable
briefing.
Peru notes with deep concern that the destructive
cycle between Israelis and Palestinians does not stop.
Escalations of violence, such as the one occurring a
week ago, are followed by periods of tense calm, which
is simply an unsustainable and destabilizing scenario
for the Middle East and for the international community.
We continue to mourn new deaths, many of them
children and young people, as well as the deteriorating
security conditions for millions of Palestinians and
Israelis.
We note with concern the serious impact of this
vicious cycle on the prospects of resuming a political
process leading to the two-State solution. The parties
persist in blaming each other and in justifying their
violent actions, thereby increasing mistrust and giving
free reign to hate and extremist speech. We reiterate
our condemnation of any attack against civilians while
acknowledging the right to self-defence, which must
always be guided by the principles of proportionality,
precaution and distinction.
We emphasize the need for an urgent compromise
between Israel and Hamas, which would allow a longterm ceasefire. We highlight the important efforts being
made to that end by the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral and Egypt, among other countries with
12/18

19/11/2018

influence in the region. We believe that an agreement
of that type should serve to improve the tragic
humanitarian conditions in Gaza, bearing in mind that
the intensification of violence is often accompanied by
retaliatory measures that create chaos on the civilian
population.
We also consider it necessary for the Palestinian
Authority to resume effective control over Gaza, with
a view to improving the humanitarian situation and
laying the foundations for a resumption of PalestinianIsraeli dialogue. We reiterate the need to guarantee
the performance of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) in providing essential services. To that end,
we welcome the significant contributions recently made
by countries in the region and by the European Union,
which have made it possible to alleviate the shortfall in
UNRWA’s resources for the current year.
The prospects for a political solution are becoming
increasingly unclear. It should be a cause for alarm that
recent opinion polls allude to a significant reduction
in the support of Israeli and Palestinian citizens
for the two-State solution. Persistent and harmful
practices such as settlements, property demolitions
and evictions in the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967 undermine precisely the two-State solution
and contravene resolution 2334 (2016). Those illegal
practices must cease.
We also consider it imperative to reject hate speech,
anti-Semitism and discrimination in all their forms. In
any society, ethnic, cultural and religious diversity must
be appreciated as a value, and never as a threat. We face
an extremely turbulent and uncertain situation, which
requires more than ever that leaders on both sides show
concrete restraint, commitment to peace and respect for
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
Those efforts must necessarily be supported by
the international community. The Security Council,
in line with its sensitive responsibility to ensure
international peace and security, cannot and must not
remain silent in the face of the gravity of developments
on the ground. Peru supports all efforts to reverse the
cycle of destruction, address the underlying causes
of this prolonged and bloody conflict and achieve the
resumption of direct negotiations between the parties.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes this briefing on the latest
developments in the situation in the Middle East,
18-38644

19/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

including the Palestinian question. We thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, whose
briefing challenged us once again on the need to
continue collective efforts to restore peace and stability
in a region affected by numerous crises, of which the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the oldest and one of the
most worrisome.
The breakdown of the relative calm, followed
by the resumption of violence between Israelis and
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip, is a source of concern
for the Security Council. In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire
reaffirms its consistent position in favour of a peaceful
and negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict through dialogue. Therefore, we call on all
parties to exercise restraint and urge them to refrain
from unilateral actions that would irreparably harm the
chances of a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
My country values the security of the State of
Israel, just as we recognize the inalienable right to
self-determination of the Palestinian people. That deep
conviction is reflected in my country’s continued support
for the two-State solution — Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Côte d’Ivoire remains concerned about the
continuing deterioration of the humanitarian situation
in Gaza, in particular clashes and an increasingly
unfavourable socioeconomic situation characterized by
one of the world’s highest youth unemployment rates,
increasingly difficult access to health care, continuing
water shortages and very limited electricity supply. In
addition, there is irregularity in the payment of civil
servants’ salaries.
My country would like to express its gratitude to
all State and non-State actors that, despite the obvious
difficulties on the ground, are making every effort
to ensure that the suffering population can maintain
hope for a better tomorrow. In view of the gravity of
the situation, Côte d’Ivoire calls for the mobilization
of the international community to provide substantial
humanitarian assistance to people in need.
In that regard, we welcome Qatar’s provision of
resources to supply 200 megawatts of electricity and
financial assistance for the payment of salaries of
Palestinian civil servants. We would also like to thank
Kuwait for its multifaceted assistance to the desperate
Gaza population, which is on the brink of a troubling

S/PV. 8405

situation. Côte d’Ivoire is also concerned about the
funding difficulties facing the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, and urges the United Nations and international
partners to address them in order to ensure continued
assistance to Palestinian refugees.
It is undeniable that the critical humanitarian
situation and the risks of a major regional confrontation
will be averted only if the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
finds a lasting and mutually acceptable solution. Côte
d’Ivoire therefore calls on the Israeli and Palestinian
sides to return unconditionally to the negotiating table
as part of the good offices and missions led by the
United Nations.
Against that backdrop, my country supports Egypt’s
commendable efforts to promote reconciliation between
Fatah and Hamas, which will ensure the Palestinian
Authority’s meaningful involvement in peace
negotiations and better handling of humanitarian issues
in Gaza. We also welcome the ceasefire following the
recent mediation by Egypt and the United Nations. We
hope that this cessation of hostilities will be sustained
in order to create the conditions for a resumption of
dialogue between Israelis and Palestinians.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire affirms its support
to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, in his untiring efforts
to promote a dialogue aimed at settling the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, which is a key to the restoration
of lasting peace and stability in the entire Middle East.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I would like to express our
appreciation to Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
comprehensive and valuable briefing on the situation in
the Middle East and the Palestinian question.
We have been closely following the escalation
of violence in the occupied Palestinian territory,
particularly the Gaza Strip, and we are deeply
concerned about these developments, which undermine
the hopes for peace. We strongly support the efforts
of the Secretary-General, the Special Coordinator, the
Government of Egypt and others to restore calm. We
welcome all attempts to reduce tension and prevent
further escalation.
The
deteriorating
political,
security
and
humanitarian situation in Gaza is extremely worrying.
Essential services such as water, fuel, electricity and
access to health care must be restored as soon as

18-3864413/18

S/PV.8405

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

possible, and we must prioritize enabling the movement
of people, goods and services. It is also equally
important to promote intra-Palestinian reconciliation
and support Egypt’s efforts to bring the Gaza Strip
under the Palestinian Authority’s control, as laid down
in the 1994 Cairo Agreement on the Gaza Strip and the
Jericho Area. It is vital that all sides exercise maximum
restraint and work to de-escalate the tension to avoid
continuing to endanger the lives of innocent civilians.
Any escalation merely undermines efforts to improve
the lives of Palestinians and support the return of the
Palestinian Authority to Gaza.
It is self-evident that unless the peace process is
advanced and the underlying problems are resolved
peacefully, this latest tragedy will only be repeated and
the situation will once again move rapidly towards a
point of no return. It is critical that we find ways and
means to limit the damage and to work, however difficult
it may be, to continue the peace process and save the
two-State formula. That is the long-held position of the
United Nations and the international community. There
is no doubt that it is still the best and the only realistic
option for the future. Of course, the same underlying
problems and obstacles to peace persist. There has been
little or no sign of movement, and the present situation
is hardly conducive to sustainable peace or security for
either party. It is clear that genuine efforts to remove
the obstacles are a prerequisite for any meaningful
progress towards realizing a two-State solution. In other
words, it is essential to ensure that direct negotiations
between the parties are resumed without preconditions
or delays. The international community as a whole,
and the Security Council in particular, must put their
full weight behind this and do it as quickly as possible.
The sooner that happens, the better it will be for both
Israelis and Palestinians, and indeed the entire region.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Mladenov for his
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. That is the way the agenda
item we developed together is written, so let us abide
by it.
We deplore the fact that the status quo in the
occupied Palestinian territories, the epicentre of the
potential for conflict in the Middle East, is untenable,
consisting as it does of an endless series of crises.
The result is that it blocks any movement towards
achieving a comprehensive, sustainable Arab-Israeli
settlement and resolution of the Palestinian question on
14/18

19/11/2018

internationally recognized foundations, which include
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Arab
Peace Initiative, the Madrid principles, including the
principle of land for peace, and the two-State formula,
which provides for the creation through negotiations of
a State of Palestine coexisting in peace and security
with Israel.
Against a backdrop — repudiated by the entire
international community — of aggressive revision
of agreements previously arrived at, including in the
Security Council, any prospects for a resumption
of the negotiation process are receding. The gulf of
misunderstanding and mistrust between Palestinians
and Israelis is widening. What is now front and centre
is not the call for peace and peaceful initiatives but
violence, unilateral measures and provocative rhetoric.
In the Gaza Strip, where only recently much effort had
succeeded in creating a relative lull, the tensions have
not subsided. A willingness to show restraint must be
maintained. Actions resulting in civilian casualties and
the destruction of civilian facilities in the Gaza Strip
and in Israel should be firmly condemned.
Considering the current worsening of the
Palestinian-Israeli issue, we have been urging the
parties to immediately end hostilities. We appreciate
and support the mediation efforts of Egypt and the
United Nations to restore the ceasefire. We hope it will
be sustainable and long-term, that it will enable the
international community to mobilize efforts to improve
the dismal humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip and
focus on advancing the political process. Of course, we
particularly emphasize that any assistance to the Gaza
Strip should be carried out in close coordination with
the legitimate Palestinian authorities, led by President
Abbas, and should conform to the goal of restoring
Palestinian unity.
We urgently need to mobilize our collective
diplomacy in order to prevent the failure of the efforts
that all of us in the international community have made
together to establish the conditions for implementing
the only viable solution there is, a two-State solution
based on direct negotiations between Palestinians and
Israelis. It is through the direct dialogue format that
we can work to find answers to all final status issues,
including those regarding Jerusalem, refugees, borders
and all the security issues that are crucial to the region.
These sensitive issues cannot just be taken off the
negotiating table before the parties can discuss them.
18-38644

19/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8405

If they are not settled, they will still surface as painful
shocks for everyone.

Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.

The policy of creating faits accomplis on the ground
in an attempt to anticipate the outcome of a bilateral
discussion of these issues is not acceptable. We consider
the expansion of Israeli settlements, the demolition of
Palestinian property and the eviction of Palestinian
families illegal, in contravention of international law
and detrimental to a two-State solution. The holding
of municipal elections in the occupied Syrian Golan
by Israeli authorities is equally unacceptable and
illegitimate. This dangerous step, which violates more
than one Council resolution, could have far-reaching
negative consequences for a Middle East settlement as
a whole.

The United Kingdom is deeply concerned about
the recent violence in Gaza and Israel, including the
civilian casualties. We must do everything we can to
avoid another devastating war, which would compound
the already awful humanitarian and security conditions
that ordinary Gazans face and further threaten the
security of Israeli border communities. We urge all
parties to show restraint, and we welcome the return
to calm of the past few days. We strongly support the
mediation efforts of the international community led
by Egypt and the United Nations, and urge for talks to
continue aimed at achieving enduring peace in Gaza
under the control of the Palestinian Authority.

Russia’s position remains consistent. We maintain
and develop relations with all the States in the region
based on a positive agenda. We support a resumption of
active efforts by the Middle East Quartet of international
mediators, which is still the only mediation format
approved by Security Council resolutions. Russia’s
proposal for hosting a summit between the leaders of
Palestine and Israel is still on the table, and we want
to point out that the Palestinian leader has repeatedly
confirmed his agreement with that initiative. We will
continue our financial and political assistance to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). UNRWA’s work
is vital, as it has an important stabilizing effect in the
Palestinian territories and the countries of the Middle
East. It must be able to survive and function fully.

We strongly condemn the firing of projectiles from
Gaza towards Israel. Our Ambassador to Israel visited
communities affected by the rocket fire on Tuesday.
Hamas and other factions must end such attacks
immediately. The recent deaths on both sides of the
conflict are alarming. In order to protect civilians, it
is crucial to ensure that a ceasefire is agreed on and
maintained as part of a political process that sees
the Palestinian Authority return to Gaza and the
restrictions on the Gazan people and economy lifted.
As Mr. Mladenov made clear today, no effort must
be spared to reverse the spiral of violence. The cycle
of conflict in Gaza has gone on for too long and the
civilian populations in Gaza and Israel have suffered
the consequences. We call on Hamas, the Palestinian
Authority and Israel to refrain from any action that
could lead to further deterioration.

In conclusion, we want to once again urge our
colleagues in the Council to refrain from making
threats and unfounded accusations, and instead do the
essential work of strengthening the overall atmosphere
of trust in the Security Council, the Near and Middle
East and North Africa and to abandon policies of
confrontation once and for all. Israelis, Palestinians,
Saudis and Iranians all deserve to live in prosperity and
security, but if that goal is to be achieved, the regional
security architecture must be comprehensive and
indivisible, and diplomacy and dialogue channels must
be brought to bear. We believe that Russia’s security
concept for the Persian Gulf constitutes a good basis for
launching efforts in that direction. History has shown
us that we can succeed in the Middle East only when
we work together according to the principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations of respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.

We remain deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Gaza and have been holding
frequent discussions with the Government of Israel
about the importance of easing its restrictions on Gaza.
The United Kingdom welcomes the recent efforts to
improve the humanitarian situation, especially the
increase in the supply of electricity from between
four to six hours to 12 hours a day, and the Palestinian
Authority’s continued payment of salaries and other
costs. As others have done, we also welcome the recent
contributions that have been made to close the funding
gap for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and we reiterate
the United Kingdom’s support for the Agency.
If the situation in Gaza is to improve, it requires
political resolve. The October 2017 reconciliation

18-3864415/18

S/PV.8405

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

agreement was a good start, but now all the Palestinian
factions must work together to implement an agreement.
We strongly support the efforts of Egypt, the Special
Coordinator and the wider international community
to achieve that. The United Kingdom will continue to
urge the parties to prioritize progress towards reaching
a durable solution for Gaza and to take the necessary
practical steps to ensure Gaza’s reconstruction and
economic recovery. That is the only way to improve the
living standards of ordinary Palestinians in Gaza and
guarantee Israel’s long-term security.
In conclusion, the people of Israel and Gaza have
the right to live without constant fear for their security,
and both peoples have the right to live safely and in
peace. Urgent steps must be taken now to address the
underlying causes of the conflicts. It is in everyone’s
interest for peace and stability to prevail in Israel and
the occupied Palestinian territories. Now more than
ever we need a political process that delivers a twoState solution.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his excellent briefing. We would also like
to pay tribute to the major efforts that he and his team
are carrying out in the region.
We are quickly approaching the end of 2018, a year
in which we have had several occasions to address this
important issue, which we believe is still of enormous
importance to all of us, considering that it is a focus of
the media, an issue of concern to the entire international
community and a decisive factor in the stability of the
region.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is extremely
concerned about the incidents in recent weeks in the
Palestinian enclave of Gaza involving hostile exchanges
between the Israeli army and Hamas militants, which
have led to the loss of human lives and caused many
injuries and extensive material damage. In that regard,
we call on the parties to refrain from unilateral actions
and provocations and emphasize that any incitement to
violence must be condemned.
Since it began, this conflict has caused enormous
damage to the parties, many measures have been taken
to prevent it and find a solution, and massive amounts of
money have been spent. But the reality is that the results
achieved so far have shown us that while much has been
done, it has not been enough to find a solution to the sad
coexistence of Israelis and Palestinians. Palestinians’
16/18

19/11/2018

lives are becoming increasingly miserable, unstable and
insecure, while for its part Israel cannot easily ensure its
people’s security, owing to the border activity between
Palestine and its settlers — and all those factors and
more have created an atmosphere of detachment and
insecurity in the countries of the region.
Despite the Council’s efforts over the seven decades
it has spent considering this issue, the pain and sorrow
of the conflicting parties have continued to grow. In that
regard, we regret that the moments in the history of the
situation that gave hope to the whole world have been
nothing but a waste of paper. However, we still believe
that it is vital and urgent to continue coordinating our
efforts aimed to find a diplomatic way to encourage the
parties to return to the negotiating table. We believe
that ensuring that all Council members are united on the
issue is crucial in that regard, considering the influence
and strategic importance of some of its members in the
world generally and the Middle East in particular.
For its part, Equatorial Guinea would like to
reaffirm its position, based on the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly, the
Arab Peace Initiative, the Madrid peace principles,
the Quartet road map and other instruments, that the
Palestinian claims are just and that Israel has the right
to live in peace and security. We therefore reiterate
our support for a two-State solution based on the
1967 borders, with Jerusalem as its capital, based on
negotiations between the parties that ensure the two
States’ safe and peaceful coexistence and harmony
with the other States of the region.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our call
concerning the importance of continuing to work for
intra-Palestinian reconciliation, bearing in mind that
the exchange of accusations of non-compliance with the
commitments in the reconciliation agreement signed in
October last year between Hamas and Fatah has called
into question its consideration and implementation.
However, we hope that the efforts initiated by Egypt
and other international partners will achieve the desired
results. Lastly, we are grateful for the statements
that various countries have made in recent months in
support of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East urging other
States to join in that gesture of solidarity.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I am honoured by the
presence here today of Their Majesties King Carl XVI
Gustaf and Queen Silvia of Sweden. I would like to
18-38644

19/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

start by thanking Special Coordinator Mladenov for
his briefing and welcome his strong engagement on the
issue, including in the recent efforts to prevent another
conflict in Gaza.
The vision of the international community remains
unchanged. It is one that sees Israel and Palestine, side
by side in peace and security, with Jerusalem as the
future capital of two States and home to three world
religions, in a two-State solution that resolves all final
status issues. Every month, however, we reflect on the
continuing deterioration of the situation on the ground,
which seriously hampers the hopes for a two-State
solution. Whether it is the continued Israeli occupation
and illegal settlement expansion; threats of demolitions
and evictions of villages such as Khan Al-Ahmar in
Area C; violence in and around Gaza, including the
recent firing of rockets, as well as incitement, hatred
and violence; or actions that shrink the space for civil
society, the parties have a responsibility to reverse
those negative trends.
Last week we witnessed another dangerous
outbreak of violence in and around Gaza. We condemn
the firing of rockets against Israel by Hamas and other
militant groups, and regret the loss of life on both
sides. While recognizing Israel’s legitimate security
concerns, we underline that the Israeli response must be
proportionate. In the past seven months, approximately
200 Palestinians have been killed in Gaza and more
than 24,000 injured. We all know that another fullfledged conflict would be an immense tragedy.
We commend Egypt for its mediation efforts.
But while calm has been restored for now, that is
only temporary relief. The situation for the people in
Gaza is untenable. It is a humanitarian catastrophe
affecting 2 million people without freedom to move
to or from Gaza. If we do not address the situation
there holistically, a new flare-up of violence will be
just around the corner. As we have repeatedly stated,
there is an urgent need for, first, concrete humanitarian
interventions with a quick, direct and immediate impact
on daily lives that can alleviate the suffering; secondly,
the easing of restrictions and improvement of access and
movement to and from Gaza, including for all donors,
with the aim of ending Gaza’s closure; and lastly, steps
that can further Palestinian reconciliation and enable
the Palestinian Authority’s return to Gaza. We support
the Egyptian-led efforts to achieve reconciliation, and
we call on all Palestinian factions to engage genuinely
to that end. Only reconciliation can lead to a united

S/PV. 8405

Palestinian leadership and a reunification of Gaza and
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. The Council
has a responsibility to actively contribute beyond these
regular meetings, and Sweden has made concrete
proposals to that effect.
We need to show the so-called post-Oslo generation
that there is an alternative to conflict, violence and a
constant deterioration on the ground, and the voices
of young Israelis and Palestinians must be heard and
listened to, in line with resolution 2419 (2018). Israel
and Palestine have a responsibility to build peaceful and
inclusive societies, particularly with the meaningful
participation of women and young people. The shrinking
space for civil society, along with the negative human
rights developments, is a source of great concern. On
the Palestinian side, laws are used to curtail freedom of
expression. On the Israeli side, representatives of civilsociety organizations are delegitimized, which limits
them in their efforts to do their important work. We call
on the Palestinian and Israeli leaderships to support
and respect members of civil society and allow them to
operate and express their views freely.
We cannot let the viability of a two-State solution
move out of reach. Action is urgently needed if we are
to avoid the risk of ending up not only in perpetual
occupation but in a one-State reality, which was the
reason for the Council’s adoption almost two years
ago of resolution 2334 (2016). We look forward to the
Secretary-General’s latest report next month, with
a view to having a more thorough examination of its
implementation. We must do everything in our power
to make sure that the hope of two States is kept alive
and that a just, lasting and comprehensive peace,
based on international law, the relevant United Nations
resolutions and previous agreements, is realized.
The President (spoke in Chinese): On behalf of
the members of the Council, I welcome King Carl XVI
Gustaf and Queen Silvia of Sweden to the Security
Council.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of China.
I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
briefing.
China has been closely following the current
tensions in Gaza, and is deeply concerned and
distressed about the escalation of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict in the Gaza Strip and the resulting casualties.

18-3864417/18

S/PV.8405

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The use of force, and of efforts to halt violence with
violence, does not help to solve problems. China
appreciates the mediation efforts of Egypt and the
United Nations and calls on both sides of the conflict
to meet halfway, end their military actions and work
to effectively promote the easing of tensions. Based
on the interests of preserving their peoples’ safety and
maintaining peace and stability in the region, all the
parties should exercise restraint in order to avoid the
escalation of tensions. China has consistently advocated
for resolving the Palestinian-Israeli dispute through
peaceful negotiations, and we oppose any violence that
exacerbates tensions or targets civilians. The Security
Council and the relevant parties must focus on the
long term and strive to create the conditions necessary
for promoting stability and resuming dialogue. The
international community should ramp up its sense
of urgency, fully implement the relevant General
Assembly resolutions and protect Palestinian civilians
in a joint effort to bring the Palestinian issue back to the
negotiation track in order to reach a settlement. I would
like to highlight the following points.
First, a two-State solution is fundamental
to resolving the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The
international community should step up its mediation
efforts, while adhering to the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the
Arab Peace Initiative. All the parties concerned
should work to effectively implement resolution 2334
(2016), stop all settlement activities in the occupied
territories, cease the demolition of Palestinian houses
and the destruction of Palestinian property, and
take measures to prevent violence against civilians.
Secondly, promoting a resumption of the PalestinianIsraeli peace talks is a shared goal of the work of the
international community. The international community
and the Security Council should embrace an elevated

18/18

19/11/2018

sense of urgency and responsibility by launching a
new round of efforts to promote peace. All parties that
have significant influence with regard to the Middle
East issue should play a constructive role in exploring
new mediation mechanisms and breaking the impasse
facing Palestinian-Israeli peace talks sooner rather than
later. Thirdly, the final status of Jerusalem is key to
advancing the Middle East peace process. That issue is
as complex as it is sensitive, and it concerns the future
of a two-State solution, as well as regional peace and
tranquillity.
All the parties should be cautious when dealing with
related issues, refraining from imposing solutions lest
they trigger new confrontations. They should uphold the
principle of respect for diverse histories, maintaining
justice and fairness, implementing international
consensus and achieving peaceful coexistence and,
based on the relevant United Nations resolutions and
international consensus, work to reach a negotiated
solution that accommodates the interests of all.
I want to reiterate that China has always been
committed to advancing the Middle East peace process,
supporting the just cause of the Palestinian people
to exercise their legitimate national rights and the
establishment of an independent and fully sovereign
Palestinian State, based on the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. The international community
should step up its support for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East. China will continue to follow the fourpoint proposal of President Xi Jinping for promoting
a political settlement of the Palestinian issue, and
we stand ready to work with the relevant parties and
the international community to play a positive and
constructive role in achieving peace in the Middle East.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

18-38644
