s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/25520
3 April 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the Council,
at its 3192nd meeting, on 3 April 1993, in connection with the Council's
consideration of the item entitled "The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina":
"The Security Council is shocked by and extremely alarmed at the dire
and worsening humanitarian situation which has developed in Srebrenica in
the eastern part of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina following the
unacceptable decision of the Bosnian Serb party not to permit any further
humanitarian aid to be delivered to that town, and to allow only evacuation
of its civilian population. The relevant facts are contained in a letter
dated 2 April 1993, addressed to the Secretary-General by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (S/25519, annex).
"The Security Council recalls and reaffirms all its relevant
resolutions and statements and condemns the continuing disregard and wilful
flouting of the relevant Security Council resolutions and statements by the
Bosnian Serb party, which once again, in pursuit of its unlawful,
unacceptable and abhorrent policy of "ethnic cleansing" aimed at
territorial aggrandisement, has blocked the United Nations humanitarian
relief efforts.
"Recognizing the imperative need to alleviate, with the utmost
urgency, the sufferings of the population in and around Srebrenica who are
in desperate need of food, medicine, clothes and shelter, the Security
Council demands that the Bosnian Serb party, cease and desist forthwith
from all violations of international humanitarian law, including in
particular the deliberate interference with humanitarian convoys, and allow
all such convoys unhindered access to the town of Srebrenica and other
parts in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Security Council
demands that the Bosnian Serb party strictly comply with all relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.
It further demands that the Bosnian
Serb party honour forthwith its most recent commitment "to guarantee the
free movement of humanitarian convoys and the protection of endangered
civilians". The Security Council also reaffirms that those guilty of
crimes against international humanitarian law will be held individually
responsible by the world community.

93-19320 (E)

030493

030493

I • ..

S/25520
English
Page 2

"The Security Council commends and strongly supports the efforts of
the brave people who have undertaken to deliver urgently needed
humanitarian assistance, under extremely trying conditions, to the civilian
population in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and in particular the
efforts of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and
the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR).
"The Security Council recalls the request it made in its statement of
3 March 1993 (S/25361) to the Secretary-General to take immediate steps to
increase UNPROFOR's presence in eastern Bosnia; welcomes the action taken
already in that respect; and urges the Secretary-General and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to use all the resources at their
disposal within the scope of the relevant resolutions of the Council to
reinforce the existing humanitarian operations in the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
"The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter."
