Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Noting the obligation of Member States under the
Charter to promote universal respect for, and observance of, human rights,
RecalUng its resolutions 2444 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 and 2597 (XXIV) of 16 December
1969, in which it invited the Secretary-General, in
consultation with the International Committee of the
Red Cross, to study, inter alia:
(a) Steps which could be taken to secure the better
application of existing humanitarian international conventions and rules in all armed conflicts,
(b) The need for additional humanitarian international conventions or for other appropriate legal instruments to ensure the better protection of civilians,
prisoners and combatants in all armed conflicts,
BeUeving, therefore, that the treatment accorded to
victims of war and armed aggression is a concern of the
United Nations,
Noting resolution XI, adopted by the twenty-first
International Conference of the Red Cross held at
Istanbul in 1969,28 calling upon all parties to the
Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of
Prisoners of War, of 12 August 1949,29 to ensure that
all persons entitled to prisoner-of-war status are treated
humanely and given the fullest measure of protection
prescribed by the Convention, and that all parties involved in an armed conflict, no matter how it is characterized, provide free access to prisoners of war and
to all places of their detention by a protecting Power or
by the International Committee of the Red Cross,
Considering that the direct repatriation of seriously
wounded and seriously sick prisoners of war and the
ret>atriation or internment m a neutral country of
pnsoners of war who have undergone a long period
of captivity constitute important aspects of human
rights as advanced and preserved under the Geneva
Convention of 1949 and the Charter of the United Nations,
1. Calls upon all parties to any armed conflict to
comply with the terms and provisions of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of
War, of 12 August 1949, so as to ensure the humane
treatment of all persons entitled to the protection of the
Convention and, inter alia, to permit regular inspection,
in accordance with the Convention, of all places of
detention of prisoners of war by a protecting Power or
humanitarian organization such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross;
2. Endorses the continuing efforts of the Inte.rnational Committee of the Red Cross to secure the effective application of the Geneva Convention of 1949;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to exert all efforts
to obtain humane treatment for prisoners of war, especially for the victims of armed aggression and colonial
suppression;
4. Urges compliance with article 109 of the Geneva
Convention of 1949, which requires the repatriation
of seriously wounded and seriously sick prisoners of
war and which provides for agreements with a view
to the direct repatriation or internment in a neutral
country of able-bodied prisoners of war who have
undergone a long period of captivity;
5. Urges that combatants in all armed conflicts not
covered by article 4 of the Geneva Convention of
28 [nternational Review of the Red Cross, No, 104 (November 1969), p. 614.
• United Nations, Treaty Serlea, vol. 75 (19SO), No. 972.

77

1949 be accorded the same humane treatment defined
by the principles of international law applied to
prisoners of war;
6. Urges strict compliance with the provisions of
the existing international instruments concerning human
rights in armed conflicts, and urges those States which
have not yet done so to ratify or aceede to the relevant
instruments in order to facilitate in -an aspects the
protection of the victims of armed conflicts.
1922nd plenary meeting,
9 December 1970.
2677 (XXV). Respect for human rights in armed
conflicts
The General Assembly,
Determined to continue all efforts to eliminate the
threat or use of force in international relations, in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations, and
to bring about general and complete disarmament under
effective international control,
Reaffirming its desire to secure the full observance
of human rights applicable in all armed conflicts pending the earliest possible termination of such conflicts,
Convinced of the continuing value of existing
humanitarian rules relating to armed conflicts, in particular the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907,30 the
Geneva Protocol of 192531 and the Geneva Conventions
of 1949,82
Realizing, however, that because existing humanitarian rules do not adequately meet all contemporary
situations of armed conflict it is necessary to develop
the substance of these rules and procedures for their
implementation,
Reaffirming the principles contained in resolution
XXIII adopted by the International Conference on
Human Rights held at Teheran in 1968, 88 and in General Assembly resolutions 2444 (XXIII) of 19
ber 1968 and 2597 (XXIV) of 16 December 1969,
Aware of the importance and complexity of the tasks
undertaken in pursuance of these resolutions, which
require the continuing attention and concern of the
United Nations, the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the international community as a whole,
Noting with appreciation the two reports of the Secretary-General on respect for human rights in armed
conflicts, H
Recalling resolution XIII adopted unanimously by
the twenty-first International Conference of the Red
Cross held at Istanbul in 1969, 311 concerning the
reaffirmation and development of the laws and customs
applicable in armed conflicts,
Welcoming the decision of the International Committee of the Red Cross to convene at Geneva, from
24 May to 12 June 1971, a conference on the reaffirmation and development of international humanitarian

Decem-

30 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, The Hague
Conventions and Declarations of 1899 and 1907 (New York,
Oxford University Prf'ss, 191S).
31 League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV (1929), No.
2138.
82 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 7S ( 1950), Nos.
970-973.
88 Final Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68JCTV.2),
p. 18.
UA/7720 and A/8052.
H See A/7720, annex I, section D.

78

General Assembly-Twenty-fifth Session

law applicable to armed conflicts, to be attended by
government experts,
Believing that one or more plenipotentiary diplomatic
conferences of States parties to the Geneva Conventions
and other interested States might be convened at an
appropriate time, after due preparation, in order to
adopt international legal instruments for the reaffirmation and development of humanitarian law applicable
to armed conflicts,
Considering that the effective implementation of
humanitarian rules relating to armed conflicts can best
be attained if those rules are laid down in widely accepted agreements,
Emphasizing the importance of continued close collaboration between the United Nations and the International Committee of the Red Cross,
1. Calls upon all parties to any armed conflict to
observe the rules laid down in the Hague Conventions
of 1899 and 1907, the Geneva Protocol of 1925, the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and other humanitarian
rules applicable in armed conflicts, and invites those
States which have not yet done so to adhere to those
instruments;
2. EEesses the hope that the conference of government xperts to be convened in 1971 by the International
'ttee of the Red Cross will consider
further what development is required in existing
humanitarian laws applicable to armed conflicts, and
that it will make specific recommendations in this respect for consideration by Governments;
3. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To invite early comments by Governments on
his reports;
(b) To transmit his reports and the comments of
Governments thereon, together with the records of
relevant discussions and resolutions of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Commission on Human Rights, to the International
Committee of the Red Cross for consideration, as appropriate, by the conference of government experts;
(c) To present the comments received to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session and to report
at that session on the results of the conference of government experts to be convened by the International
Committee of the Red Cross and on any other relevant
developments;
4. Decides to consider this question again, in all its
aspects, at the twenty-sixth session.
1922nd plenary meeting,
9 December 1970.
2712 (XXV). Question of the punishment of war
criminals and of persons who have committed crimes against humanity

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2583 (XXIV) of 15 December 1969 on the punishment of war criminals and
~f persons who have committed crimes against humanity,
Welcoming with satisfaction the fact that the Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity
entered into force on 11 November 1970,
Noting with regret that the numerous decisions
adopted by the United Nations on the question of the

punishment of war criminals and of persons who have
committed crimes against humanity are still not being
fully complied with,
Expressing deep concern at the fact that in presentday conditions, as a result of aggressive wars and the
policies and practices of racism, apartheid and coloniaEsm and other similar ideologies and practices, war
crimes and crimes against humanity are being committed in various parts of the world,
Convinced that a thorough investigation of war
crimes and crimes against humanity, as well as the
arrest, extradition and punishment of persons guilty
of_ such crimes-wherever they may have been comJD1tted-and the establishment of criteria for determin~g compensation to the victims of such crimes, are
unportant elements in the prevention of similar crimes
now and in the future, and also in the protection of
~um.an rights and fundamental freedoms, the strengthenmg of confidence and the development of co-operation
between peoples and the safeguarding of international
peace and security,
1. Draws attention to the fact that many war
criminals and persons who have committed crimes
against humanity are continuing to take refuge in the
t~rritories of certain States and are enjoying protection;
2. Calls upon all States to take measures, in accordance with recognized principles of international
law, to arrest such persons and extradite them to the
countries where they have committed war crimes and
crimes against humanity, so that they can be brought
to trial and punished in accordance with the laws of
those countries;
3. Condemns the war crimes and crimes against
humanity at present being committed as a result of
aggressive wars and the policies of racism, apartheid
and colonialism and calls upon the States concerned
to bring to trial persons guilty of such crimes;
4. Also calls upon all the States concerned to intensify their co-operation in the collection and exchange
of information which will contribute to the detection
arrest, extradition, trial and punishment of person~
guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity;
5. Once again requests the States concerned, if they
have not already done so, to take the necessary measures
for the thorough investigation of war crimes and crimes
against humanity, as defined in article I of the Con".ention on the ~on-Applic~bility o! Statutory Limitations to War Cnmes and Crunes agamst Humanity, and
for the detection, arrest, extradition and punishment of
all war criminals and persons guilty of crimes aJainst
humanity who have not yet been brought to tnal or
punished;
6: Requests States. which have not yet become
parties to ~e. C~nvention on ~e Non-Applicability of
Statutory Lmutations to War Crimes and Crimes against
Humanity ~o do so as soon as possible;
1. Appeals to Governments to provide the Secretary-General with information on the measures which
they have taken or are taking to become parties to the
q>nyen_tion on the _Non-Applic!lbility of Statutory
~mutations to War Crimes and Cnmes against Humanity;
8. Als~ appeals to States. which have not yet become parties to the Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and
Crimes against Humanity strictly to observe the provisions of General Assembly resolution 2583 (XXIV)
