S/2004/934

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 November 2004
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to Central Africa,
21 to 25 November 2004*
I. Introduction
1.
In his letter dated 9 November 2004 (S/2004/891), the President of the
Security Council informed the Secretary-General that the members of the Council
had decided to send a mission to Central Africa in November 2004, which would be
led by Jean-Marc de La Sablière. Following consultations among the members of
the Council, it was agreed that the composition of the mission should be as follows:
France (Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sablière, head of mission)
Algeria (Ambassador Mourad Benmehidi)
Angola (Ambassador Ismael Abraão Gaspar Martins)
Benin (Ambassador Joël W. Adechi)
Brazil (Ms. Irene Vida Gala)
Chile (Mr. Andrés Landerretche)
China (Ambassador Zhang Yishan)
Germany (Ambassador Gunter Pleuger)
Pakistan (Ambassador Munir Akram)
Philippines (Mr. Patrick Chuasoto)
Romania (Ambassador Gheorghe Dumitru)
Russian Federation (Ambassador Andrey Denisov)
Spain (Ms. Ana Jiménez)
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (Ambassador Adam
Thomson)
United States of America (Ambassador Sichan Siv)
2.

The terms of reference of the mission are annexed to document S/2004/891.

* A list of abbreviations used in the present report appears at the end of the document.

04-62632 (E) 031204

*0462632*

S/2004/934

3.
The Security Council mission to Central Africa immediately followed the
meetings of the Security Council in Nairobi on 18 and 19 November. The Council
mission left Nairobi on 21 November and returned to New York on 26 November.
During that period, the mission visited Kigali, Kinshasa, Bukavu, Bujumbura and
Entebbe. The mission met with the President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame; the
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Joseph Kabila; the President of
Burundi, Domitien Ndayizeye; and the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta
Museveni.
4.
The mission also met in Kinshasa with the four Vice-Presidents of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; the President of the Senate and the Speaker of
the National Assembly; the Chairpersons of the five institutions in support of
democracy; representatives of civil society; and the International Committee in
Support of the Transition (CIAT). The mission met in Bukavu with the Governor of
South Kivu, one of the two Vice-Governors, the Commander of the tenth military
region, the Provincial Police Inspector and two presidential advisers. In Bujumbura,
the mission held consultations with the newly appointed Vice-President, the
President of the Senate, the Speaker of the National Assembly, the Minister of State
in charge of Good Governance and of General Audit Service, the Independent
National Electoral Commission, the Implementation Monitoring Committee and
representatives of civil society.
5.
The mission was briefed in Kinshasa and Bukavu by the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and in
Bujumbura by the United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB). In Kinshasa, the
mission also received a briefing from the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region, Ibrahima Fall. The mission was accompanied
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, William Lacy Swing, in Kinshasa, Bukavu and Entebbe, while the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Burundi, Carolyn McAskie,
accompanied the mission in Bujumbura and Entebbe.
6.
The fifth mission of the Security Council to Central Africa in as many years
took place at a time when the peace processes in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in Burundi have decisively entered a new phase, with both countries
actively preparing for elections to take place in 2005. The mission also took place in
the context of the Council’s greater role in support of these two transitions, with the
reinforcement of MONUC by an additional 5,900 personnel, making it the largest
United Nations peacekeeping operation in the world, and the establishment of
ONUB.
7.
The mission took place immediately after the first summit of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region of Africa in Dar es Salaam, which had
concluded successfully with the adoption of the Declaration on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes Region.
8.
The mission began its visit to the region with a meeting with President
Kagame in Kigali. Much of the discussion focused on the nature of the problem
posed by the ex-FAR/Interahamwe based in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and the status of their disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and
resettlement.

2

S/2004/934

9.
President Kagame regretted that the problem of the génocidaires had been
“preserved” because of the “insufficient” efforts expended by the international
community in the last 10 years. In response to a question regarding how many
génocidaires were actually present among the mostly young rank and file of the exFAR/Interahamwe elements in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, President
Kagame noted that even if they had not participated in the 1994 genocide, they were
immersed in the genocidal ideology. In his view, therefore, FDLR, a group that had
been constituted by ex-FAR/Interahamwe elements, could never be seen as a
legitimate political interlocutor. President Kagame indicated, however, that his
Government was ready to accept and reintegrate individual members of FDLR into
Rwandan society, noting that Rwanda had already successfully reintegrated some
2.5 million returnees.
10. President Kagame expressed his satisfaction with the Dar es Salaam
Declaration, which recognized the problem of the genocide. He also expressed the
view that it would be useful if the United Nations were to support a regional force to
settle the issue of the ex-FAR/Interahamwe, since the voluntary disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and resettlement approach had shown its
limits. In response to a question about whether the principles of the Dar es Salaam
Declaration would be implemented by the signatory parties, President Kagame
indicated that his Government would be making a positive contribution. He also
indicated his Government’s willingness to participate in the Joint Verification
Mechanism and the tripartite mechanism, while at the same time stressing the need
for concrete actions to follow any investigations undertaken.
11. The mission underlined in this connection the importance of respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries in the region. It noted that while
it might have a different assessment of the scale of the threat posed by the ex-FAR/
Interahamwe, it agreed that the ex-FAR/Interahamwe was a problem that had to be
tackled. It recalled that the Transitional Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, with the support of MONUC, was currently pursuing a two-phase plan to
resolve the issue of the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and
resettlement of the ex-FAR/Interahamwe. It underlined that progress would also
depend on Rwanda’s continued openness to the repatriation of ex-FAR/Interahamwe
fighters.
12. Regarding the transition process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
President Kagame criticized the terms of reference of the mission, stressing that the
fall of Bukavu was strictly an internal Congolese affair, in which Rwanda played no
part. He emphasized the nature of “internal problems” faced by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, adding that Rwanda should not be blamed for them.

II. Democratic Republic of the Congo
Political transition
13. One of the key objectives of the Security Council mission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was to observe at first hand the achievements made in the
peace and transition process since its last visit to the country, shortly before the
establishment of the Government of National Unity and Transition on 30 June 2003.
In this connection, the Council mission noted that the main transitional institutions

3

S/2004/934

had been established and were operational; an integrated high command had been
set up for the armed forces and police service; the Governors and Vice-Governors of
the provinces had been appointed; and some key laws, such as the nationality law,
had been adopted. The mission reiterated its strong support for the transition, while
at the same time underscoring to its interlocutors that there was no alternative to the
process under way. Welcoming the fact that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
peace process had entered a new phase leading to the adoption of the Constitution
and the holding of the elections, the Security Council mission stressed the
importance of respecting the deadline for completing the process, as agreed, by June
2005.
14. The Council noted that much work remained to be done in this respect. In
order to ensure peaceful elections, there was a need to accelerate the implementation
of the key aspects of the transition. These were the integration of the armed forces
and of the police, the adoption of the Constitution, a package of election-related
legislation and other essential laws and technical preparations for the elections,
including the registration of voters. The Council mission noted that in order to
accomplish these objectives, it was essential that the President and his four VicePresidents (known as the espace présidentiel) work together more closely and
constructively, and with MONUC and CIAT. To this end, MONUC and the wider
international community were prepared to help the Transitional Government through
the three joint commissions, on the security-sector reform, legislation and elections,
established by Security Council resolution 1565 (2004). Looking beyond the
elections, the Council mission stressed the need to create conditions that would
ensure stability in the post-electoral period. The mission underscored that the
electoral process must remain credible.
15. While acknowledging the delays encountered thus far, President Kabila, his
Vice-Presidents and other transitional leaders reaffirmed their determination to work
towards free, fair and transparent elections within the agreed time frame. President
Kabila renewed his and his Government’s commitment to the transition road map. In
discussions on the three joint commissions of CIAT and the Transitional
Government, on security-sector reform, legislation and elections, called for by the
Security Council, President Kabila agreed that all three should be operational no
later than the end of 2004.
16. The mission was reminded of the tremendous challenges that the country
faced, such as the need to overcome the continued divergence of views among the
components of the Transitional Government, the continuing insecurity in the east
and the sheer logistical challenges posed by the size of the country and lack of
infrastructure. Furthermore, some interlocutors conveyed to the mission that issues
such as the “prevailing culture of corruption” and lack of progress in reaching an
agreement on power-sharing in respect of public enterprises contributed to an
environment that was, in their view, not conducive to the holding of free and fair
elections.
17. Many interlocutors also spoke of the challenges of holding elections in a
country that has never, since its independence, conducted free and fair elections.
Four decades of an undemocratic regime characterized by economic
mismanagement and two decades of chronic instability, followed by two wars over a
five-year period, had left the country deeply scarred. The mission stressed the need
to combat hate speech and inflammatory propaganda. It was nevertheless reassured

4

S/2004/934

by the determination expressed by all its interlocutors to carry through the
transitional process. The transitional leaders stressed the importance of establishing
legitimacy through the holding of the elections and the setting up of a Government
based on democratic principles. The mission also came away with a strong
impression of the Congolese people’s ardent desire to hold the elections. The
mission concluded that the parties must reach an understanding on the posttransitional period in order to ensure stability in the long run. The Congolese
population demanded no less.

Eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo: continuing insecurity
and the need for good-neighbourly relations
18. While the main focus of the mission’s discussion with its interlocutors was on
the elections, it was frequently reminded of the insecurity that continued to affect
the eastern part of the country. The lack of progress in military integration and in the
extension of State authority throughout the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are reflected in the tensions still existing between disparate military units
of former belligerents, while foreign armed groups, especially the exFAR/Interahamwe, continue to pose a threat to the civilian population, to stability in
the area and, to some extent, to neighbouring countries. The mission’s Congolese
interlocutors stressed that the district of Ituri and the provinces of North and South
Kivu remained volatile and a source of major concern. The mission was also
reminded of the continuing problem of the illegal exploitation of natural resources,
which simultaneously caused and fuelled conflict. In this connection, the mission
stressed to the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo the need to
establish institutions that could control, in a transparent and effective manner, the
exploitation of natural resources for the benefit of the population.
19. The improvement of security conditions in the east, therefore, remains a key
priority for the Transitional Government and MONUC. Restoring confidence with
neighbouring countries on the eastern border is a key element in that regard. Upon
being informed that two border towns in Rwanda had reportedly been shelled on
15 and 16 November by unknown attackers, apparently from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the mission urged both the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and that of Rwanda to immediately
operationalize the Joint Verification Mechanism. It was widely acknowledged that
the problem posed by the ex-FAR/Interahamwe must be rapidly addressed in view of
the forthcoming elections and the need to build regional confidence. The mission
took note of the willingness of the Congolese authorities for the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and resettlement of foreign armed groups,
in particular the ex-FAR/Interahamwe, to enter a more active phase. The mission
was subsequently informed in more detail about the two-phase plan of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to settle this problem, with
the assistance of MONUC. The mission welcomed the sensitization campaign
currently being conducted by the Transitional Government, with the support of
MONUC, in South Kivu, as the first phase of this plan. It encouraged the
Government to further develop its disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
reintegration and resettlement strategy, with the cooperation of Rwanda and
Uganda, in accordance with the November 2003 Pretoria Agreement and the
October 2004 tripartite agreement.

5

S/2004/934

20. Upon its departure from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the mission
was surprised to receive reports that Rwanda intended to intervene across its border
with the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in response to alleged threats from the
ex-FAR/Interahamwe. This underlined the importance, in Kigali’s eyes, of the exFAR/Interahamwe problem. On behalf of the mission of the Security Council, its
leader issued a press statement in Bujumbura on 25 November, urging the
Government of Rwanda to refrain from any action that would violate international
law, undermine the region’s fragile stability or jeopardize the transition process
supported by the international community. The statement also recalled the plan
established by the Congolese authorities, supported by MONUC, to accelerate the
repatriation of foreign armed groups and urged Rwanda to explore the way forward
with the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, building on their
existing bilateral mechanisms.

The situation in Bukavu
21. The mission spent 23 November visiting Bukavu and met with Mr. Bulaimu,
Governor of South Kivu province, Mr. Kaningini, Vice-Governor, Brigadier General
Mabe, Commander of the tenth military region, Mr. Bocope, Provincial Police
Inspector, and Mr. Cishambo and Mr. Darwezi, presidential advisers. The mission
also received a comprehensive briefing from the MONUC field office in Bukavu on
the situation in the Kivus and the activities of MONUC in the two provinces.
22. The mission’s objective in visiting Bukavu was to show its solidarity to the
people of the town, which in early June was briefly captured by General Nkunda
and Colonel Mutebutsi, “dissident” elements of RCD-Goma. It also gave the
mission an opportunity to receive a first-hand briefing from MONUC personnel
regarding the Mission’s military and disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
reintegration and resettlement activities. In particular, the mission was briefed on
the ongoing “Walungu operation”, which is the first joint exercise of the Congolese
Armed Forces and MONUC, aimed at promoting the disarmament and repatriation
of Rwandan armed elements. The present phase of the operation is preparatory in
nature. It seeks to provide protection to civilians who are often victimized by the exFAR/Interahamwe that operate in the area, west of Bukavu, and to encourage the
latter to enrol in the voluntary MONUC disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
reintegration and resettlement programme before the commencement of a military
phase. The Congolese Armed Forces and MONUC have established a combined
operations centre to coordinate their activities and support requirements.
23. While obstacles to peace are numerous everywhere in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the challenges are particularly acute in the Kivus, which have suffered
the brunt of the conflict in the last five years. The costs of the conflict are
tremendous, including the displacement of hundreds of thousands of people,
massive violations of human rights, use of sexual violence as a weapon of war,
extensive destruction and looting of property and the widespread use of child
soldiers by almost all armed groups. In the aftermath of the Bukavu crisis, and of
the massacre of Congolese refugees in the border town of Gatumba in Burundi, the
region also faces the major challenge of repatriating and reintegrating a large
number of Congolese Banyamulenge refugees in an environment that is deeply antiRwandaphone.

6

S/2004/934

24. In the meeting between the mission and the local authorities, the mission
reiterated its condemnation of the capture of Bukavu on 2 June and the ensuing
atrocities. It also informed the South Kivu leaders that these concerns had led to the
decision of the Council to augment MONUC by an additional 5,900 personnel, most
of whom would be deployed to the Kivus. Each province would receive a brigade of
three battalions. Both the Indian brigade and the Pakistani brigade had completed
their reconnaissance for their forthcoming deployment in the Kivus just prior to the
mission’s visit to Bukavu. Advance elements of the first Pakistani battalion arrived
in theatre during the visit itself. The full deployment of both brigades will take
several months to complete.
25. The Governor and his associates reaffirmed their determination to do
everything possible to ensure that the elections could be held on time. The leaders
also noted that while deep mistrust remains between different communities, they
would work on reconciliation initiatives to ensure the coexistence of the
Banyamulenge and other groups. They outlined the numerous challenges that
remain, such as the insecurity resulting from the continuing inflows of arms, vast
humanitarian needs, inaccessibility of parts of the province and lack of
infrastructure and material requirements.

The role of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the international
community
26. In its meetings with Congolese interlocutors, the Council mission reminded
them that the Council had “invested” considerably in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo peace process. With the Council’s adoption of resolution 1565 (2004),
MONUC was now the largest and most expensive peacekeeping operation of the
United Nations. MONUC was being reinforced with a view to contributing to the
stabilization of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially in the east, and to
assisting the Transitional Government in moving the reform and political processes
forward. The mission noted the restructuring challenges that MONUC is now
facing. It welcomed the strong grip that MONUC was taking on the very troubling
issue of sexual exploitation and abuse and its zero-tolerance approach to the issue. It
underlined the importance of early, detailed planning for the role of MONUC in
supporting the election process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
27. The mission expressed the hope that the transitional leaders of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo would take advantage of the unique support being provided
by the international community and work effectively on political arrangements to
ensure stability after the elections. While MONUC remained a principal tool of the
Security Council to support the peace process in the country, the mission welcomed
the work of CIAT, which was an essential forum for coordinating the approaches of
MONUC with those of vital bilateral and multilateral partners of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In this regard, the mission encouraged the espace
présidentiel to maintain a regular dialogue with CIAT.

7

S/2004/934

III. Burundi
28. The Security Council mission visited Bujumbura on 24 and 25 November and
was greatly encouraged by the progress made in the peace process since its last visit.
With the signing of the Global Ceasefire Agreement in November 2003, the
Transitional Government of Burundi now includes representatives of CNDD-FDD
(Nkurunziza). The mission was pleased to observe that the Burundian parties had
reached an overall understanding on the conclusion of the transition.
29. The mission expressed its strong support for the transitional process based on
the principles of dialogue, power-sharing and reconciliation. ONUB had been
established by the Security Council earlier in the year to help assist and sustain this
process. Welcoming the decision, endorsed by the States of the Regional Peace
Initiative, to extend the transition, the Council mission nonetheless stressed to its
Burundian interlocutors the need to adhere strictly to the newly adopted electoral
calendar prepared by the Independent National Electoral Commission. Much
remained to be done in the coming seven months.
30. The mission expressed its concern over delays encountered so far in two
critical areas. First, the electoral code and the commune act, essential prerequisites
for the elections, must be adopted. Second, progress should be made in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of combatants in order to create
conditions conducive to the holding of elections. To do so, in turn, it was necessary
to adopt the draft law on the organization of the defence and security forces,
currently being considered by the National Assembly.
31. In its interaction with the Burundian leaders, the mission placed considerable
emphasis on the need to ensure stability in the post-transition period, underscoring
that elections were not an end in themselves, but must also serve as a means to
achieve durable peace. The mission encouraged its interlocutors to work towards
creating favourable conditions for stability in the long term. It also expressed hope
that, with the successful conclusion of the Dar es Salaam summit on the Great Lakes
region, Burundi would work with its neighbours to promote regional security.
32. The mission was reassured by the determination expressed by all its Burundian
interlocutors to respect the electoral calendar and to strive to accelerate their efforts
in addressing the above-mentioned outstanding issues through an inclusive dialogue.
At the same time, Council members noted other priorities expressed by its various
interlocutors, such as the need to accelerate the military integration; the release of
political prisoners; the expeditious transformation of ex-belligerent groups into
political parties; and the need to seek wider consultations on the draft post-transition
constitution.
33. All the interlocutors of the mission stressed the need to take decisive measures
against FNL, led by Agathon Rwasa, the only armed group outside of the peace
process. It was recalled that the summit of the Regional Peace Initiative, held on
15 October, had declared the movement a terrorist organization and that the
mission’s interlocutors had made repeated requests for the Council to act on the
matter. It was strongly felt by the mission’s interlocutors that FNL (Rwasa) was not
prepared to enter into negotiations, despite the numerous opportunities given to it to
do so. At the same time, the Burundian leaders indicated that FNL did not pose a
major threat to either the Transitional Government or the electoral process.

8

S/2004/934

34. In many meetings, the mission’s interlocutors reiterated their appeal to the
international community to establish the international judicial commission of
inquiry, as envisaged in the Arusha Agreement. It was felt that its establishment
would underline the deep commitment of the international community to support the
fight against impunity in Burundi. The mission noted, on the positive side, that the
draft legislation on the national truth and reconciliation commission had been
adopted by the Parliament and was awaiting promulgation by the President.
35. A broad understanding had been reached on power-sharing on the basis of the
August 2004 Pretoria Agreement, and the interim Constitution had been adopted.
The mission believed that parties with divergent views should continue to work with
the others to reach a consensus on the issue in a spirit of pragmatism and
compromise, especially during the discussion of the draft electoral code, in order to
avoid further delays in the electoral calendar. The mission took note of the requests
from some interlocutors that a follow-up mechanism of some kind, involving the
international community, in particular the States in the region, be established in the
post-electoral period to continue to assist the Burundian Government.
36. The mission was reassured to receive a widely shared assessment from the
Burundian parties that the security situation in the country had improved. With the
exception of Bujumbura Rurale, where the joint units of the Burundian Armed
Forces and CNDD-FDD (Nkurunziza) continue to clash with FNL (Rwasa), most of
the country was now considered stable. At the same time, wide-scale displacements
have taken place in Bujumbura Rurale, and the level of criminality in general has
increased. The mission underscored the need to redouble the Government’s efforts
to protect the civilian population, which continued to be victimized. Following the
mission’s meeting with representatives of civil society, the mission was all the more
convinced that an effective strategy must be put in place to fight against the
pervasive culture of impunity.
37. As in the previous visits of the Security Council to Burundi, there was a
unified appeal by all of the mission’s interlocutors to help them overcome the dire
poverty facing the country, which was a root cause of the conflict and a major factor
in the population’s suffering. Many leaders requested the expeditious disbursement
of pledged assistance, while others appealed for Burundi’s external debts to be
cancelled. The message that peace and development are intrinsically linked was
echoed repeatedly throughout the mission’s stay in Burundi.

The role of the United Nations Operation in Burundi and the
international community
38. The mission offered congratulations on the successful operationalization of the
United Nations Operation in Burundi. Five months after the smooth transition from
the African Mission in Burundi to ONUB, the Operation, which has since been
reinforced with additional contingents and acquired specialized civilian expertise, is
now almost fully deployed, and its military and civilian personnel are present
throughout Burundi. The mission took note of the close cooperation of ONUB with
the Transitional Government on matters of vital importance, such as electoral issues
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. The Implementation Monitoring
Committee, chaired by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for

9

S/2004/934

Burundi, has been effective in encouraging the Transitional Government to advance
the peace process.

IV. Regional dimension
39. While the Council has always recognized the linkages between the peace
processes of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of Burundi, the mission was
left with the impression that the regional dimension of the conflict had become more
prominent since its last visit, as was so vividly demonstrated by the tragic incident
on 13 August in a refugee transit centre in Gatumba, Burundi, where 152 Congolese
Banyamulenge were cold-bloodedly massacred. The subsequent waves of
spontaneous refugee returns from Burundi to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have sharply increased tensions along the border, especially when they were
stranded in the no-man’s land between the two countries. Refugee flows affect all
the countries in the subregion. Their safe return and smooth reintegration in their
places of origin, in conditions of safety, must remain a key goal of the leaders in the
region.
40. The mission is deeply disturbed by the indications it received from its
interlocutors that illicit arms continue to flow through the porous borders into the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. While the reinforcement of MONUC in the
Kivus and the establishment of ONUB, together with the ongoing work of the group
of experts established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1533 (2004), will
enhance the international community’s capacity to monitor such illegal circulations
of arms, it was reminded of the vastness of such a task, with no fewer than 325
identified airstrips in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo alone. The
mission was also concerned to receive reports, albeit unconfirmed, of possible
cross-border cooperation between different armed groups.
41. The mission condemns the prevalence of sexual violence in both the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi. Such atrocities continue to be
perpetrated by almost all armed groups, including units associated with the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of Burundi. Sexual
violence, a war crime, must be stopped, and the regional leaders are reminded of
their responsibility to hold those responsible accountable.
42. The successful conclusion of the Dar es Salaam summit on 20 November gives
a ray of hope that a new chapter has been opened for regional cooperation. This
positive outcome has given further dynamism to the ongoing peace processes of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and of Burundi. The alarming news of Rwanda’s
threatened preparedness to cross the border to “neutralize” the ex-FAR/Interahamwe
only reinforces the need for stronger regional cooperation. The mission is convinced
that the implementation of the 82 provisions of the Dar es Salaam Declaration
provides a solid basis for consolidating peace and promoting cooperation between
the countries of the Great Lakes region, keeping in mind the need to respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States in the region.
43. The mission concluded its visit to the region with a meeting with President
Museveni of Uganda, and they exchanged views on the status of the peace processes
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Burundi and on the humanitarian
situation in northern Uganda.

10

S/2004/934

44. President Museveni expressed the view that in order to achieve durable peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, that country needed a stronger, central
authority, backed up by a capable military force. He also felt that the greater
involvement of regional players, especially the African partners of the 1999 Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement, was an essential requirement. He added that a deeper and
meaningful engagement of the broader international community was currently
lacking in the process. Regarding the situation in Ituri, President Museveni stressed
the need to integrate the armed groups, as agreed with the Transitional Government.
45. Regarding the situation in Burundi, he felt that the close involvement of
regional States had borne fruit, and he commended their productive partnership with
the United Nations, noting that it could serve as a future model of cooperation. On
the political process, he emphasized the importance of preserving the most essential
principle that had guided the Arusha Agreement: democracy, with security for all.
To this end, it was crucial that minority interests be properly represented in key
institutions of the future Government.
46. In regard to northern Uganda, President Museveni expressed his confidence
that the conflict there would soon cease, given the recent positive developments in
the Sudanese peace process, as a result of the curbing of cross-border operations of
the Lord’s Resistance Army, whose combatants had now become “fugitives”. The
mission highlighted its grave concerns over the humanitarian situation and appealed
to the President to pay special attention to the plight of child soldiers and other
children associated with the conflict. In response, President Museveni observed that
the ability of LRA to abduct children has virtually disappeared.

V. Conclusions and recommendations
47. The Security Council mission found that the primary challenges facing the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi were strikingly similar: the need to
accelerate the implementation of the outstanding aspects of the transitional agenda
to conduct credible elections that would lead to durable peace and stability. While
the contexts and circumstances of the two conflicts are different, both countries find
themselves at a crucial turning point in their peace processes. The mission noted the
challenging nature of the last phase of the transition, since the most difficult issues
are usually deferred until the end of the process. The leaders of the Transitional
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi must persevere
in their commitment to making the peace processes irreversible. It is their
responsibility.
48. At the same time, the more the leaders of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Burundi can do to advance the transitions in their countries the more the
international community is likely to be able to assist. The mission notes that
international support for the election processes is likely to be crucial, including
material assistance and the participation of international observers.
49. Regarding the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Council mission recalls
that the parties signatories to the 16 December 2002 Global and All-Inclusive
Agreement set out the following as the objectives of the transition: (a) the
reunification, pacification and reconstruction of the country, the restoration of
territorial integrity and the re-establishment of State authority throughout the
national territory; (b) national reconciliation; (c) the creation of a restructured and

11

S/2004/934

integrated national army; (d) the holding of free, transparent elections at all levels,
allowing for the establishment of a democratic constitutional regime; and (e) the
establishment of structures that will lead to a new political order. The progress
achieved since last June, examined in this context, is impressive. At the same time,
the list of objectives is a reminder that tremendous challenges still lie ahead.
50. The mission recommends that the espace présidentiel hold regular meetings
with CIAT to help “prioritize priorities” from the extensive road map produced by
the Transitional Government. It also now welcomes the fact that actors from the
Transitional Government will engage in a dialogue with MONUC and other
international partners, through the work of the three joint commissions, on issues
that are fundamental to the success of the transition. With the elections scheduled to
take place in seven months, establishing structures that lead to a new political order
has acquired an added sense of urgency.
51. The mission strongly urges the Transitional Government to develop its
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement or reintegration plan, to be
supported by MONUC. As long as the problem of the ex-FAR/Interahamwe in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains, it will be a source of instability in the
region. The mission therefore recommends that the Security Council urge possible
donors of financial and technical assistance to help the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in the important task of military integration. The mission further
recommends that, within its current mandate, MONUC explore with the Transitional
Government and the Congolese Armed Forces short-term measures to address the
problems posed by non-governmental armed groups in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
MONUC do all they can to accelerate the deployment of enhanced capabilities into
the area.
52. Additionally, the operationalization of the Joint Verification Mechanism
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda and the implementation
of the diplomatic and security aspects of the Democratic Republic of the CongoRwanda-Uganda tripartite agreement are absolute imperatives. The mission
recommends that the Council continue to closely monitor the implementation of
these agreements and to follow closely the roles and activities of the States of the
region to this end. The mission also recommends that the joint commissions
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi established in 2002 be
reactivated, with a view to consolidating their bilateral relations. The mission
supports Burundi’s interest in joining the mechanisms agreed between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda.
53. Turning to the situation in Burundi, the mission was impressed by the major
strides that have been made in favour of peace under the leadership of the President
of the Transitional Government. It welcomes the spirit of reconciliation that has
guided the process thus far. From its visit, the mission took note of three main
requests from its interlocutors. First, the mission recommends that the Security
Council undertake a deeper reflection on the issue of FNL, with a view to
ascertaining what additional measures could be taken against those in the movement
who compromise the peace process. Second, regarding the issue of impunity, it
recommends that the Council take urgent action on the report of the assessment
mission to Burundi on the feasibility of establishing an international judicial
commission of inquiry, which should be submitted to it as quickly as possible.

12

S/2004/934

Third, to help alleviate poverty, it is recommended that the Council proactively urge
donor countries to disburse the much-needed financial aid and extend technical
assistance to Burundians, as far as Burundi’s capacity to absorb this assistance
permits, and to work with the Burundian authorities to expand this capacity.
54. The mission was satisfied to see that ONUB was playing a useful, perhaps
even indispensable, role in assisting its Burundian partners in implementing its
peace process. The mission therefore recommends that the Security Council, when it
considers the second report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Burundi of 15 November 2004 (S/2004/902), extend the mandate of
ONUB.
55. The mission believes that the Security Council must continue to actively
explore means to take action to combat impunity, which in the absence of such
action creates environments conducive to massive human rights abuses. All
instruments available, such as the national human rights observatories, truth and
reconciliation commissions and judicial prosecutions of those responsible, must be
pursued vigorously.
56. The mission notes that despite the many concurrent challenges that remain,
there has been a steady positive trend in the promotion of regional security. Since
the adoption of the Principles on Good-Neighbourly Relations and Cooperation
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its eastern neighbours in
September 2003, much progress has been made, leading up to the adoption of the
Dar es Salaam Declaration. The mission recommends that the Security Council
welcome this development and encourage the participants in the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region to focus on the development of priorities and
speedy implementation.
57. The mission wishes to express its appreciation to the heads of State and other
interlocutors who met with the mission and provided valuable insights. The mission
is also very grateful to Special Representatives Swing and McAskie for their sound
advice and extensive assistance to facilitate the mission’s visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi. The mission wishes to thank the United
Nations Development Programme and other United Nations agencies for the
faultless logistical support provided on its behalf in Nairobi, Kigali and Entebbe, as
well as the Secretariat staff who accompanied it for their professionalism and
support.

13

S/2004/934

Abbreviations

14

CIAT

International Committee in Support of the Transition

CNDD

Conseil nationale pour la défense de la démocratie

FAR

Forces armées rwandaises

FDD

Forces pour la défense de la démocratie

FDLR

Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda

FNL

Forces nationales de libération

LRA

Lord’s Resistance Army

MONUC

United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo

ONUB

United Nations Operation in Burundi

RCD

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie
