United Nations

A/RES/58/209

General Assembly

Distr.: General
13 February 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 94

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2003
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/58/484/Add.8)]

58/209. Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme on its twenty-second session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, by which it
established the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme,
Recalling also its resolutions 53/242 of 28 July 1999, 56/193 of 21 December
2001 and 57/251 of 20 December 2002 on the report of the Governing Council,
Taking note of the report of the Governing Council on its seventh special
session, 1
Reaffirming the role of the United Nations Environment Programme as the
principal body within the United Nations system in the field of environment, which
should take into account, within its mandate, the sustainable development needs of
developing countries as well as countries with economies in transition,
Taking into account the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 2
Recalling the need to enhance the provisions of the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation concerning support for capacity-building in developing countries
and countries with economies in transition,
Takes note of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations
1.
Environment Programme on its twenty-second session 3 and the decisions contained
therein;
2.
Emphasizes the need for the United Nations Environment Programme,
within its mandate, to further contribute to sustainable development programmes,

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/57/25).
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August-4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.
3
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/58/25).
2

03 50706

A/RES/58/209

the implementation of Agenda 21 4 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation2 at
all levels, bearing in mind the mandate of the Commission on Sustainable
Development;
Reiterates the need to ensure that capacity-building and technical
3.
assistance to developing countries remain important components of the work of the
United Nations Environment Programme, and in this regard emphasizes the need for
full and effective implementation of relevant decisions of the Governing
Council/Global Ministerial Environment Forum;
Calls upon the United Nations Environment Programme to contribute,
4.
within its mandate, to the preparations for the twelfth session of the Commission on
Sustainable Development, while avoiding duplication and overlap in the work of the
two bodies;
Also calls upon the United Nations Environment Programme to
5.
contribute, within its mandate and as a member of the Inter-Agency Task Force, to
the preparations for the international meeting to review the implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States, 5 to be held in Mauritius from 30 August to 3 September 2004, including its
preparatory process;
6.
Encourages Member States, the Governing Council and the relevant
bodies of the United Nations system to submit their comments, in a timely manner,
on the important but complex issue of establishing universal membership of the
Governing Council/Global Ministerial Environment Forum, including its legal,
political, institutional, financial and system-wide implications, in order to contribute
to the report of the Secretary-General to be submitted to the General Assembly for
consideration before its sixtieth session, in accordance with resolution 57/251;
Encourages Member States to participate in the ongoing
7.
intergovernmental consultation process on the strengthening of the scientific base of
the United Nations Environment Programme;
Notes, in regard to strengthening the overall financial situation of the
8.
United Nations Environment Programme, the various available options and the
efforts being undertaken to enhance predictability in financing its programme of
work and broadening its base of contributions;
Invites the Governing Council/Global Ministerial Environment Forum to
9.
review its methods, agenda and programme of work, in view of the mandate of the
United Nations Environment Programme, with the aim of enhancing manageability
and the effective participation of States Members of the United Nations in its
sessions, and taking into account recent work thereon by the Committee of
Permanent Representatives of the United Nations Environment Programme;
10. Emphasizes the need to further enhance coordination and cooperation
among the relevant United Nations organizations in the promotion of the
environmental dimension of sustainable development, and in this respect welcomes

_______________
4

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June
1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
5
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April-6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and
corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.

2

A/RES/58/209

the participation of the United Nations Environment Programme in the United
Nations Development Group;
11. Requests that the reports on the work of the Environmental Management
Group be made available to the General Assembly at its next session through the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme;
12. Reiterates the need for stable, adequate and predictable financial
resources for the United Nations Environment Programme, and in accordance with
resolution 2997 (XXVII) underlines the need to consider adequate reflection of all
administrative and management costs of the Programme in the context of the United
Nations regular budget;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the resource needs of the United
Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations Office at Nairobi under
review so as to permit the delivery, in an effective manner, of necessary services to
the Programme and to the other United Nations organs and organizations in Nairobi.
78th plenary meeting
23 December 2003

3
