A /69/PV.80

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

80th plenary meeting

Thursday, 26 February 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda items 9 and 13 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Economic and Social Council
(A/69/3/Rev.1)
Draft resolution (A/69/L.53)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
(a) Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
The President: In connection with agenda
item 9, I would like to recall that, pursuant to resolution
58/316, of 1 July 2004, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the General Committee, decided
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 19 September 2014, to
consider agenda item 9 in its entirety in plenary, on
the understanding that the administrative, programme
and budgetary aspects should be dealt with by the Fifth
Committeee. At the same meeting, the Assembly took
note of the clarification that, in implementing resolution
58/316 to consider agenda item 9 in its entirety in
plenary, the relevant parts of chapter I of the report that
deal with agenda items already allocated to the Main
Committees would be considered by the Committee
concerned for final action by the General Assembly.

In connection with sub-item (a) of agenda item 13,
members will recall that, pursuant to resolution 57/270
B, the Assembly decided to consider, under the item,
the chapters of the annual report of the Economic
and Social Council relevant to the integrated and
coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the
outcomes of the major United Nations conferences
and summits, including through the participation in its
discussions of the President of the Council.
Under agenda item 9, the Assembly has before it the
report of the Economic and Social Council circulated
in document A/69/3/Rev.1. Under the same item, the
Assembly also has before it a draft resolution entitled,
“A global geodetic reference frame for sustainable
development”, issued as document A/69/L.53.
Permit me now to make a brief statement.
The report before us synthesizes the significant
accomplishments of the Economic and Social Council
realized through the course of last year. It also shows
the ongoing implementation of the Council’s reform.
The substantive theme chosen for the 2014 session,
“Addressing ongoing and emerging challenges for
meeting the Millennium Development Goals in 2015
and for sustaining development gains in the future”,
was most important and pertinent. It provided specific
focus as the Economic and Social Council continues
to enhance its contribution to the transition from the
Millennium Development Goals to the post-2015
development agenda. The Council’s work in this
area will be invaluable as we move forward with the
negotiations on the new development agenda.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-05206 (E)

*1505206*

A/69/PV.80

The 2014 Economic and Social Council session
yielded several other important outcomes, including
the decision to enhance global cooperation in providing
technical assistance for the development of a global
reference frame which can contribute to more accurate
measuring of the changing planet, with potential
economic and environmental benefits. In addition to
its traditional operational activities and humanitarian
segments, the Council also held the first meeting of its
integration segment last year, focusing on the important
issue of sustainable urbanization. The Council’s highlevel segment in 2014 was successful and hosted the
important meeting of the Development Cooperation
Forum, the high-level policy dialogue with international
financial and trade institutions and the High-level
Political Forum on Sustainable Development. The joint
meetings of the Economic and Social Council and
the Second Committee also provided useful insights
on several topics, including the sovereign debt crisis
and the renewed global partnership for development.
These meetings also promoted a spirit of coherence and
coordination in our work.
As the Assembly well knows, the year 2015 will
be a landmark for the United Nations, particularly for
those directly involved with sustainable-development
issues. Resolution 68/1 recognized the leading role
of the Economic and Social Council in identifying
emerging challenges and promoting reflection, debate
and innovative thinking on development. In this
context, the Council’s work continues to provide an
invaluable contribution towards our efforts to formulate
an integrated and unified development framework, as
well as to the advancement of stronger linkages among
the activities of the United Nations system.
Going forward, we will need greater emphasis on
the role of the High-level Political Forum in the followup and review of the implementation of the post-2015
development agenda. This will require even greater
and stronger coordination and cooperation between
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. I look forward to continued collaboration
between the Assembly and the Council throughout the
current session.
I now give the floor to the President of the Economic
and Social Council, His Excellency Mr. Martin Sajdik,
to introduce the report of the Council.
Mr. Sajdik (Austria), President of the Economic
and Social Council: It is an honour to introduce the
2014 report of the Economic and Social Council,
2/14

26/02/2015

contained in document A/69/3/Rev.1, to the General
Assembly. Before introducing the report, I would like
to profoundly thank my colleagues in the Bureau of the
Council: Ms. María Emma Mejía Vélez of Colombia,
Mr. Vladimir Drobnjak of Croatia, Mr. Oh Joon of the
Republic of Korea, and Mr. Mohamed Khaled Khiari
of Tunisia. I would also like to thank the previous
members of the Bureau, Ibrahim Dabbashi of Libya and
Mr. Carlos Enrique García González of El Salvador.
This is a historic time. The international community
continues to accelerate its efforts to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals, and the crafting of
the post-2015 development agenda is in full swing.
The universality of the post-2015 development
agenda signifies that the agenda will have a global
reach, applicable to all countries. Universality is also
recognition of the growing interdependence in today’s
world. The principle of integration will be at the core of
the post-2015 development agenda. Integration is also
at the centre of the work of the the Economic and Social
Council system, at both the conceptual and analytical
levels of policy, as well as in its implementation. The
Assembly’s discussion today of the Council’s 2014
report offers an opportunity to engage in a reflection
on the substantive policy guidance of the Economic and
Social Council system.
The year 2014 was the first year of the new
Economic and Social Council, arising from the General
Assembly’s strengthening of the Council. The Assembly
initiated a year-and-a-half transitional cycle that will
culminate in the Council’s high-level segment this July.
The transitional period is stretched over 18 months. I
am honoured to be presiding over the Council for this
entire period.
The new Economic and Social Council is the most
important instrument at the intergovernmental level for
pursuing the twin objectives of eradicating poverty and
achieving the integration of the economic, social and
environmental dimensions of sustainable development.
The year 2014 was the first in which the Council
convened its new platforms, including the convening
of the High-level Political Forum under the auspices
of the Council and the new integration segment.
These were pursued together with the full range of the
Council’s existing platforms and processes, including
the Development Cooperation Forum, the Financing
for Development follow-up process, the work of the
Council’s functional commissions and expert bodies,
the Quadrennial Comprehensive Policy Review follow-

15-05206

26/02/2015

up process, and the Economic and Social Council
Dialogue on the Longer-term Positioning of the United
Nations Development System.
The Economic and Social Council is now well
on its way to be fit for purpose for the post-2015
development agenda. All of its instruments have their
own distinctive roles, interplay and division of labour.
Taken together, they are ready to advance ownership,
engagement, implementation and follow-up and review
at the global level. I believe that the whole of the
Economic and Social Council system, including the
High-level Political Forum, can and will deliver better
results for humankind.
In 2014, the Council supported the transition to the
post-2015 development agenda through the main theme
of “Addressing ongoing and emerging challenges for
meeting the Millennium Development Goals in 2015
and for sustaining development gains in the future”.
The Economic and Social Council system considered
the theme throughout its work during the 2014 session,
culminating in the Council’s high-level segment and
the ministerial-level High-level Political Forum in
July. The meeting of the High-level Political Forum on
Sustainable Development, held under the auspices of the
Economic and Social Council, addressed key aspects of
that transition through its aligned theme, “Achieving
the Millennium Development Goals and charting the
way for an ambitious post-2015 development agenda,
including the sustainable development goals”.
The Economic and Social Council also addressed
the 2014 theme and the transition to the post-2015
development agenda through its segments and forums,
including the Development Cooperation Forum and
the Financing for Development follow-up process.
The related theme of the 2014 integration segment
was “Sustainable Urbanization”. The segment brought
together Member States, the Economic and Social
Council system, civil society and the business and
philanthropic sectors to focus on its economic, social
and environmental dimensions.
(spoke in French)
In 2014, the Economic and Social Council afforded
various development players an opportunity to join
forces to drive forward sustainable. To do that it carried
out the following actions: a review of the 2014 theme,
including obstacles to achieving the Millennium
Development Goals and sustaining gains in future,
particularly through national voluntary presentations

A/69/PV.80

from various countries; facilitating the integration of
the three dimensions of sustainable development in
sustainable urbanization; initiating a dialogue on ways
to ensure that the United Nations development system
can adapt its activities more effectively and efficiently to
the evolving development landsacpe; achieving progress
in the area of development cooperation by focusing
on priority issues for action with a view to achieving
concrete results; considering jointly with the General
Assembly the role and features of multistakeholder
partnerships in implementing a post-2015 development
agenda; enabling youth, who represent one quarter of
the world’s population, to participate in the international
dialogue on development; tackling the Ebola crisis and
linking the emergency Ebola response in West Africa
to longer-term endeavours to strengthen health systems;
and strengthening the coordination of the humanitarian
assistance provided by United Nations bodies.
I am especially pleased that discussions on
humanitarian affairs have been an essential part of
the Economic and Social Council since 1998, giving
a humanitarian dimension to the work of the United
Nations.
The Council also launched an open and inclusive
dialogue on the longer-term positioning of the United
Nations development system, the primary objective
being to make the system fit for purpose and ready to
support the implementation of a universal and unified
development agenda. That is another area where the
Council could potentially show the way forward.
(spoke in Russian)
The Economic and Social Council will continue
to make efforts to advance a rights-based approach to
sustainable development, the rule of law and access
to justice, as well as to strengthen implementation
and review. The Economic and Social Council
provides a global platform for bringing together all
stakeholders and advancing an integrated approach to
the development of a unified and universal agenda.
The Economic and Social Council serves as a unifying
platform for our substantive areas of work, as well as
between national and global development action.
The Economic and Social Council’s unifying
platform includes the work of the entire Economic
and Social Council system, including the functional
and regional commissions and various expert bodies,
and the newly established High-level Political Forum,
which covers a broad range of substantive areas. The

15-052063/14

A/69/PV.80

Economic and Social Council system is an interlocking
framework that connects functional and regional
commissions, expert bodies and specialized agencies.
They all have clear, distinctive roles and divisions
of labour. Thanks to the recent strengthening of the
Economic and Social Council by the General Assembly,
we now have a main, annual theme to guide and support
harmonized, coordinated and integrated work within
the Economic and Social Council system.
We need to ensure that the individual followup processes are aligned and facilitate coherent and
unified implementation in terms of analysis and policy.
The annual theme of the Economic and Social Council
serves to align and connect the broad analytical work of
the Economic and Social Council system, culminating
in the high-level segment. The High-level Political
Forum, convened under the auspices of the Economic
and Social Council, also aligns its theme with the
annual theme of the Council.
We have an important and challenging task before
us. In the post-2015 era, we must mobilize our common
resources and energy to face our two major challenges,
namely, the fate of humankind and the fate of our
planet. We have a shared responsibility for doing so.
In order to provide strategic, substantive guidance, the
United Nations needs a strong General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council system.
Today’s dialogue, informed by the 2014 report of the
Economic and Social Council, moves us forward in our
quest for sustainable development and a world without
poverty. The Assembly can count on me and the entire
Economic and Social Council system to facilitate our
work and the implementation of that common vision.
The President: I thank the President of the
Economic and Social Council for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Fiji to
introduce draft resolution A/69/L.53.
Mr. Thomson (Fiji): I cannot repeat the impressive
linguistic feats of the President of the Economic and
Social Council, unless the interpreters understand the
Fijian language — in which case I could speak a bit of
Fijian.
It is my honour this morning, on behalf of its
44 sponsors, to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.53,
entitled “A global geodetic reference frame for
sustainable development”, under agenda item 9, entitled
“Report of the Economic and Social Council”.

4/14

26/02/2015

The delegation of Fiji wishes to first thank all
Member States for their support throughout the
consultation process. By way of introduction, the draft
resolution before the Assembly stems from the texts
previously adopted by the Committee of Experts on
Global Geospatial Information Management and by the
Economic and Social Council in August and November,
respectively, last year. The current text preserves the
essence of what the Committee of Experts had intended
for this initiative, namely, to leverage the importance
of a globally coordinated approach to geodesy based
on the premise of equitably measuring the location,
shape, rotation and gravitational field of the planet.
As the planet revolves in constant motion, a point of
reference is needed. Geodesy provides that through an
accurate and stable coordinate reference frame to relate
measurements taken at different times and locations.
Recognizing that no one country can do that alone, a
common global geodetic reference frame will enable
multilateral cooperation in geodesy, including through
the open sharing of geospatial data, further capacitybuilding in developing countries and the establishment
of international standards and conventions.
We take this opportunity to emphasize the
important role played by the Committee of Experts on
Global Geospatial Information Management, which
the Economic and Social Council established in 2011
to develop the proposed road map that will establish
the common global geodetic reference frame. The
information to be derived from this important work
will benefit the international community’s development
work, as it will be fundamental to satellite remote
sensing, by which changes in populations, ice caps,
oceans and the atmosphere can be tracked over time.
Such geospatial measurements will support sustainable
development policy-making, climate change monitoring
and natural-disaster management, and will also have a
wide range of applications for transport, agriculture
and construction.
As a small island developing State, Fiji is
vulnerable to increasingly severe natural disasters,
sea-level rise and other problems triggered by
climate change. We use geodetic data for our disaster
preparedness action plans, and greatly appreciate the
importance of critical geospatial infrastructure and
information in helping countries such as ours make
more informed evidence-based decisions on mitigation
and preparedness.

15-05206

26/02/2015

Furthermore, as a troop-contributing country to
United Nations peacekeeping missions, we believe
that increased accuracy and sustainable geospatial
information will ensure that Blue Helmets operate with
more reliable evidence-based data, thereby leading to
greater effectiveness in United Nations peacekeeping
missions.
In this critical year of determining the global
course of action to improve people’s lives and protect
the planet for the next 15 years, the adoption of this
draft resolution will do its bit to enable us to achieve the
goals of the post-2015 development agenda. Practical
solutions and international cooperation will be integral
to the achievement of the sustainable development
goals, and the establishment of the global geodetic
reference frame for sustainable development will be a
trustworthy tool in helping deliver those solutions in a
spirit of international cooperation.
Finally, the delegation of Fiji wishes to thank all
Member States that have sponsored this draft resolution
for their support throughout. We look forward to its
adoption.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Ms. Klausa (European Union): The European
Union (EU) and its member States would like to thank
the President of the Economic and Social Council for
introducing the Council’s report (A/69/3/Rev.1). We
commend the work of the Council during the reporting
period and recognize the leadership of its President,
Mr. Martin Sajdik of Austria, as well as the dedication
of the entire Bureau. We would also like to acknowledge
with gratitude the support that the Secretariat provided
to the Council.
We are very much aware of the challenges faced
by the presidency of the Economic and Social Council,
the Bureau and the Secretariat during this period of
transition and reform. We have seem much progress
over the past year. We should strive to build upon that
progress to make the Economic and Social Council
even more relevant, effective and efficient. In this
particularly important year, which will include ongoing
discussions on, inter alia, the post-2015 development
agenda, financing for development, and climate change,
which of course are of great interest and significance
to the Economic and Social Council system, the EU
and its member States will actively participate in and
support the work and activities of the Council.

A/69/PV.80

Mr. Mackay (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Belarus
is convinced that the Economic and Social Council
is uniquely endowed with the capacity for integrated
consideration of all aspects of sustainable development.
It is the key United Nations forum for developing
collective approaches to address the inherent
socioeconomic problems of the future sustainable
development goals, having shown its relevance during
debates on the new development agenda.
At the first meeting of the High-level Political
Forum on Sustainable Development, under the auspices
of the Economic and Social Council, last year, Member
States shared their vision of the difficulties inherent in
the implementation of the Millennium Development
Goals and possible solutions. Belarus hopes that the
Forum will become an additional opportunity for
Member States to fully participate in discussions on
strategic development issues of development, and that
it will help to boost interaction between the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council in that
regard.
We need to discuss issues of interest to all
categories of States, including middle-income
States, in the Forum. The success and experience of
middle-income countries should assist the transition of
the least-developed countries to a higher development
category. Efforts are needed not only from the States
themselves,but the international community as well,
to promote sustainable development in middle-income
countries. We will work with interested countries so
that this topic has a place on the United Nations and
Economic and Social Council agenda.
Our delegation supports the process of strengthening
cooperation between the Economic and Social Council
and the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade
Organization and the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, with a view to finding joint
ways to implement the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) and the future development agenda.
We anticipate that joint decisions will be geared to
developing practical steps to ensure the sustainability
of the global economy overall, and national economies
in particular.
Moreover, we need to reflect on how to implement
the often-heard proposal to establish a subsidiary body
of the Economic and Social Council for financing for
development. It is very important that the resources
pledged by developed countries and confirmed by the

15-052065/14

A/69/PV.80

Monterrey Consensus become a reliable factor in the
financing system.
Alhough official development assistance adds
to the internal resources of recipient countries, the
mobilization of those resources cannot fully eliminate
the need for the former. We should be alarmed by the
growing tendency to de-emphasize the importance of
official development assistance. At the same time, a
number of States are forced to address development
issues while also facing the application of unilateral
economic, trade or other financial measures that
contradict the norms of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations, and also hinder the full
implementation of the internationally agreed MDGs.
We would look forward to finding a long-term
solution to the issue of financing the agenda in the post2015 period at the Third International Conference on
Financing for Development, to be held in Addis Ababa.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): It is an honour to speak on
the introduction of the 2014 report of the Economic and
Social Council to the General Assembly (A/69/3/Rev.1).
First and foremost, I wish to thank the President of the
Economic and Social Council, Ambassador Sajdik,
and my colleagues on the Council’s Bureau and in the
Secretariat for our collaborative work. I would like
to highly commend their efforts. It is a true pleasure
working with them.
The General Assembly, in its recent strengthening
of the Economic and Social Council, decided that the
Council would adopt an annual main theme that will
serve as its guiding substantive focus. The theme
will serve to support harmonized, coordinated and
integrated work within the Economic and Social Council
system, so I think that we need to ensure that the work
of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council together provides substantive policy guidance
and contributes to and facilitates the coherent, unified
implementation of the post-2015 development agenda.
We are pleased to see that the entire Economic and
Social Council system is now aligning, to the extent
possible, its work to the main theme of the Economic
and Social Council. This connects the analytical work
of the Economic and Social Council system to the highlevel segment and the High-level Political Forum when
it is convened under the auspices of the Council.
The report before us is an important one, and this
is an important year. The year 2015 has tremendous
transformative potential and power for reasons we
6/14

26/02/2015

all know, and the Economic and Social Council has a
fitting place in it. Croatia, as a member of the Economic
and Social Council, is responsible for streamlining the
work of the integration segment, so I should like to say
a few words on that matter.
In 2014, the integration segment was still a novel
part of the work of the Economic and Social Council,
but we successfully organized and conducted meetings
on sustainable urbanization. The integration segment
quickly proved to be worthy and relevant. This year,
the integration segment will take place from 30 March
to 1 April, and will address the issue of employment,
with a focus on the creation of decent work for all. I
look forward to another rich debate that will once
again demonstrate the unbreakable synergy between
the economic, social and environmental dimensions of
development.
Finally, I would like to end by once again
commending the President of the Economic and Social
Council, Ambassador Sajdik, for his efforts and the
results achieved under his able guidance.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): My delegation
welcomes the 2014 annual report of the Economic
and Social Council (A/69/3/Rev.1). We would like to
commend the leadership of Ambassador Martin Sajdik,
President of the Economic and Social Council, and also
express our appreciation for the Secretariat’s support
during this period of transition, which is part of the
strengthening of the Council.
The Economic and Social Council is now mandated
to serve as the platform for the coordination of global,
regional and national development activities and to
connect the individual, follow-up and review processes
in order to optimize mutual reinforcements across
the development agenda as a whole. We believe that
the efforts made for further integration during this
transition from the Millennium Development Goals to
the sustainable development goals will serve to make
the Economic and Social Council fit for its role in the
implementation of the transformative and universal
development agenda.
We have learned from many discussions that a
transformative and ambitious post-2015 development
agenda can be achieved only through a genuine
partnership engaging different development actors.
In that regard, we need to utilize the strength and
expertise of the Economic and Social Council, which
arise from its collaboration with its subsidiary bodies,

15-05206

26/02/2015

including the functional and regional commissions.
As the Council’s President indicated, 2014 saw the
introduction of the new Economic and Social Council,
and new platforms have been introduced into the work
of the Council.
Looking back at the major developments throughout
the work of the Economic and Social Council in 2014,
the new integration segment and the High-level Political
Forum, under the Council’s auspices, are especially
noteworthy. The first-ever integration segment in
2014 provided a unique platform for Member States,
the United Nations system, civil society and other
stakeholders to promote effective collaboration
among them and, in particular, to focus on how to
achieve sustainable urbanization by incorporating
the economic, social and environmental dimensions
of sustainable development. The High-level Political
Forum, which met under the auspices of the Economic
and Social Council last year, represents an important
reform that offers a new multilateral architecture to
respond to sustainable development challenges.
As a member of the Bureau of the Economic and
Social Council, I have experienced first-hand the
positive impact of the Council’s work. My delegation is
pleased to be able to count on the entire Economic and
Social Council system to bring together all development
actors for the achievement of the sustainable
development goals and the successful implementation
of the post-2015 development agenda. The Republic
of Korea reaffirms its commitment to our common
endeavours in that regard.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.53, entitled
“A global geodetic reference frame for sustainable
development”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like
to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of A/69/L.53: Austria, the Bahamas, Costa
Rica, Guyana, Iceland, Indonesia, Italy and Serbia.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.53?
Draft resolution A/69/L.53 was adopted (resolution
69/266).

A/69/PV.80

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to take note of the report of the
Economic and Social Council contained in document
A/69/3/Rev.1?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 9 and sub-item (a) of agenda item 13.
Agenda item 129
Seventieth anniversary of the end of the Second
World War
Draft resolution (A/69/L.52)
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Russian Federation to introduce draft resolution
A/69/L.52.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation): The delegation
of the Russian Federation has the honour to introduce
on its own behalf, and on behalf of a large group of
sponsors, the draft resolution contained in document
A/69/L.52, entitled “Seventieth anniversary of the end
of the Second World War”.
This year we will celebrate the commemoration
of a famous date — the seventieth anniversary of the
great victory of the Second World War. It was a war
unprecedented in its scope and cruelty, and one that
turned into a terrible tragedy for the peoples of the entire
world. Our quest to spare future generations from the
tragedy of a war that brought great grief and suffering
to people helped us establish the United Nations and
today’s system of international relations. The very
term “United Nations” first appeared in the years of
the Second World War. The States of the anti-Hitler
alliance called themselves that. With great effort and
at great cost, 70 years ago we managed to repel that
terrible threat to the very foundation of civilization.
We cannot forget the price we paid or the horrendous
atrocities of the Nazis and their accomplices in the
Second World War.
The international criminal justice system that was
established after the war made it possible to judge
the many crimes against humanity and war crimes
that had been committed. Time has demonstrated the
correctness and great significance of that judgement.
However complex and acute the challenges since the
end of the Second World War have been, honouring the

15-052067/14

A/69/PV.80

deeds of the people of all countries who courageously
fought against fascism and militarism is a duty to
cherish. Ours was a common victory that we are not
only entitled to, but must be proud of. Our common
obligation is to remember the bitter lessons of the war
and to help keep its memories alive, not to allow for
historical revisionism or attempts to rewrite it.
Draft resolution A/69/L.52 continues the United
Nations tradition of celebrating the anniversary of
the end of the Second World War. We are maintaining
the tradition of broad sponsorship by Member States
representing all regions of the world. We hope that
we will also maintain the tradition of unanimously
adopting the draft resolution.
Paragraph 1 of the draft resolution calls on all
Member States, organizations of the United Nations
system,
non-governmental
organizations
and
individuals to observe these days in an appropriate
manner to pay tribute to all victims of the Second World
War. Paragraph 2 is a request to hold a special solemn
meeting of the United Nations in the second week of
May 2015 in commemoration of all victims of the war.
We would suggest holding that meeting on 5 or 6 May.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Van Den Akker (European Union ): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Iceland and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia align themselves with this
statement.
Soon we will commemorate the seventieth
anniversary of the end of the Second World War, a
tragic chapter in the history of Europe and of the whole
world. Our consideration of draft resolution A/69/L.52
is a fitting way for us to mark this commemoration.
We should never forget the horrors of the past and the
cruelty of war to prevent ourselves from repeating
them. We have the responsibility of ensuring that such
atrocities will never reoccur. We also have to remember
the sacrifices made and mourn all the people who
lost their lives as victims of the war, the Holocaust,
occupations and acts of repression. We believe that
historical awareness is a necessary step in preventing
similar crimes in the future.

8/14

26/02/2015

The United Nations should be conceived of as
having the aim of preserving international peace and
security. In its very Preamble, the Charter of the United
Nations talks of
“We the peoples of the United Nations,
determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has
brought untold sorrow to mankind”.
However, we remain very conscious of the fact that
it is not just the two world wars that have brought
untold sorrow to humankind over the past 100 years.
Unfortunately, our efforts for peace have failed too
often. The European Union and its member States
have pledged to work with all the States Members of
the United Nations to lift those scourges and to create
a more peaceful, just and prosperous world for future
generations.
At the same time, we note with regret that many
current crises remain unresolved. Therefore, the
anniversary must remind us of our commitment
to refrain from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or sovereignty of any State. Also,
it should lead us to redouble our efforts to settle
disputes by peaceful means. The European Union and
its member States are deeply committed to the core
principles outlined in the Charter, and we firmly believe
that there is no place for the use of force or coercion to
change internationally recognized borders in Europe or
elsewhere in the twenty-first century.
We pay our earnest tribute to the historic role of the
allied forces and their sacrifices in the defeat of Nazism
during the Second World War. However, we should
likewise remember that the Second World War brought
about painful divisions in Europe and that for many
European countries the end of the Second World War
brought not freedom but more crimes against humanity
committed against their people.
We need to overcome the legacies of the war and
build on the progress made since the end of the Second
World War in promoting democratic values, human
rights and fundamental freedoms. When it comes to
commemoration, we should pay tribute to the women
and men who fought for liberty and peace. They should
inspire us to look forward with hope and to redouble
our efforts for peace and understanding. Today, we, the
States Members of the United Nations, must play this
crucial role together.

15-05206

26/02/2015

The European Union and its member States
believe that an honest and thorough debate on history
will facilitate reconciliation based on truth and
remembrance. We therefore appreciate this draft
resolution, as it contributes to preserving the memory
of the victims of one of the darkest episodes of our
history.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Seventy years ago, the roar of
the guns fell quiet over Europe, and the Second World
War came to a close. Today, as we mourn the human
tragedy of that war, we must also recognize those
who made victory possible and ensured that freedom
triumphed over tyranny. We owe our freedom to the
courage and sacrifices of the soldiers of the Allied
armies.
I stand before the Assembly as a man who has seen
and experienced war as a soldier and a diplomat and
the father of children who themselves have been sent
to war. I also speak today as the son of a man who fled
Nazi Germany to escape the annihilation of his people.
In his novel The Young Lions, Irwin Shaw describes the
incomprehensible horror of the Second World War:
“This time it is not a simple, understandable
war ... This time it is an assault of the animal world
upon the house of the human being ... I know what I
saw in Russia and Poland ... A cemetery a thousand
miles long and a thousand miles wide. Men,
women, children, Poles, Russians, Jews, it made no
difference. It could not be compared to any human
action.”
More than 60 million people — 3 per cent of the
world’s population — were killed or murdered in the
Second World War. Half of the victims were civilians.
Men were forced from their farms and fields and sent to
the battlefields. Women were torn from their families
and sent to hard-labour camps. Countless young girls
and boys were denied the most basic right: the right to
grow up and grow old. The scope of the human tragedy
is simply unfathomable.
The sacrifices were immense — Russia alone lost
over 25 million people. The Russian people faced the
harsh forces of nature. They looked the brutal enemy
in the eye. They pushed forward to conquer Berlin
and halted the Nazi advancement. They fought so that
peoples and nations could live in freedom. When history
and circumstances called for bravery, they answered
the call. Throughout the war, every news broadcast in
Russia started with the following phrase: “The enemy

A/69/PV.80

will be stopped, and we shall prevail.” Thanks to its
courage and conviction, Russia was indeed victorious.
But there was no one country that could alone
stop the monstrous Nazi killing machine. President
Roosevelt’s decision to send American forces and troops
to fight for freedom changed the course of history.
Fighting shoulder to shoulder with Winston Churchill’s
Great Britain was a courageous decision. Without the
alliance between the United States, Great Britain,
Russia, France and other countries, and the bravery of
the Allied soldiers, the trajectory of civilization would
have been terribly different.
On 25 April 1945, soldiers from the Soviet
58th Guards Rifle Division and the American 69th
Infantry met at the Elbe River. That historic meeting
of East and West signalled the end of long and bloody
campaigns by the Allied Powers to turn back Nazi
Germany’s unprecedented aggression against Europe
and humankind. Two weeks later the war in Europe
was over, and six years of death and destruction finally
came to an end.
Seventy years ago, in Europe’s darkest hour, a third
of the world’s Jews were killed in the Nazi Holocaust. As
Elie Wiesel once said, “not all victims were Jews, but all
Jews were victims”. The magnitude of the destruction is
simply unparalleled. We cannot comprehend the riches
of the mind lost to us by the destruction of Einstein’s
Berlin or Kaf ka’s Prague. The tragedy of the Shoah
is a stain on the conscience of humankind, a mockery
of the very concept of a civilized world, never ever to
be forgotten. The elimination of Jews from the face of
Europe was not a means to further a goal, it was the
goal itself.
In the darkest hours, Allied nations kindled the
light of liberty. American and British forces bravely
fought back the Germans on the Western front and, in
the East, the 322nd Rifle Division of the Russian Army
liberated the Auschwitz death camp. The steel of the
Allied spirit proved to be mightier than the steel of the
tanks and guns they faced. Thanks to them, the flame
of liberty continues to burn brightly.
Today we are here to confirm that the responsibility
for preventing atrocities rests on our shoulders. Seventy
years ago, with the ashes of the Second World War still
smouldering, the victors of the war came together to
establish the United Nations and ensure that “never
again” would not be a hollow promise. Today the values
at the very heart of this institution are being threatened

15-052069/14

A/69/PV.80

by extremist ideologies that target our way of life. From
West Africa to the Middle East, extremist groups have
unleashed a plague of persecution, believing that by
silencing individuals they can silence civilization.
The terrorists that stormed the Charlie Hebdo office
in Paris attacked liberty — the right of every person to
express himself or herself. The terrorists that targeted
Jews in Paris and Copenhagen attacked equality — the
idea that every person, no matter one’s faith, is equal.
By aiming their attacks at innocent civilians, the
terrorists also attacked brotherhood — the bonds of
our shared humankind. Make no mistake — freedom
is under attack throughout the whole world. A war is
being waged against human dignity and human rights,
and we must fight back. Standing united with courage
and conviction, we can turn back the tide of violent
extremism and safeguard the values we cherish.
Peace and security is also threatened by Iran, the
world’s foremost sponsor of terrorism. That radical
theocracy is working tirelessly to advance its nuclear
capabilities, while explicitly threatening to eradicate
Israel from the face of the Earth. But let me be perfectly
clear: what is at stake is not just the security of Israel, it
is the security and stability of the entire world. Consider
what the world would look like if Iran were allowed to
proceed. A nuclear Iran will set off an arms race in
the Middle East. It will provide a nuclear umbrella that
would protect terrorist groups, allowing them to act
with increasing impunity. That is not the world the men
and women who fought victoriously 70 years ago would
have hoped for.
The Second World War taught us that the costs of
inaction are simply too high to bear. It is the reason this
institution exists, and it is the obligation that we must
live up to. Each and every one of us has a role to play
in the struggle for human rights and human dignity.
We must overcome indifference. We must know what
we stand for — and then stand up for what we believe
in — we never indulge racism, never ignore incitement
and are never silent when confronted with the warnings
of war.
From the Assembly I issue a warning to the world.
Do not close your eyes to the atrocities around you.
Do not turn away from the animosity that ensues. It is
your responsibility to speak out against hatred clearly
and unequivocally. Equip the next generation with
words, not weapons. Arm them with ideas, not radical
ideologies. Teach them tolerance, not terrorism. War is
not inevitable. It is not a force of nature, nor is it part of
10/14

26/02/2015

human nature. It can be prevented, but only if we stand
together to denounce indifference and defend peace.
I would like to finish with a quote from
General Douglas MacArthur, Supreme Commander of
the Allied Powers in the South-West Pacific, who said:
“It is my earnest hope, and indeed the hope
of all mankind, that from this solemn occasion
a better world shall emerge out of the blood and
carnage of the past — a world founded upon faith
and understanding, a world dedicated to the dignity
of man and the fulfilment of his most cherished
wish for freedom, tolerance and justice.”
The duty rests upon us. If we wish our children to
live in a world built on freedom, tolerance and justice,
then we must stand united to defend those values.
Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): On
behalf of its many sponsors, including Belarus, the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation
clearly and convincingly introduced today draft
resolution A/69/L.52, which we are about to adopt.
Speaking on behalf of a country that stood at the
epicentre of the Second World War, with grief and the
pain of loss embedded in our national memory, I hope
that this draft resolution will not be perceived as a
ritual document or a mere nod to tradition. The text of
the draft resolution may indeed be similar to resolution
59/26, which the General Assembly adopted 10 years
ago. However, the degree to which focusing on this
watershed moment in world history is sorely needed is
greater today than ever.
There is a need for a focus on the wisdom of the
statesmen who found within themselves the strength
to overcome ideological and political differences
and to unite their countries to battle a misanthropic
ideology — a focus on the heroism and courage of
everyday people at the front and at the rear, and a desire
to understand its origins; a focus that is not the result of
mere curiosity or interest in history; a focus that stems
not only from considerations for decency, but from a
wish to understand how the lessons of a bygone war
may help us to avoid tragic and irreparable mistakes in
the future.
Today, from this rostrum, I would like to appeal
to States Members of the United Nations to try to
understand that this is not just another anniversary. An
extraordinary meeting of the General Assembly will
be held at the start of May. It will, first and foremost,

15-05206

26/02/2015

allow us to observe a minute of silence to grieve and
ponder how we can manage to come together in a spirit
of cooperation, empathy, compassion and awareness of
our responsibility for our shared home on Earth before
the first salvos in a new war are heard.
Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting.
Seventy years ago the Second World War brought an
unprecedented catastrophe to all humankind. Through
great hardship and struggle, we emerged victorious in
the world antifascist war, justice finally defeated evil,
and peace came to the world. China was an important
member of the world antifascist alliance and the site
of the main battlefield in the East. The war in China
was the earliest to break out and lasted the longest. The
Chinese people made an important contribution to the
world people’s antifascist war.
This year is the seventieth anniversary of the
anti-Fascist war, as well as of the establishment of
the United Nations, and the United Nations will hold
a series of events to commemorate this important
historical occasion. Three days ago, at China’s initiative,
the Security Council convened a public debate (see
S/PV.7389) to discuss the issue of the maintenance of
international peace and security, and Chinese Foreign
Minister Wang Yi himself came to New York to
preside over the meeting. Member States responded
positively to this initiative, with more than 80 countries
participating and supporting our discussions on the
subject.
The meeting had two clear messages for the outside
world. First, the international community must use
history as a mirror and reaffirm its commitment to
maintaining the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. Secondly, as we go forward, we
must find a way to effectively maintain international
peace and security in the new environment. This
meeting embodies the consensus of the world
community on the purposes and principles of the
Charter and is the prelude to the commemoration of the
victory of the world antifascist war and the founding of
the United Nations. The aforementioned public debate
of the Security Council was an event of the same kind
as the special meeting of the General Assembly on the
seventieth anniversary of the end of the Second World
War to be held in May and the commemorative meeting
of the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations

A/69/PV.80

to be held in September, which together constitute
the main events for the celebration of the seventieth
anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and
the winning of the world antifascist war. China expects
the General Assembly to adopt the draft resolution
commemorating the seventieth anniversary of the end
of the Second World War. It is our hope that Member
States will actively participate in the commemorative
activities, jointly recall the lessons of history and look
to the future.
We must remember the commitment to face and
remember history, treasure peace and never again resort
to war, in order to truly realize the grand blueprint
depicted in the Charter of the United Nations and by
establishing a new type of international relationship
based on win-win cooperation, making our world more
peaceful and even better.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): Armenia greatly
values draft resolution A/69/L.52, which proposes
the framework for the commemoration of the
seventieth anniversary of the end of the Second
World War. We would like to stress that the draft
resolution unequivocally recognizes the central role of
international cooperation and of the United Nations in
safeguarding peace. It also calls on Member States to
refrain from the use of force in any manner inconsistent
with the purposes of the United Nations.
With due respect to the founding document of
the Organization, we must take appropriate measures
to strengthen universal peace and develop friendly
relations among nations based on respect for the
principle of equal rights and self-determination of
peoples, in line with the purposes enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): This year we commemorate
the seventieth anniversary of the end of the Second
World War. Seventy years ago, the United Nations was
created for the purposes and principles enumerated in
the Charter. As such, it is important for us to reaffirm
that all the purposes and principles are of equal
importance as we head towards the future.
Throughout its post-war history, based on feelings
of deep remorse with regard to the Second World War,
and through upholding all the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, Japan has walked
the path of a peace-loving nation that contributes to
the peace and security of the world. We are a country
that has consistently shown respect for freedom,

15-0520611/14

A/69/PV.80

democracy, the rule of law and human rights. Our path
as a peace-loving nation will never change.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/69/L.52, entitled “Seventieth anniversary
of the end of the Second World War”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in the
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/69/L.52: Andorra,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Cambodia, Colombia, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
France, Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary, Indonesia, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Monaco, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines, Portugal, the Republic
of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, San Marino,
Slovakia, Spain, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/69/L.52.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.52?
Draft resolution A/69/L.52 was adopted (resolution
69/267).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
129.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments.
(g) Appointment of members of the Joint
Inspection Unit
Note by the Secretary-General (A/69/106)
The President: Members will recall that, at its
55th plenary meeting, on 18 November 2014, the
12/14

26/02/2015

Assembly selected Canada, Germany and Romania
to propose candidates for appointment to the Joint
Inspection Unit for a five-year term of office beginning
on 1 January 2016.
Members will also recall that, at the request of the
Chair of the African Group for the month of November
2014, the Assembly postponed the selection of the
country to propose a candidate for the seat allocated
to the African States. For the one vacancy from among
the African States, there are two candidates, namely,
Ethiopia and Morocco.
As indicated in paragraph 2 of document A/69/106,
the General Assembly, by its resolution 61/238, decided
that, beginning on 1 January 2008, the President of
the General Assembly, when drawing up the list of
countries in accordance with article 3, paragraph 1,
of the statute of the Unit, will invite Member States to
submit the names of the countries and their respective
candidates simultaneously, on the understanding that
the candidates submitted would be the candidates that
the respective Member States intended to propose, to
the extent possible, for appointment by the Assembly,
in accordance with article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute.
Since, from among the African States, there
are two candidates for one vacancy, I should like, in
accordance with past practice, to consult with Member
States through the procedure of holding an advisory
vote by secret ballot, to select one country from
among the African States to be requested to propose a
candidate for appointment to the Joint Inspection Unit.
Although that advisory vote would not be an election,
we would follow the rules of procedure of the Assembly
governing elections.
If there is no objection, may I take it that the
General Assembly agrees to that procedure?
It was so decided.
The President: In accordance with existing
practice, the country receiving the greatest number
of votes and not less than a majority of the votes of
those present and voting, shall be the country selected
to propose a candidate for appointment to the Joint
Inspection Unit.
May I also take it that the General Assembly agrees
to that procedure?
It was so decided.

15-05206

26/02/2015

The President: In the case of a tie vote, there will
be a restricted ballot limited to the candidates who have
obtained an equal number of votes.
May I take it that the Assembly also agrees to that
procedure?
It was so decided.
The President: May I remind members that the
Assembly is not appointing members to the Joint
Inspection Unit at this time. It is only selecting one
country to be requested to propose a candidate.
Therefore, only the name of one country, and not the
name of an individual, should appear on the ballot
paper.
I should now like to repeat that for the one vacancy
from among the African States, there are two candidates,
namely, Ethiopia and Morocco. I should further like
to point out that, from the African States, the Gambia
already has a national serving on the Joint Inspection
Unit whose term of office ends on 31 December 2017.
The name of that State therefore should not appear on
the ballot paper.
The Assembly will now proceed to the selection
of one country from among the African States to be
requested to propose a candidate to fill the vacancy in
the Joint Inspection Unit.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order on
the actual conduct of the voting.
We shall now begin the voting process. Members
are requested to remain seated until all ballots have
been collected.
Ballot papers will now be distributed. May I request
representatives to write on the ballot paper the name of
the one State for which they wish to vote. Ballot papers
containing more than one name will be declared invalid.
If a ballot paper contains the name of a Member State
that does not belong to the relevant region, that ballot
paper will be declared invalid. Ballot papers bearing
the name of an individual shall not be counted.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Subotic (Bosnia
and Herzegovina), Mr. Díaz Reina (Colombia),
Mr. Aliu (Ghana), Mr. Zamporlini (Italy),
Mr. Fawundu (Sierra Leone) and Mrs. Thanarat
(Thailand) acted as tellers.

A/69/PV.80

A vote was taken by secret ballot.
Mrs. Baaro (Kiribati), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The meeting was suspended at 11.30 a.m. and
resumed at noon.
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Number of ballot papers:
184
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
184
Abstentions:
0
Number of members present and voting:
184
Required majority:
93
Number of votes obtained by each Member State:
Morocco
131
Ethiopia
53
Having obtained the greatest number of votes and
not less than a majority of the votes of those present
and voting, Morocco has been selected to propose
a candidate for appointment to the Joint Inspection
Unit.
I thank members for their advice and I thank the
tellers for their assistance.
In accordance with article 3, paragraph 1, of the
statute of the Joint Inspection Unit, Canada, Germany,
Morocco and Romania will be requested to submit
the names of candidates and their curricula vitae
highlighting the candidates’ relevant qualifications for
the tasks ahead.
I would like to remind members that, in accordance
with resolution 59/267, of 23 December 2004, the
candidate should have experience in at least one of
the following fields: oversight, audit, inspection,
investigation, evaluation, finance, project evaluation,
programme evaluation, human resources management,
management, public administration, monitoring and/
or programme performance, as well as knowledge of
the United Nations system and its role in international
relations.
After holding the appropriate consultations
described in article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute of the
Joint Inspection Unit, including consultations with the
President of the Economic and Social Council and with
the Secretary-General in his capacity as Chairman of
the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, the President of the General Assembly

15-0520613/14

A/69/PV.80

26/02/2015

will submit the names of the candidates to the Assembly
for appointment to the Joint Inspection Unit.

Mr. Dibaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I take the
floor in exercise of our right of reply.

We have thus concluded this stage of our
consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda item 113.

It is regrettable that, once again today, the
representative of the Israeli regime has levelled
baseless accusations against my country. I just wanted
to re-emphasize our position that the occupation by
Israel is the main source of all the problems in the
region, including violent extremism. His remarks were
off the topic of the resolution adopted today (resolution
69/267), on the anniversary of the end of the Second
World War. Iran was one of the victims of that war.

The President: A representative has requested to
make a statement in exercise of the right of reply. May
I remind members that statements made in the exercise
of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the
first intervention and five minutes for the second
intervention and should be made by delegations from
their seats.

14/14

The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

15-05206
