A/RES/73/27

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 December 2018

Seventy-third session
Agenda item 96

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 5 December 2018
[on the report of the First Committee (A/73/505)]

73/27.

Developments in the field of information and telecommunications
in the context of international security
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/103 of 9 December 1981, 43/78 H of 7 December
1988, 53/70 of 4 December 1998, 54/49 of 1 December 1999, 55/28 of 20 November
2000, 56/19 of 29 November 2001, 57/53 of 22 November 2002, 58/32 of 8 December
2003, 59/61 of 3 December 2004, 60/45 of 8 December 2005, 61/54 of 6 December
2006, 62/17 of 5 December 2007, 63/37 of 2 December 2008, 64/25 of 2 December
2009, 65/41 of 8 December 2010, 66/24 of 2 December 2011, 67/27 of 3 December
2012, 68/243 of 27 December 2013, 69/28 of 2 December 2014, 70/237 of
23 December 2015 and 71/28 of 5 December 2016,
Noting that considerable progress has been achieved in developing and applying
the latest information technologies and means of telecommunication,
Underscoring the aspirations of the international community to the peaceful use
of information and communications technologies (ICTs) for the common go od of
humankind and to further the sustainable development of all countries, irrespective
of their scientific and technological development,
Noting that capacity-building is essential for cooperation of States and
confidence-building in the field of ICT security,
Recognizing that some States may require assistance in their efforts to bridge
the divide in the security of ICTs and their use,
Noting that providing assistance, upon request, to build capacity in the area of
ICT security is essential for international security,
Affirming that capacity-building measures should seek to promote the use of
ICTs for peaceful purposes,

18-21207 (E)

131218

*1821207*

Developments in the field of information and telecommunications
in the context of international security

A/RES/73/27

Confirming that ICTs are dual-use technologies and can be used for both
legitimate and malicious purposes,
Expressing concern that a number of States are developing ICT capabilities for
military purposes and that the use of ICTs in future conflicts between States is
becoming more likely,
Stressing that it is in the interest of all States to promote the use of ICTs for
peaceful purposes, with the objective of shaping a community of shared future for
humankind in cyberspace, and that States also have an interest in preventing conflict
arising from the use of ICTs,
Noting that the United Nations should play a leading role in promo ting dialogue
among Member States to develop common understandings on the security of and the
use of ICTs, as well as in developing common understandings on the application of
international law and norms, rules and principles for responsible State behaviou r in
this sphere, encourage regional efforts, promote confidence -building and
transparency measures and support capacity-building and the dissemination of best
practices,
Expressing concern that embedding harmful hidden functions in ICTs could be
used in ways that would affect secure and reliable ICT use and the ICT supply chain
for products and services, erode trust in commerce and damage national security,
Considering that it is necessary to prevent the use of information resources or
technologies for criminal or terrorist purposes,
Underlining the importance of respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in the use of ICTs,
Welcoming the effective work of the Group of Governmental Experts on
Developments in the Field of Information and Telecommu nications in the Context of
International Security and the relevant outcome reports transmitted by the Secretary General, 1
Welcoming also that, in considering the application of international law to State
use of ICTs, the Group of Governmental Experts, in its 2015 report, 2 identified as of
central importance the commitments of States to the following principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and other international law: sovereign equality; the
settlement of international disputes by peaceful means i n such a manner that
international peace and security and justice are not endangered; refraining in their
international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
or political independence of any State, or in any other mann er inconsistent with the
purposes of the United Nations; respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms;
and non-intervention in the internal affairs of other States,
Confirming the conclusions of the Group of Governmental Experts, in its 2013 3
and 2015 2 reports, that international law, and in particular the Charter of the United
Nations, is applicable and essential to maintaining peace and stab ility and promoting
an open, secure, stable, accessible and peaceful ICT environment, that voluntary and
non-binding norms, rules and principles of responsible behaviour of States in the use
of ICTs can reduce risks to international peace, security and sta bility, and that, given
the unique attributes of such technologies, additional norms can be developed
over time,

__________________

A/65/201, A/68/98 and A/70/174.
A/70/174.
3
A/68/98.
1
2

2/5

18-21207

Developments in the field of information and telecommunications
in the context of international security

A/RES/73/27

Confirming also that State sovereignty and international norms and principles
that flow from sovereignty apply to State conduct of ICT-related activities and to their
jurisdiction over ICT infrastructure within their territory,
Reaffirming the right and duty of States to combat, within their constitutional
prerogatives, the dissemination of false or distorted news, which can be interpreted
as interference in the internal affairs of other States or as being harmful to the
promotion of peace, cooperation and friendly relations among States and nations,
Recognizing the duty of a State to abstain from any defamatory campaign,
vilification or hostile propaganda for the purpose of intervening or interfering in the
internal affairs of other States,
Stressing that, while States have a primary responsibility for maintaining a
secure and peaceful ICT environment, effective international cooperation w ould
benefit from identifying mechanisms for the participation, as appropriate, of the
private sector, academia and civil society organizations,
1.
Welcomes the following set of international rules, norms and principles of
responsible behaviour of States, enshrined in the reports of the Group of
Governmental Experts on Developments in the Field of Information and
Telecommunications in the Context of International Security of 2013 3 and 2015 2
adopted by consensus and recommended in resolution 71/28 entitled “Developments
in the field of information and telecommunications in the contex t of international
security”, adopted by the General Assembly on 5 December 2016:
1.1. Consistent with the purposes of the United Nations, including to maintain
international peace and security, States should cooperate in developing and
applying measures to increase stability and security in the use of ICTs and to
prevent ICT practices that are acknowledged to be harmful or that may pose
threats to international peace and security.
1.2. States must meet their international obligations regarding internat ionally
wrongful acts attributable to them under international law. However, the
indication that an ICT activity was launched or otherwise originates from the
territory or objects of the ICT infrastructure of a State may be insufficient in
itself to attribute the activity to that State. Accusations of organizing and
implementing wrongful acts brought against States should be substantiated. In
case of ICT incidents, States should consider all relevant information, including
the larger context of the event, the challenges of attribution in the ICT
environment and the nature and extent of the consequences.
1.3. States should not knowingly allow their territory to be used for
internationally wrongful acts using ICTs. States must not use proxies to commit
internationally wrongful acts using ICTs and should seek to ensure that their
territory is not used by non-State actors to commit such acts.
1.4. States should consider how best to cooperate to exchange information,
assist each other, prosecute terrorist and criminal use of ICTs and implement
other cooperative measures to address such threats. States may need to consider
whether new measures need to be developed in this respect.
1.5. States, in ensuring the secure use of ICTs, should respect Human Rights
Council resolutions 20/8 of 5 July 2012 4 and 26/13 of 26 June 2014 5 on the
promotion, protection and enjoyment of human rights on the Internet, as well as
__________________

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and
corrigendum (A/67/53 and A/67/53/Corr.1), chap. IV, sect. A.
5
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53), chap. V, sect. A.
4

18-21207

3/5

Developments in the field of information and telecommunications
in the context of international security

A/RES/73/27

General Assembly resolutions 68/167 of 18 December 2013 and 69/166 of
18 December 2014 on the right to privacy in the digital age, to guarantee full
respect for human rights, including the right to freedom of expression.
1.6. A State should not conduct or knowingly support ICT activity contrary to
its obligations under international law that intentionally damages critical
infrastructure or otherwise impairs the use and operation of critica l
infrastructure to provide services to the public.
1.7. States should take appropriate measures to protect their critical
infrastructure from ICT threats, taking into account General Assembly
resolution 58/199 of 23 December 2003 on the creation of a global culture of
cybersecurity and the protection of critical information infrastructures, and
other relevant resolutions.
1.8. States should respond to appropriate requests for assistance by another
State whose critical infrastructure is subject to malicious ICT acts. States should
also respond to appropriate requests to mitigate malicious ICT activity aimed at
the critical infrastructure of another State emanating from their territory, taking
into account due regard for sovereignty.
1.9. States should take reasonable steps to ensure the integrity of the supply
chain so that end users can have confidence in the security of ICT products.
1.10. States should seek to prevent the proliferation of malicious ICT tools and
techniques and the use of harmful hidden functions.
1.11. States should encourage responsible reporting of ICT vulnerabilities and
share associated information on available remedies for such vulnerabilities to
limit and possibly eliminate potential threats to ICTs and ICT-dependent
infrastructure.
1.12. States should not conduct or knowingly support activity to harm the
information systems of the authorized emergency response teams (sometimes
known as computer emergency response teams or cybersecurity incident
response teams) of another State. A State should not use authorized emergency
response teams to engage in malicious international activity.
1.13. States should encourage the private sector and civil society to play an
appropriate role to improve security of and in the use of ICTs, including supply
chain security for ICT products and services. States should cooperate with the
private sector and the organizations of civil society in the sphere of
implementation of rules of responsible behaviour in information space with
regard to their potential role;
2.
Calls upon Member States to promote further, at multilateral levels, the
consideration of existing and potential threats in the field of information security, as
well as possible strategies to address the threats emerging in this field, consistent with
the need to preserve the free flow of information;
3.
Considers that the purpose of such measures could be served through
further examination of relevant international concepts aimed at strengthening the
security of global information and telecommunications systems;
4.
Invites all Member States, taking into account the assessments and
recommendations contained in the reports of the Group of Governmental Experts on
Developments in the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the Context of
International Security, 1 to continue to inform the Secretary-General of their views and
assessments on the following questions:
(a)
4/5

General appreciation of the issues of information security;
18-21207

Developments in the field of information and telecommunications
in the context of international security

A/RES/73/27

(b) Efforts taken at the national level to strengthen information security and
promote international cooperation in this field;
(c)

The content of the concepts mentioned in paragraph 3 above;

(d) Possible measures that could be taken by the international community to
strengthen information security at the global level;
5.
Decides to convene, beginning in 2019, with a view to making the United
Nations negotiation process on security in the use of information and communications
technologies more democratic, inclusive and transparent, an open -ended working
group acting on a consensus basis, to continue, as a priority, to further develop the
rules, norms and principles of responsible behaviour of States listed in paragraph 1
above, and the ways for their implementation; if necessary, to introduce changes to
them or elaborate additional rules of behaviour; to study the possibility of establishing
regular institutional dialogue with broad participation under the auspices of the
United Nations; and to continue to study, with a view to promoting common
understandings, existing and potential threats in the sphere of information security
and possible cooperative measures to address them and how international law applies
to the use of information and communications technologies by States, as well as
confidence-building measures and capacity-building and the concepts referred to in
paragraph 3 above, and to submit a report on the results of the study to the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, and to provide the possibility of holding, from
within voluntary contributions, intersessional consultative meetings with the
interested parties, namely business, non-governmental organizations and academia,
to share views on the issues within the group’s mandate;
6.
Also decides that the open-ended working group shall hold its
organizational session in June 2019 in order to agree on the organizational
arrangements connected with the group;
7.
Further decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fourth
session the item entitled “Developments in the field of information and
telecommunications in the context of international security”.
45th plenary meeting
5 December 2018

18-21207

5/5
