Reeolutions adopted on reports of the Fourth Committee
2. Decides, without prejudice to future requests
for oral hearings before the Fourth Committee, to
transmit these statements, together with the observations 21 made by members of the Fourth Committee, to
the Trusteeship Council with a request that these questions be further investigated, in particular as to the
implementation of recommendations already made on
them, and that the Council report upon them in a report to the General Assembly at its eighth session.
410th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.

656 (VIl). Hearing of petitioners from the Trust
Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration
The General Assembly,
Having granted oral hearings 22 to representatives
of organizations in Somaliland under Italian administration,
Considering that the Trusteeship Council has not yet
examined the Administering Authority's report for
1952 in respect of the Trust Territory of Somaliland
under Italian administration,
Considering that with respect to a number of questions raised by the petitioners the Trusteeship Council,
and in some cases the General Assembly, has previously made observations and recommendations in the
light of the considered views of the Administering
AuthoriJy,

Considering that, in the particular case of this
Trust Territory. the General Assembly established an
Ach isory Council which is entitled to speak in the
Tru~;teeship Council and the authoritative opinion of
which should be heard for a better understanding of
the Territory's problems,
1. Takes note of the statements 23 of the representatives of organizations in Somaliland
under
Italian administration;
2. Decides, without prejudice to future requests for
oral hearings before the Fourth Committee, to transmit
the said statements to the Trusteeship Council together
with the comments .. of members of the Fourth Committee and to request the Council to give special attention to these questions, particularly with respect to
the application of past recommendations relating to
these questions, in the light of the statements of the
petitioners and of the observations made in the -Fourth
Committee, and to request the Council further to report on these matters to the General Assembly at its
eighth session ;
3. Requests the Trusteeship Council further to
consider the desirability of preparing a special questionnaire for Somali\and and of sending a separate
visiting mission to that Territory in view of its special
position and of the fact that it will acquire its independence in the next eight years, and further requests
that this matter be reported upon in the Council's next
report.
410th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.

21 /bid.
22

See Official Reco,-ds of the General Assembly, Seventh
Session, Fou,-th Committee, 313th and 314th meetings.

39

23
2•

/bid.

Ibid.
