General Auembly-Thirtieth Session

136 · ·

Recognizing the vital significance and importance of
the Lima Declaration and Plan of Action for the industrialization of the developing countries,
Noting with regret that the submission made by the
Secretary-General in his revised estimates for the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization60 provides insufficient information on the relationship between the resources requested therein and the programmes stemming from the Lima Declaration and
Plan of Action,
1. Accepts the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions61 regarding the revised estimates submitted by the
Secretary-General in his report; 00
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly, at its thirty-first session, revised
estimates for the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, taking fully into account all elements of the Lima Declaration and Plan of Action on
Industrial Development and Co-operation and indicating clearly the resulting programme requirements and
the related resouroes.
2444th plenary meeting
17 December 1975
3534 (XXX).

Presentation of the United Nations
programme hudget

The General Assembly,
Desirous of improving the presentation of the United
Nations programme budget, in order to make optimum
use of available financia! resources and to create a more
solid comparison base and well-founded justification
in proposing possible growth of such resources, and of
finding budgetary means to finance the new programmes
by utilizing the resources released,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session, through the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, information-including the relevant authorization and budgetary appropriations-on programmes,
projects or activities within the United Nations which
have already been completed or are nearly completed,
or which were considered by the appropriate intergovernmental bodies, in particular when they werc examining the medium-term plan, as obsolete, of marginal
usefulness or ineffective;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to include
in the above-mentioned information specific examples
of steps taken towards reorganizing, merging, eliminating, or otherwise, units within the Secretariat which had
been established for the foregoing programmes, projects
or activities;
3. Decides to take -into account the above-mentioned
information in considering the medium-tcnn plan for
the period 1978-1981 at its thirty-first session;
4. Decides also to include in future United Nations
programme budgets information relating to the anticipated duration of all new programmes, projects or
activities;
5. Decides further to include in the performance
reports on the United Nations progvamme budgets relevant information on the staff and resources released as
a result of the completion, reduction, reorganization,

merging, elimination or otherwise of Únited Nations
programmes, projects or activities.
2444th plenary meeting
17 December 1975
3535 (XXX).

United Nations public information
policies and activities 62

The General Assembly,
Recalling the purposes and principies of the Charter
of the United Nations and noting the thirtieth anniversary of the United Nations and the commemorations
thereof,
Recognizing the achievements of the United Nations,
Taking note of the statement of the Secretary-General contained in paragraph 1 of his report on public
infonnation policies .and activities, 63 in which he emphasized that the United Nations, in arder to succeed
in its formidable task, required a large measure of
public support and understanding, which would in tum
have an influence on national policies,
T aking note of the statement of the Secretary-General contained in paragraph 22 of the report to the
effect that new efforts are needed to gain broader publíe understanding of and support far the aims and activities of the United Nations,
Noting the prevailing attitude of the information
media and public opinion of sorne of the Member
States towards the United Nations system and the possibility of a resultant decline of public support and
confidence in the activities of the Organization,
Determined to improve the public image of the
United Nations system,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to make new efforts in the field of information activities of the Organization and convey to the general public comprehensive information regarding the political, economic,
social, cultural and humanitarian achievements and unde:ta~ngs of the_ United Nations system, including the
pnnc1ples and aims related to the new international
economic arder;
2. Calls upon the Secretary-General to collaborate
closely in this effort with the national information
media, the United Nations associations and other nongovemmental organizations concerned throughout the
world;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Gener~l ~ssembly at its thirty-thir~ session a report on
the act1V1t1es of the Office of Pubhc Information of the
Sec~etariat and decides to consider the question at that
sess1on as a separate ítem entitled "United Nations
public information policies and activities".
2444th plenary meeting
17 December 1975
3536 (XX.X). Honoraria payable to members of
the h1ternational Law Commission. the International Narcotics Control Board and the
United Nations Aclministrative Tribunal

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral64 and the related report of the Advisory Com-

60 A/C.5 /1715/Rev.I.

61 Offidal Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Ses-

sion, Supplement No. 8 A (A/10008/ Add.1-28), document Al
10008/Add.26.

62 See also p. 144, item 96, subparagraph (n).

63 A/C.5/1679.

G4 A/C.5/1677 and Corr.l.
