A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/195
18 February 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 96 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/53/611)]
53/195. United Nations Institute for Training and Research
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 47/227 of 8 April 1993, 48/207 of 21 December 1993, 49/125 of 19
December 1994, 50/121 of 20 December 1995, 51/188 of 16 December 1996 and 52/206 of 18 December
1997,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General1 and the report of the Executive Director of
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research on the activities of the Institute,2
Welcoming the successful restructuring of the Institute and the recent progress made by the Institute
in its various programmes and activities, including the improved cooperation that has been established with
other organizations of the United Nations system and with regional and national institutions,
Noting the relevant recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit in its report entitled “Training
institutions in the United Nations system: programmes and activities”,3

1

A/53/534.

2

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/53/14).

3

A/52/559, annex.

99-76885

/...

A/RES/53/195
Page 2

Expressing its appreciation to the Governments and private institutions that have made or pledged
financial and other contributions to the Institute,
Noting that contributions to the General Fund of the Institute have not increased along with the
increased participation of the developed countries in the training programmes, and underlining the need
to address urgently this discrepancy,
Reiterating that the funding of training programmes offered at the specific request of States or
departments and units of the Organization and other organs of the United Nations system and the
specialized agencies should be arranged by the requesting parties,
Recognizing that training activities should be accorded a more visible and larger role in support of
the management of international affairs and in the execution of the economic and social development
programmes of the United Nations system,
1. Reaffirms the importance of a coordinated United Nations system-wide approach to research and
training and underlines the need for United Nations training and research institutions to avoid duplication
in their work;
2. Reaffirms also the relevance of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research, in view
of the growing importance of training within the United Nations and the training requirements of States,
and the pertinence of research activities related to training undertaken by the Institute within its mandate;
3. Stresses the need for the Institute to strengthen further its cooperation with other United Nations
institutes and relevant national, regional and international institutes;
4. Also stresses the need for continuity in the management of the Institute in order to ensure
efficient and effective completion of the process of restructuring and revitalization;
5. Renews its appeal to all Governments and to private institutions that have not yet contributed
financially or otherwise to the Institute to give it their generous financial and other support, and urges the
States that interrupted their voluntary contributions to consider resuming them in view of the successful
restructuring and revitalization of the Institute;
6. Encourages the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research to
continue its efforts to address the discrepancy between the contributions to the General Fund of the
Institute and participation in its programmes;
7. Stresses the need for enhanced coordination between the main training and research institutions
of the United Nations system, based on an effective division of labour among these institutions;
8. Notes the survey prepared by the Institute of training institutes and training programmes within
the United Nations,4 and requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with the Institute, to prepare,

4

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/53/14),
paras. 23-26. For the results of the survey, see the UNITAR website (www.unitar.org).
/...

A/RES/53/195
Page 3

from within existing financial resources, an assessment of the survey with a view to highlighting the
lessons learned from the responses already received, providing a qualitative assessment of pedagogical
methods followed by these institutions in the provision of their training services and highlighting the
complementarities and synergies that were apparent in the survey;
9. Welcomes the progress made in building partnerships between the Institute and other agencies
and bodies of the United Nations system with respect to their training programmes, especially for
developing countries and countries with economies in transition, consistent with the division of labour;
10. Underlines the need to develop further and expand the scope of these partnerships, particularly
at the country level;
11. Requests the Board of Trustees to attract, to the extent possible, experts from developing
countries and countries with economies in transition for the preparation of the relevant training materials
for the programmes and activities of the Institute;
12. Calls upon the Secretary-General to continue to explore all possible ways and means to provide
additional facilities to the Institute for maintaining its offices and for conducting programmes and training
courses that are provided at no cost to States and to their representatives accredited to United Nations
offices in New York, Nairobi, Geneva and Vienna;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Institute, as well as with the United
Nations funds and programmes, to continue to explore ways and modalities to utilize systematically the
Institute in the execution of training and capacity-building programmes;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session
on the implementation of the present resolution.
91st plenary meeting
15 December 1998
