UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL
TWENTY-NINTH

RECORDS
YEAR

QC-j- 2.

‘1333

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l795/Rev.l)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

The situation in Cyprus:
(a) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Secretary-General to the President
of the Security Council (S/11334);
(b) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1335);
(cl Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Greece to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1348);

(4 Letter dated 28 July 1974 from the Acting Permanent Representative

of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/11389);
Letter
dated 13 August 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
(e)
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1444);
0 Letter dated 13 August 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Greece
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11445);
(2) Letter dated 27 August 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1471) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...*.....

1

S/PV. 1795

“I

.. .

A

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ofyicial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

- --

..--

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND NINETY-FIFTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 30 August 1974, at 10.30 a.m.
@I Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent

President: Mr. Yakov A. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11335);
(cl Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the United Nations to the President
of the Security Council (S/11348);
Letter
dated 28 July 1974 from the Acting
(4
Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/11389);
(e) Letter dated 13 August 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11444);
v) Letter dated 13 August 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11445);
&I Letter dated 27 August 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11471)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia,
Austria,
Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia,
Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania,
Peru, Union of Soviet
Socialist
Republics,
United
Kingdom
of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Cameroon and United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption

agenda (SfAgenda/I79S/Rev.l)

of the agenda

2.

The situation in Cvnrus:
(a) Letter dated 1cJuly 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1334);
Letter
dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent
(b)
Representative
of Cyprus to the United
Nations. addressed : to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 11335);
(cl Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Greece to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1348);
(translation
from Russian):
1. The PRESIDENT
(4 Letter dated 28 July 1974 from the Acting
In accordance with the decisions previously taken by
Permanent Representative
of the Union of
the Security Council [1779th-1781st
and 1793rd
Soviet Socialist Republics
to the United * meetings], I intend, with the consent of the Council,
Nations addressed to the President of the
to invite the representatives
of Cyprus, Turkey,
Security Council (S/l 1389);
Greece, Yugoslavia, Romania, India, Mauritius and
(e) Letter dated 13 August 1974 from the
Algeria to take part, without the right to vote, in the
Permanent Representative
of Cyprus to the
discussion of the question.
United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/11444);
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rossides
Letter dated 13 August 1974 from the
(Cyprus),
Mr. Olcay (Turkey) and Mr. Carayannis
Permanent Representative
of Greece to the
(Greece) took places at the Council table.
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/l 1445);
2. The PRESIDENT
(translation
from Russian):
Letter dated 27 August 1974 from the
In view of the limited number of places at the Council
Permanent Representative
of Cyprus to the
table, I invite the representatives
of Yugoslavia,
United Nations addressed to the President
Romania, India, Mauritius and Algeria to take the
of the Security Council (S/11471)
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, on the understanding
that they will be
The meeting was called to order at II.15 a.m.
invited to take a place at the Council table when
Adoption of the agenda
they are called upon to speak.
The agenda was adopted.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Job
The situation in Cyprus:
(Yugoslavia), Mr. Gheorghe (Romania), Mr. Budhiraja
(India), Mr. Ramphul (Mauritius)
and Mr. Taleb(a) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security Council
Bendiab (Algeria) took the places reserved for them
(S/11334);
at the side of the Council chamber.
1

3. The PRESIDENT
(translation
from Russian):
As the members of the Council know, this meeting
has been called at the request of the representative
of Cyprus in a letter circulated as document S/l 1471.
I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to the fact that the latest reports of the
Secretary-General
also relate directly to today’s
meeting: first, a report on developments in Cyprus
for the period 20 to 25 August [S/11468], and,
secondly, a report on the Secretary-General’s
recent
visit to Cyprus, Greece and Turkey [S/11473].
Furthermore,
the Council has before it a draft
resolution contained which has been submitted by
Austria, the United Kingdom and France [S/11479].
4. The tirst.speaker is the representative
on whom I now call.

country through the virtual deracination of the Greek
Cypriot people, who form the large majority of its
population.
8. The world has thus witnessed, from the very
first moment of the invasion, the ruthless shelling
and intensive napalm bombing of undefended towns
and villages, indiscriminately
and wantonly spreading
death and destruction, for the purpose of death and
destruction.
Special targets appear to have been
hospitals, educational and other public institutions,
public and private buildings, all having nothing to do
with military targets. Priceless ancient monuments
were also the targets, like the ancient city of Salamis,
an isolated city in an area where there was nothing
else but that ancient city, which was deliberately
destroyed. So were the forests, through fires from
incendiary bombs.

of Cyprus,

5. Mr.
ROSSIDES
(Cyprus):
The continuing
deterioration
of the critical situation in Cyprus, in
circumstances that are unprecedented and unthinkable
for our times and have led to the present state of
affairs, is a tragedy that should be unacceptable to the
world community. In their history of over 3,000 years
the people of Cyprus have gone through many
vicissitudes and tests. Repeatedly they have been
invaded. Repeatedly they have lost and regained their
freedom, yet they have never faced the kind of
aggressive catastrophe from a strong Power that they
are now facing in these times of the United Nations,
unprecedented in nature and in the methods adopted.

9. Now, in this orgy of .destruction,
what is
remarkable?
There are many things that are
remarkable. One is that, from the very start, from the
very first moment of the invasion-that
is, at the very
time that the Prime Minister of Turkey was broadcasting to Cyprus and to the world, “Our mission
is peaceful. Turkish forces have begun landing in
shows that it was just at that
Cyprus . ..“-which
time--” We are not going for war but to bring peace
to -the island, not only to the’ Turks but to the
Greeks as well”. While these pronouncements
were
being made, the wanton catastrophe’:1
have:just
mentioned had just started and was going on.

6. The territorial integrity of the island of Cyprus
had never in its history been threatened; the distinct
identity and historic character of Cyprus had never
been challenged; its continuity
has been unbroken
from age to age, from the Mycenaean and the
Bronze Age down to this day, and has been for this
reason the subject of study by eminent ethnologists
and historians. Stanley Cusson, in his book regarding
ancient and modem Cyprus, writes:

10. The tragic irony of the situation, which is both
a tragedy and a travesty, is that Turkey pretends
to do all this as a guarantor and protector of the
independence,
territorial
integrity and security of
Cyprus under the so-called Treaty of Guarantee of
1960. The guarantee of what independence? That of
subjugation
to a renascent Turkish
imperialism?
Guarantee of what security? The security of the
grave? Of what territorial
integrity?
That of a
deliberately dismembered Cyprus under that Treaty of
Guarantee and its auspices?

“The cultural development of Cyprus was never
broken, for no expedition and no invasion set out
with the set and main object of destroying Cypriot
civilization.”

11. This is the picture that has been unfolding for
over six weeks now before a stunned world and an
; ineffective Security Council for reasons we all know.
What is, however, important at this’juncture
is that
now-for
the first time since the Second World
War, and perhaps I should say since even before
it-a course of action which is rare in all of world
history is taking place. The invaders are deliberately
proceeding with a determined
policy of expelling
Cypriots from their ancestral homes in order to make
room for other illicit and unavowed purposes.

But that is what is happening today. The invader is
there with a set purpose, not merely to use the
island for strategic purposes, not merely to use it for
some other understandable
purpose that has been
sought in the past, but for something new.
7. The Turkish aggression and invasion of Cyprus
in its- unfolding goes far beyond the concept of
“the scourge of war” spoken of in the Charter. It is
a pre-planned
and long-prepared
attempt to use
overwhelming military force in order to tear. asunder
the very heart of Cyprus in an all-engulfing effort to
deface and destroy the island, to break up its physical,
economic and cultural continuity and its development. The objective is the dismemberment
of the

12. Although this plan may not have been clear
enough from the outset to all, it nevertheless rapidly
became unmistakable to all that the invader had entered
with a set purpose-that
of expulsion by blood and
iron, by whatever means were at hand, of the rightful
2

._
.

,r

and historic owners from their homes and lands.
is_ the
problem
we are facing today
And that
._
in the Security Council.

legality and morality-a
wrong consciously intended
to change the very character of a sovereign Member
State, a wrong which is destroying its very economy?

13. From the very start, a reign of terror and a policy
of expulsion was initiated to carry out this illegal and
immoral process, a process that amounts to geographic
and demographic dismemberment.
The invader, with
unchallenged command of the sea and air, and with
‘an overwhelming force and weaponry in its possession-we
know under what circumstances-has
consistently and continuously increased its force in
Cyprus, in violation of all the cease-fires called for
by the Security Council, which it had accepted, and
in violation of the cease-fire which it had signed and
agreed to in Geneva.

18. Is it necessary to remind ourselves of our solemn
obligations under the Charter? If so, then by all means
let us do so.
19. Article 2, paragraph 1, of the Charter speaks of
the principle of the sovereign equality of all Members.
Article 2, paragraph 3, says Members shall settle
their international
disputes by peaceful means.
Article 2, paragraph 4, says that
“Members
shall refrain in their international
relations from the. threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of
any State, or in any other manner inconsistent
with the purposes of the United Nations.‘*

14. For instance, as a result, over-400 modem tanks,
brought ashore after the cease-fire, were pitted against
nine old tanks and other primitive weapons, mercilessly
attacking and wreaking mass destruction to create the
movement
of civilian populations
from the areas
desired by the invader. Able-bodied
men were
transported to unknown destinations;
women and
children and old people were driven out of such areas
and forcibly expelled. Over 200,000 persons from
among the small population of Cyprus have been forced
out of the area, leaving their livestock and their
personal belongings, and taking with them only the
shirts on their backs. Those .who were allowed to
escape ; with, their lives were not allowed to take
anything else with them.

Now, this situation in Cyprus begins with a violation
of every one of those principles. Needless to say,
the Charter makes equally clear the responsibilities
of the Security Council where those Articles are not
observed.
20. In the watershed year of 1970, the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the world Organization,
a number of
steps were solemnly taken by the General Assembly
to strengthen precisely the lawful obligations between
States and the responsibility
of the United Nations.
Thus I need only briefly remind members of the
Declaration
on the Strengthening
of International
Security [resolution 2734 (XXV)], which solemnly
reafIirms that:

15. The question everyone must ask himself is
whether this is the century of the United Nations
or a century of at least an elementary international
lawful community,
or whether this is a new age,
with a new wave of barbarism beginning recently-r
not so recently-no
different from that of past
centuries except for the more sophisticated weapons
and the increaesd number of the means of destruction
in the service of those policies.

“the territory of a State shall not be the object
of military occupation resulting from the use of
force”-as
the territory of Cyprus under Turkish
military occupation now is-“in contravention ofthe
provisions of the Charter, . . . the territory of a
State shall not be the object of acquisition by
another State resulting from the threat or use of
force, . . . no territorial acquisition resulting from the
threat or use of force shall be recognized as legal”.

16. Therefore, a new era of barbarism is setting in,
with greater repercussions
because this is a
technologically
advanced age, and this is a matter
of thought for everyone.
Are there any other
considerations
to be put before the immediate
restitution of the legal and moral rights of the countless
persons displaced from their lands and homes for no
valid reason whatever, other than the fact that they
happened to be the inhabitants of that area and must
thus be moved out to make room for illicit and
unavowed purposes-for
no other reason than that the
invading Power wants to create a State of its own,
on its own terms, in total defiance of every aspect
of international
law and order, including scornful
defiance of this very body?

Equally, on the situation in the Middle East, it was
declared that the acquisition of territory by force was
inadmissible.
Also, the Declaration that I have just
quoted and the Declaration on Principles of Intemational
Law concerning
Friendly
Relations
and
Corporation
among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations [resolution 2625 (+XV)].
21. Now, why is there such difficulty in ending the
military occupation of Cyprus by ‘a foreign State?
The resolutions of the Security Council provide for
the immediate cessation of military intervention in the
island and for the withdrawal without delay of the
foreign military forces. Turkey has an obligation to
comply with the resolution that was adopted without
its objection and countersigned, and thus reaffirmed,

17. What considerations could be put ahead of the
rectification of this great wrong done to innocent and
helpless people in total defiance of international
3

.

would have the moral concepts that would restrain
him. The wholesale collapse of moral concepts is
symbolic of what is coming to humanity.

‘with .its consent, in the Geneva Declaration
[see
:Slf1398]. And yet, instead of withdrawing its forces,
and not content with merely not withdrawing them,
it ejects the indigenous population
and maintains
its position there. The aggressor stays there in
disrespect of the resolutions of the Security Council.
Not only that: it ejects the population by force-by
blood and iron, as I have said before.

27. Now all that is happening in Cyprus is on the
conscience of the world community and is focused in
the United Nations. It is the implementation
of that
conscience by the Organization
which is now on
trial. Where shall the small, the defenceless, the
helpless turn if not to the United Nations and, more
spe&cally,
the Security Council? And if the Council
is so blissfully ineffective, what can be the hope of
mankind? But, leaving all these considerations aside
for the moment, let me turn to the immediate problem
of the inhumanity and unacceptability
of the expulsion
of the population
of Cyprus by the hundreds of
thousands from their ancestral homes.

22. That is the situation the world is facing today
with equanimity, and the Security Council in a mood of
ineffectiveness. That is the picture that has now been
unfolding for more than six weeks before a stunned
world. However, what is important is that this is the
first time the question of forcible expulsion has
appeared. In no other case in that area of the world
has there been open and blatant expulsion of the
population of a territory, the completely unabashed
expulsion of the population.

28. I must go into certain details. Aside from the
200,000 persons that have been so displaced-this
population represents about 40 per cent of the entire
Greek population of the island; over 50,000 households
which have been broken up and the properties of
their owners left behind, subject to further looting and
to the destruction of time--Cyprus
is now losing
about f2 million worth of production
every day
that passes. Virtually
the entire labour force is
unemployed
as compared with the state of full
employment before the invasion. As reported in my
letter to the Secretary-General of 23 August [s/1.1467],
many thousands of animals are dying because of the
lack of food, water and care. They are dying because
their owners have been thrown out of their houses
and off their land. Permission to feed and water the
livestock has been denied to the Greek Cypriots
when it was asked twice by the Government
of
Cyprus. I want to be accurate-it
was not actually
denied. There was no response, which in effect was
negative. Twice application was made for permission
for the people to return to tend their land and farms
for the sake of the economy, and twice there was no
response. The last time was on 17 August. These
requests were made formally and effectively through
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP),
but also, formally and effectively, there
was no response. Furthermore, persons who attempted
to go back in spite of that refusal, persons who
felt that their,own livelihoods were disappearing and
that they had to go back to water their dying cattle
were all killed on two occasions. I do not have the
details now, but I shall produce them shortly. In
addition, the orange plantations of the north region
will perish in a few more days if they are not irrigated
-a system created by many years of laborious work
and at very considerable expense.

23. Thus the problem transcends Cyprus. It is a
problem of all small countries, and, more properly,
a problem of the world. It is a direct challenge to
the very concept of the maintenance of international
peace and security with which this august body is
specifically charged, and a challenge to elementary
human rights in our world. All the solemn declarations
of the United Nations and of the Charter itself are
,now in question.
24. It is obvious that until the present time the
invader has continued
to work his sinister will
unopposed-virtually
and effectively
unopposed.
What he has actually done during this period is to
bring destruction-destruction
of a community,
destruction
of land and property, destruction
of
livestock and other resources, destruction of homes
and families and towns and villages. And he is now
pushing forward with the destruction of the economy
and the character of the island also.
25. I believe I heard voices of jubilation
from that
source over the “victory”.
What victory? Victory
against the United Nations? Victory against the
Charter? Victory against any remaining concept of
international
security and international
order and
international
law? That is the victory that has been
promoted, that has been protected, that is looked
upon with pride.
26. I am afraid that this little case of this little
country of Cyprus-I
have said this before but I
cannot refrain from saying it again, because I feel it
so strongly and am persuaded it is true-is going to
be the symbol .of what will happen to the world in
the years ahead. Not only that. There are so many
other things concurrent with it. But this is a symbol of
one of its aspects. The downfall of morality in an
age of gigantic technological progress in which there
should be comparable progress in moral aspects, so
that man, having become powerful enough through
technology to destroy himself and the whole ,world,

29. It is important to note that-as is also pointed
out in my letter of 23 August-the
Turkish occupation
already covers far more than one third of the Cypriot
territory, 40 per cent, which, however, corresponds
to 70 per cent of the economic life of the country.
The economy now runs the risk of being destroyed.
4

All this depends upon the return of the refugees to
their homes and all this depends upon what resolution
the Council will adopt today, on how far it will be
effective in its drafting and on how effective the
Council will be in its implementation.
The economic
survival of the country is now at stake, and we must
view the draft resolution to be adopted in the light of
these considerations.

land and the property and the houses of those people
who were there; thereby destroying the very concept
of negotiation
and the solution of the problem.
Therefore, from the point of view of the economy,
of human rights and of the solution of the problem,
there must be a resolution
which directly and
emphatically
points to the return of the refugees to
their homes and their lands. A resolution to that
effect, duly implemented, can save the present critical
situation for Cyprus -and, no less I repeat, for the
United Nations and the world.

30. There are three main aspects to this problem
that have to be taken into account in their order of
importance.

36. If the Security Council has so far been ineffective
in carrying out its responsibilities for the maintenance
of peace and security and protecting the independence,
sovereignty
and territorial
integrity
which every
Member
State, according to the resolutions,
is
supporting, but yet so easily neglecting; if, with
respect to one small non-aligned country Member of the
United Nations, the Council is unable effectively to
insist upon the implementation
of its cease-fire and
its own resolutions,
it should at least respond
effectively to the present aspect of saving the economy,
the life, the existence of Cyprus and making a positive
solution of the problem possible. We shall see what
type of draft resolution the Council will adopt along
these lines. It is its responsibility;
we have no vote
in the adoption of the resolution. But I give this as
a warning: this resolution has to be effective if the
situation is not to deteriorate further, with unknown
consequences and repercussions for the world.

31. First and most immediate and most consequential
is the threatening effect of this expelling of the
population
on the economy of the island. Never
before has there been such a situation for the reason
that never before has there been such a pounding
by a comparatively
enormous Power of a small
undefended and unprotected country. Never before
has such an attack been ‘made for the set purpose
of destruction and deracination.
That is the first
problem, the problem of the economy of the island
which is daily being eroded and destroyed as a result
of the situation.
32.

The second main aspect is the humanitarian

one.

33. The third and, I would say more vitally important
aspect in a broader sense, is its effect upon the solution
of the problem. In this respect, resolution 353 (1974),
reaffirmed by subsequent resolutions and by the
Geneva Declaration, states-1 have said this before
but I must say it again in the present context-that
foreign military
intervention
should be ended
immediately,
that foreign military personnel should
without delay be withdrawn from the Republic of
Cyprus. These are made preconditions for the solution
of the problem through free negotiations.
We have
seen how the negotiations in Geneva were vitiated by
the presence of the army. The presence of the army
was abused in order to carry out negotiations at
gun-point,
vitiating the negotiations,
vitiating and
destroying their forum. So it is not constructive to
take an attitude of indifference to the conduct of
Turkey in this respect.

37. In the long run the dire effects for the international
community and the United Nations itself of not taking
proper and effective action will be incalculably
greater and graver than any short-term parochial
considerations
and interests that may prompt the
failure of this resolution,
and, in my humble
submission, that would be unworthy of the gravity of
the situation and of the over-all interests of the
United Nations.
38. The PRESIDENT
(translation from Russian):
I now call on the next speaker, the representative
of Greece.
39. Mr. CARAYANNIS
(Greece): The refugee
problem in Cyprus has, I think, two aspects. One is
humanitarian.
The number of those who became
refugees in the span of several days was such that
available means and organizations could not cope with
the emergency. It was the Secretary-General’s
good
idea to call on the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and entrust him with the co-ordination
of the effort. Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan spent
several days in Cyprus. I understand that he has now
gone back to Geneva, and that we shall soon have a
report enabling us to have a clear picture of what could
be done to alleviate the human suffering. The High
Commissioner
cannot, however, solve the problem.
He knows it and we know it. He.is not even entitled
to try, because it is a political problem, and it is our
problem.

34. Following the- repeated violations of the ceasefire and the illegal occupation by military force of a
far greater area by the invader, the Security Council
adopted resolution 360 (1974) which emphasized that
“the acquisition of advantages resulting from military
operations”
should not in any way impede or
prejudice the negotiations and their outcome.
35. The return of the displaced persons to their
homes and land is imperative and urgent for all these
three reasons: to save the economy, for humanitarian
reasons and to make negotiations for the solution of
the problem possible. The reason why there is objection
to their return is that the other side wants to create
faits accomplis by bringing in other people to rob the
5

40. So the second aspect is, in effect, political. It is
estimated that 200,000 refugees have fled from the
occupied northern part of the island and have sought
refuge in the south. Why have they fled? Presumably
because they were afraid of the invading army.
Everybody is afraid of an invading army; and, in
any case, the experiences of the first days of invasion
were not reassuring. In most cases they left their
homes without taking anything with them, or very
little. And they had to leave behind livestock and
crops. When the cease-tire became almost effective
-something
which seems unbelievable, and it already
appears precarious-those
people asked to be allowed
to go back to their homes in the occupied territory.
The reason was that the cattle were dying of thirst,
the crops would be ruined. Hope, you see, never
abandons a human being. The Turkish answer to this
request was “No”, and it is still “No”.

and at the same time, were not allowed to enter the
Turkish enclaves, and they were not entering them,
43. The Turks in the enclaves have suffered
economically and otherwise by their seclusion. But it
was not a suffering imposed by the Greeks; it was
a suffering imposed by the Turkish Government across
the sea, for obvious reasons-in
order to create a
status of separation which was to be exploited at the
first available opportunity. This opportunity came.
44. The Turkish representative
said the other day
that he was entitled to remind members of the Council
that he had told them so. But I am also entitled to
remind members of the Council that I had told them
so, or, at any rate, Greece had told them so. The
whole question was a real estate question right from
the beginning: how Turkey would secure a part of the
island and how the Turkish population could be used
to that end. There is a cataract of documents circulated
on questionable Greek Cypriot atrocities, which I
refrain as much as possible from replying to-and
not for lack of material. But I have never said
around this table that Greek Cypriots are angels.
Greeks have their fanatics, as other countries have
kidnappers. But how can one expect not to arouse
fanaticism in a country one invades and devastates,
spreading around human misery? One thing remains
true: there were no incidents in times in which there
were no provocations, and the United Nations Force
has been there for many years to testify to this.

41. One Turkish argument is that the return of the
refugees to their homes should be dealt with in an
over-all settlement.
And we are asked to go to
negotiations in order to have those people go back to
their homes and feed their livestock. We have already
experienced gun-point negotiations; we are now asked
to experience “refugee-point”
negotiations-if
I may
so put it. The whole thing amounts to being told
“either you accept this or the refugees stay where they
are”. I do not think that this is the proper approach
if we want to find a lasting solution acceptable to
all and, more than everybody else, to the people
of Cyprus, a solution which will be good and workable
not only today but for the years to come-years
in
which Turkey and Greece will eventually be interested
in more constructive endeavours.

45. I shall be told that all this is past history, and
I would agree. Let us be realistic. The question is:
where do we go now? And the big question is: shall
we go in the direction of this Council’s resolutions
or shall we choose another way? The basic principles
constantly repeated in every single resolution of the
Council are: first, withdrawal of armed forces; second,
independence, sovereignty and integrity for Cyprus.
As far as withdrawal is concerned, all we could get
in Geneva was a “phased reduction’*.
It must be
agreed that that was not much, even on paper. It
was a very elaborated phrase which possibly could
never lead to withdrawal.

42. Another Turkish
argument
is that Turkish
Cypriots have been refugees in the island for the last
10 years. We have heard the Turkish representative
advancing this argument in this room, and in many
instances he insisted on the hardships suffered by the
Turkish community. I think that I have always been
sincere in whatever I said in this Council and I am not
the one who will pretend that Turks have been happy
in Cyprus for the last decade. The question is to
know why they have been unhappy. Turks and Greeks
have lived for centuries in Cyprus in close friendship,
even when Greeks on the mainland were fighting
against the Turks for their independence.
Even in
today’s turmoil, there are instances of Greeks fleeing
the Turkish army and leaving the keys of their homes
to Turkish friends, and vice versa in the south. A large
proportion
of Turks have been on their own
decision--or,
rather, on the decision of Turkeyconfined for the last 10 years in enclaves. But in the
same period many other Turks have been living outside
with Greeks without any hardship at all and without
any incident. Those in the enclaves had to get
permission from the Turks to go out, and they actually
were doing so. But they did not have to get permission
from the Greeks. They were free and welcome to go
anywhere they liked. The Greeks, on the other hand

46. But’ I prefer to elaborate more on the principle
of independence,
sovereignty
and integrity.
The
representative of the United States said in one of our
previous meetings that he was in favour of greater
autonomy for the Turks in Cyprus. Well, I am also
in favour of it.. Nobody wants the Turks in Cyprus
not to be as free as possible and live the life they
want to live and do the things they like to do and
express the ideas they like to express. But does that
mean that the island should be partitioned into a Greek
sector and a Turkish sector and that Greeks and
Turks should be concentrated with determination and
patience in a Greek sector and a Turkish sector
with a nominal head of State who will not know
whom he represents, just for us to be able to say that
we have violated the Security Council resolutions
6

.,

^

--

e;...

. .. . .

.-.__.

. -..

._....

1--.

.-.

.

i_.6

. . ..-.

.

..,_..

._

.

_

”

.. -

99 per cent but not 100 per cent? Is this a practical
proposition?
If this were to happen-and
anything
may happen-the
Turkish sector will inevitably be
linked in every respect with Turkey and the Greek
sector with Greece, and you will very soon find
yourselves wondering in the Council why the two
sectors are not formally attached to and annexed by the
two countries. Turkey, by not allowing the return of
the 200,000 refugees to their homes, is aiming precisely
at creating this situation. Two hundred thousand
refugees represent almost the total of the Greek
population of the areas occupied after the second
Geneva conference. The Turkish authorities have even
announced that for any deal concerning the refugees,
the Turks in the south should first be allowed to
move to the north. But the Turks in the south
belong to the south. If they were to be allowed to go
north there would be no place for the Greeks who
have left, and the consequences I foresaw in the
earlier part of this statement would have already
become a fait accompli. I have even heard reports
from the news media of this country that a number
of Turks from the mainland have been settled in
the north of Cyprus. I am not in a position to
verify that, but everybody will realize the seriousness
of such an eventuality. I humbly submit that those
who think in terms of dividing the island’one way or
another should never have voted for Security Council
resolution 353 (1974) or any other resolution on this
item.

may offer. Obviously, if the resumption of the Geneva
conference is in deadlock we are open to any other
suggestions. We are ready to try. But if one agrees
with what I have said, Turkey has first to be persuaded
that we are not completely wrong. It does not amount
to anything to negotiate if the will to negotiate does
not exist and the Security Council resolutions are not
even considered. It does not amount to anything to
concede the surplus territory occupied for this precise
purpose. With the Turkish troops at present in Cyprus
Turkey can occupy more territory if it wants, in
order to be able to concede more. If we are to be
offered the same proposals we were offered in Geneva,
as we have already honestly explained, we are not
prepared to accept them. We have to agree that,
no matter what the consequences, there is a big
difference between something one cannot prevent and
something one agrees to.
49. The PRESIDENT
(translation
from
I call on the representative of Turkey.

Russian):

50. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I remember that after
the -adoption of resolution 360 (1974), to which my
colleague from Greece has just referred, I said that my
Government had declared its readiness to take part in
the negotiations
aimed at establishing
the future
framework of the Constitution
for an independent
and sovereign State of Cyprus, but that that should
not be on the basis of what I then described as an
unbalanced, biased, unequal, unfair and unrealistic
resolution. I said, further, that if the Council adopted,
as I hoped it would do very soon, any other
resolution that did not bear all those stigmas, my
Government would be ready to reconsider its attitude
in that respect, and would do so gladly.

47. I should like to end my statement by commenting
on the question of negotiations, which is of obvious
interest to all members of the Council.
48. We are not against negotiations. We know that if
we want a settlement+nd
we do want one-we
have to negotiate. But the Council has to realize that
the positions of Greece and Turkey are very far
apart on matters of substance, and that the position
of Greece is very, very close to resolution 353 (1974).
I know the difficulty created for the Council by the
fact that its resolution is almost identical with the
position of one of the parties. It is always more
convenient for the Council to be in the middle of a
dispute. But we have to see things as they are. After
six resolutions of the Council, Turkey has not given
any indication thus far of any change in its position.
More than that, the reaction of the representative
of Turkey to the last resolution
adopted by the
Council pointed clearly to the contrary. Not even in
the refugee question does Turkey seem to offer any
indication of goodwill or comprehension. The Turkish
Government is clearly not prepared for negotiations.
All it is prepared for is to have us accept a premeditated and prearranged plan. The Vice-President,
Mr. Denktag,
who is representing
the Turkish
community but has to speak for Turkey, is very clear
on this pointi either you accept two federated
States or we shall create an independent one. We
are not concerned with the form future negotiations
may take. We are concerned with the prospect they

51. I would have hoped that this meeting of the
Council could mark a step forward in that direction.
But, having heard the representative of Greece and
the speaker who preceded him, Mr. Rossides,-I must
say that we seem to be back where we started. I have
the feeling that if this Council adopts today the draft
resolution now before it, members of the Council
will find, if they examine their conscience, that after
all the consultations that have taken place, after all
the many, tiring hours they have spent, they have
actually done nothing to lessen the suffering of
Cypriots, both Turkish and Greek, but, instead, have
satisfied the political ambitions of only one side.
If there had been any doubts about this in the mind of
any Council member, I am sure that Mr. Rossides’s
ample references to preconditions
for the peace
talks have dispelled them.
52. Today’s meeting-whose
utility I am still at a
loss to understand-is
being held in rather strange
circumstances. Allow me to explain what I mean.
53. As is known, this meeting was convened at the
request of Mr. Rossides. For the record I should
like to read out what Mr. Rauf Denktag, Vice7

President of the Republic of Cyprus, has to say on
the subject-I know that Mr. Denktag’s letter has
been distributed as a document, but I should like
to take one minute of the Council’s time to read it
out now:

-and I must say that that phrase “the new order”
reminds me of so many things-

[The speaker read out the text
contained in document S/11477.]

[S/6253, para. 1611

“would have the right to resettle in Turkey, and
should be assisted to do so, with adequate
compensation and help in starting a new life.”

of the letter

Mr. Galo Plaza went on to say:

I do not want at this stage to open up the whole
delicate subject of legitimacy in Cyprus. The original
Constitution has been violated, even desecrated, so
often by the Greek Cypriot side that it is hardly worth
referring to it. Suffice it for me to say that Mr. Rossides
seems to be the only diplomat of Cyprus duly
nominated. Nevertheless, he has been in the course of
these years, and certainly now is, merely the
representative of his own ethnic group’s administration. I reserve my Government’s right to come back
to this whole subject more formally at the appropriate
time-and certainly this is not the appropriate time.
54.

“I have therefore been pleased to be able to
record the assurances which Archbishop Makarios
has given of his concern for these aspects of the
problem and the specific measures which he has
expressed his willingness to apply. . .. They
include . .. certain exceptional and transitional
provisions.” [Ibid., para. 164.)
And Mr. Galo Plaza stated that the need for such
measures had been conceded in principle.
59. When the report is read in its entirety, the
real discrepancy in Mr. Plaza’s reasoning becomes
more obvious. He discards the idea of federation,
because he abhors the idea of a movement of
population within a few miles on the tiny island of
Cyprus, but he sees nothing wrong with the idea of
a mass emigration of Turkish Cypriots to Turkey. In
fact, I know that this has been the policy also of the
Greek Cypriot Administration for the past 10 years,
during which Turks were always encouraged to
emigrate to England, to Australia, to wherever they
wanted to go-just so long as they did not stay on
the island. This is proved by the fact that when a
Turkish Cypriot applied for a passport, if it was for
emigration purposes he was granted it immediately
but if it was for any other purpose he had to wait
indefinitely.

55. With regard to the more substantive subjectmatter of today’s meeting, that is, the problem of the
refugees-a problem that seems to have been selected
from the many problems of Cyprus because of its
dramatic potential for public presentation-I would
say this.
56. I would start by quoting Mr. Rosside’s favourite
author-indeed the favourite author of all the Greek
representatives, whether of the mainland or of the
island. I am referring to the man whom Mr. Rossides
has quoted more than any other during the two years
I have appeared before the Council Mr. Galo Plaza.
57. Mr. Galo Plaza, who explicitly states that he is
in favour of enosis, proposed in fact a transitional
solution, envisaging a unitary State in Cyprus in which
the Turkish community would be reduced to the
status of a simple minority without any effective
guarantees. He admitted that a large number of Turkish
Cypriots would find it impossible to live in such a
State and that they would want to leave the island
and emigrate to Turkey. He was so certain in his
own mind that that would be the outcome that he
suggested, very generously indeed, that compensation should be paid to Turks who preferred to leave
Cyprus. It was when the majority of Turks would
have left the island that, in Mr. Galo Plaza’s view,
the time would be ripe for enosis.

60. What Mr. Rossides said on the plight of the
refugees was, of course, moving. I recognize that
there is a tragedy. But I must say that what he
said had a familiar ring. I wonder if he was reading
from some speeches made a decade ago by Turkish
representatives describing the plight of Turkish
Cypriots. This is the essence of the Cypriot question:
refusal to recognize the equality of the Turkish
Cypriots, equality even in their suffering and plight.
And today we are faced with just another example
of this mentality.

58. I should like now to quote from Mr. Galo
Plaza’s report dated 26 March 1%5. It is an old
document, but the facts do not seem to have changed
much despite the passage of time. In that report
Mr. Galo Plaza stated:

61. Since 1963, when the Greek onslaught on the
Turks occurred, 103 villages have had to be evacuated
by Turkish Cypriots, who have fled to safer areas.
Despite the fact that every time they have appeared
in this chamber since then Turkish representatives
have drawn the attention of the Council to this
intolerable situation, the Council has remained silent.
Twenty-four thousand Turkish Cypriots have been
living as displaced persons in temporary refugee
accommodation for 11 years. It is not possible for
us to forget that during this decade everyone has

“In addition [to the foregoing], it would be just
and fair to recognize that however effective the
safeguards that can be devised, any Turkish
Cypriot who fails to find in them a basis for
reasonable confidence in the new order of things”
8

been telling Turkey that this problem could be
resolved after a political
solution of the Cyprus
question was reached.

and immoral situation, all the lands of Turkish Cypriots
situated in Greek-controlled
areas were cultivated,
without any payment, by the Greeks, while the Greek
Cypriot Administration
looked on without taking any
steps to prevent this continuing usurpation of riihts ,
and properties. For 11 years we have lived with the
knowledge of this reality and Mr. Rossides and his
kin have lived with the inevitable,
yet apparently
surmountable, burden of the knowledge of this reality
on their conscience.

62. In spite of the assurances given by Archbishop
Makarios to the Secretary-General
in September and
November 1964 that he would repair or reconstruct
all damaged properties and financially
assist the
refugees to rehabilitate themselves, the illegal Greek
Cypriot Administration
has done everything to prevent
this from actually taking place, and instead has made
it subject to prior Turkish
recognition
of its
unconstitutional
authority.

65. Now what do we see after these 11 years? We
see that it is now about 11 days since some parts of
the Greek Cypriot population became displaced, and
Mr. Rossides deems it fit to come here and ask the
Security Council to deal with this humanitarian
problem-and
I underline that we do recognize the
existence of a humanitarian problem; there is a tragedy
in Cyprus-as a matter of priority. But I cannot refrain
from asking: what nationalities,
in the opinion of this
Council, have to be displaced before one can speak of
the existence of a humanitarian problem which merits
the attention of this august body? I ask: is it, at all
compatible with the principles of equity to consider
that a humanitarian
problem exists only after some
Greek Cypriots too’have become displaced?

63. At the 1771st meeting of the Security Council,
held as recently as 29 May 1974, I stated-and
I
apologize for having to quote so much of what
I said:
“. . .The Greek Cypriot Administration
continues
to reject the Turkish proposal to set up a joint
committee under United Nations chairmanship to
arrange the rehabilitation
of the Turkish Cypriot
refugees, free from all political motivation
and
bias.” -That
was two months ago.-“The
Greek
Cypriot side is doing everything possible to impede
the return of the Turkish Cypriot refugees to their
villages by creating artificial difficulties such as the
refusal to supply their homes with drinking water,
electricity and other facilities and claiming a variety
of accumulated prohibitive sums as taxes or dues
for water, rule constable fees and so on, in respect
of which the refugees have had no benefit for
the last 11 years.

66. Why does a home become-to
use Mr. Rossides’
word-” ancestral*’ when it belongs to a Greek? Is it
because the island has been-and
again I use his
words-“Greek
for 3,000 years”? Does this mean that
all non-Greeks are, for all eternity, to be branded as
“barbarians” -again using his term? What kind of
racial and religious hatred does this reflect? I hope it
does not reflect any, but the doubt is there.

“Some of the Turkish Cypriots who have returned
to their villages with the help of the Turkish
Cypriot Administration
are being harassed by the
Greek Cypriots and their Administration.
This is the
case in three of the four villages mentioned in
paragraph 51 [of the report of the SecretaryGeneral]. The prohibition
of the return of the
Turkish Cypriot refugees to six major villages is
still in full force. The Turkish inhabitants of these
particular villages are also being denied access to
their properties, even for agricultural purposes.”
[1771st meeting,

paras.

67. Can anyone in the Council explain to me just
what “the return of the displaced persons to their
homes” means? Does it encompass the Turkish
Cypriots who were displaced 11 years ago? Who can
make a reasonable offer to compensate for the loss
of life, loss of homes, loss of land and loss of income
by the Turkish Cypriots for the past 11 years? How
is their security to be safeguarded? I admit that these
are hard questions, perhaps beyond the competence
of the Council. However, they are the real questions
which will have to, be addressed in order to reach a
solution of the Cyprus problem.

42 and 43.1

Even schoolchildren
were used in demonstrations
where they were made to carry placards asking the
Greek Cypriot Administration
to expel the Turkish
Cypriots from Cyprus. That was two months ago,
and there was no war or military occupation then.
That was the treatment
by the Cypriot Greek
Administration.
And may I say here that I beg to
differ from what the representative
of Greece just
said when he depicted the idyllic life of the Turks
under Greek Administration.

68. I agree with my Greek colleague when he said
that there is a political question involved. In fact,
what has been brought here today with humanitarian
consideration is also, and perhaps foremost, a political
question. The problem of displaced persons can be
settled only within the framework of a ,political
solution of the Cyprus problem.
It is. intricately
related to the over-all settlement. In the light of the
deplorable past of Cyprus, it has now become both
a moral and a humanitarian requirement for everyone
to recognize the need for a federal solution, with two
geographically separated, autonomous administrations
that will enable the two communities to live side by

64. Throughout the period of what I am sorry to
have to call the indifference of the Security Council
and the international
community
to this intolerable
9

side in peace and security, and without further
bloodshed, within the framework of a single State.
No amount of pretension and rhetoric can disguise
this pressing reality. Such a solution has become a
necessity, and I do not think I am exaggerating when
I say that it is a necessity for world peace.

74. Moreover, my Government has welcomed the
initiation of contacts between Mr. Denktas and
Mr. Clerides, the respective leaders of the two
communities, on the humanitarian question. And here
I should like also to express my Government’s
appreciation for the tireless efforts of the Secretary*
General. I hope that adoption of unrealistic resolutions
will not undo what he has so painstakingly achieved.

69. Now, at a time when once more all segmentsof the
Greek community, including the Greek Cypriot
Administration, are threatening guerrilla warfare, it is,
to say the least, unrealistic to expect that the question
of the displaced persons can be dealt with separately
from the over-all solution of the Cyprus question.

75. Mr. JANKOWITSCH (Austria): Now that the
weapons are silent in Cyprus, even though violence
in many forms continues to ravage the island, the
immense tragedy and human suffering of the population
of the island manifests itself in frightening dimensions.
A great number of men, women and children,
belonging to both communities, have lost their lives,
many more are wounded, and a third of the entire
population, Greek and Turkish, have been displaced
from their homes and turned into refugees who live
under the most miserable conditions. This is without
speaking about the enormous amount of destruction
and the devastating blow to the economy of a-small
nation. The tragedy of Cyprus has also claimed victims
from those who came to keep the peace. Rudolf
Kirschlaeger, the Federal President of Austria,
speaking at a ceremony of mourning at Vienna airport
a few days ago to commemorate the dead of the
Austrian contingent, said, in words which reflect,the
sacrifice of all, that those men, had died “in trying
to bring peace and maintain peace for the, .peopIe
of a country friendly to Europe”.

70. I must emphasize that the proponents of guerrilla
warfare have already clearly defined its purpose
-and I quote the local press-as “fighting to the
death until the union of Cyprus with Greece is
realized”. Turkey will not, in any circumstances,
permit the creation of conditions which would facilitate
such guerrilla activity.
71: Today, more than one third of the Turkish
Cypriots have become refugees. Practically one half
of the Turkish Cypriots outside the areas liberated
from the Greek ‘terror still continue to live under the
threat of Greek armed bands and the so-called
EOKA-B, which even the Greek Cypriot Administration cannot control. One half, therefore, of the
Turkish community are practically hostages in the
hands of these Greek hooligans, who gave proof,
a few days ago, of their sense of values in front of
a foreign embassy. Today we again received news of
what Greeks may do to Greeks when one of their
leaders again barely escaped assassination.

76. Death has also struck the diplomatic community
of Nicosia. We deplore the tragic death of the
Ambassador of the United States in Nicosia, and
I want to take this opportunity to offer condolences
to the delegation of the United States on that sad
event.

72. I did not come here to make an expose of the
life of the Turkish refugees. I know that the problem
is much wider today, and we sympathize fully with
the plight of the innocent Turkish and Greek Cypriot
displaced and otherwise affected persons. We support
activities to alleviate their hardships by providing
food, shelter and medicine. But the satisfactory
solution to their problem can be found only within the
context of an over-all solution. This is all the more
reason to resume political negotiations without delay;
and again I beg to differ with what my Greek colleague
has said about the negotiations. I can assure all
members of this Council that Turkey believes so much
in negotiations that it is ready to sit with representatives of the Greek Government, despite what was
said today by my colleague.

77. All this once more demonstrates the extreme
consequences of the use of force in the solution of
political conflicts.
78. The Security Council has repeatedly addressed
itself to the political and military aspects of the
situation. It is now imperative for the Council also as
a matter of urgency to deal with the immense
humanitarian problems which have arisen. In saying
that, we fully recognize that that aspect cannot be
separated from the over-all situation. Thus the urgent
need for the parties to resume negotiations becomes
even more evident since the humanitarian side of the
problem will have to rank prominently among the
questions to be solved. The present debate of this
Council has to be seen in the tight of the urgency
of the situation, particularly in humanitarian terms,
and it is thus consistent with the Council’s continued
preoccupation with events in Cyprus.

73. In this connexion, finally, I should like to remind
the Council that my Government has welcomed the
appointment of Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan as the
co-ordinator of the United Nations relief activities in
Cyprus. My Government and the Turkish Cypriot
Administration are fully co-operating with the
International Committee of the Red Cross, which has
undertaken the humanitarian ‘activities with respect
to both communities.

79. In his report which is now before the Council,
the Secretary-General has therefore rightly focused
particular attention on the humanitarian problems.
10

..

The untiring and enormous efforts of &he SecretarvGeneral personally and his staff here and on the island
and the efforts of the United Nations Force and of
the Red Cross, as well as those of other international
organizations,
deserve our highest praise. In that
context we welcome the appointment of the United
Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees as coordinator of United Nations humanitarian assistance
for Cyprus.

delegations of France and the United Kingdom,
is
now before the Council in document S/11479. It is
the result of long and serious consultations with all
members of the Council and the parties concerned,
and it is a serious and honest effort to achieve a
wide measure of agreement, not to say consensus,
between members of the Council on an extremely
urgent matters. In view of what I said earlier, I do
not think I should give a more detailed explanation
concerning the draft now before the Council. Let me
only add that; following
consultations
with the
sponsors and the parties concerned, we wish to add;
at the end of operative paragraph 4, the words “in
safety”, so that the text reads, “to permit persons
who wish to do so to return to their homes in safety”. ~

.80. My country was among those which responded
to an urgent appeal of the President of the Republic
of Cyprus for emergency aid for the population of
Cyprus, and at its session of 20 August the Austrian
Government decided .to provide such aid, particularly
medicine and medical equipment, in the amount of
1 million schillings, to the people of Cyprus.

84. The draft resolution is thus before the Council,
and we hope and believe that it will effectively address
itself to one of the most dramatic aspects of the
humanitarian problems of the island, the problem of
refugees, which, as we have heard this morning, has
had the gravest consequences for both communities on
the island. We hope and believe that the draft
will address itself also to a new start in the negotiating
with the necessary dialogue
process, beginning
between the representatives of the Greek and Turkish
communities
on the .island. .It is primarily
humanitarian. draft, .and it _has been conceived in a spirit
of ,impartiality.
It does not serve any one side. It
should serve only suffering human beings.

81. In the light of the most difficult problems with
which Cyprus is confronted, it is the duty of the
Council immediately
to call upon all parties to do
everything in their power to alleviate human suffering
and to ensure respect for the fundamental human rights
of every person on the island. It is the duty of the
Council to call upon all parties to deal immediately
with the plight of refugees and displaced persons in the
area of their control in accordance with relevant
international agreements.conceming
refugees. It would
also only-be logical for the Council to reiterate its
call for the co-operation of all sides with the United
Nations Force in Cyprus in carrying out its tasks,
including its humanitarian functions, as requested in
resolution 359 (1974).

85. The draft resolution also tries to strengthen the
involvement of the United Nations in the management
and solution of the crisis. It stresses the role of the
Secretary-General
in the dialogue between the
communities;
it stresses the necessary role of the
United Nations in humanitarian
assistance; and it
points to the indispensable character of the contribution of UNFICYP,
whose role needs our continued
support. But I also believe that the draft does not
lose sight of the wider aspects of the problem. It
recalls all the previous resolutions this Council, has
adopted since the beginning of the present crisis,
resolutions the complete implementation
of’ which
remains an urgent necessity, resolutions on the basis
of which the Council is deliberating today.

82, My delegation is convinced, and has said so on
many previous occasions, that one of the most urgent
demands of the hour is the return of all sides to the
negotiating table. The recent meeting of the Acting
President of the Republic of Cyprus and the VicePresident of the Republic of Cyprus in the presence of
the Secretary-General
may well be regarded as a
propitious
starting-point
for further direct talks
between the island’s two communities. There can be
no doubt, therefore, that the solution of humanitarian
problems will have to be linked with the solution of
other problems in order to ensure political stability
and personal safety through a satisfactory general
settlement.
83. It was in view of all those considerations, and
after the representative of Cyprus, Mr. Rossides, had
called for the present meeting-a
call we welcomed
in view of the urgency of the situation-that
my
delegation tried to respond to the situation and
yesterday
prepared
a working
paper for the
consideration of the members of the Council. We were,
furthermore, Mr. President, happy to respond to your
suggestion to pool our efforts with those of other
delegations and representatives of the parties who had
prepared concurrent working papers and try to prepare
a draft resolution for the consideration of the Council.
The resultant draft, sponsored by my delegation and the

86. In adopting the draft resolution,
the Council
will, of course, have dealt only with some of the most
urgent problems of the island. A huge task lies ahead
of the Council, a task intimately
linked with our
over-all target: the protection and maintenance of the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Cyprus. It remains the duty of the Council to further
the accomplishment
of that task and also to address
itself to the grave problems existing -between two
Member States whose conflict over Cyprus has more
than once brought them to the brink of war and whose
relations continue to be clouded by severe tensions and
strains because of these problems.
11

87. Many serious and constructive proposals to put
the political process in motion have’been made lately.
Those proposals will need very close and attentive
study on our part but particularly on the part of the
parties in whose interests they have been conceived.

withdrawn but, on the contrary, military forces and
military personnel are increasing in numbers.
93. .Attempts to justify the continued presence of
foreign troops in Cyprus by statements to the effect
that the other side should withdraw its troops and
military personnel first are without foundation and
at variance with the decisions of the Council. As, a
result, a closed circle is formed from which there is
no visible way out. Such an approach in fact only
leads to a build-up in the military forces on the island,
to a spreading of the conflict and, in the last analysis, to
a delay in normalizing the situation in Cyprus. The
Council must intensify its efforts to move the question
of the withdrawal of foreign troops from dead
centre. The only way to resolve this key question is
the immediate and simultaneous
withdrawal of all
foreign troops and military personnel.

88. In putting this draft resolution before the Council,
we hope to be able to make a contribution
to the
furthering of the solution of one particularly urgent
problem. We hope the members of the Council can
strongly support this draft resolution, and we ask
you, Mr. President, to put it to the vote at the earliest
possible moment.
89: The PRESIDENT
(translation from Russian):
1 now intend to speak in my capacity as representative of the UNION
OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS
on the question of refugees and on the
three-Power draft resolution submitted to the Council
by the representatives of Austria, the United Kingdom
and France.

94. The events of the last few days in Cyprus cannot
but be of concern to those who cherish peace and
international
security. As a result of outside interference in the internal affairs of the Republic of
Cyprus, there has been continuing bloodshed on the
island. The cease-tire continues to be violated, as
the Secretary-General
has informed us in his latest
report. The situation in Cyprus continues to be
explosive; it is creating a real danger and further
extending the area of tension, constituting a threat
to peace.
._:,
,.

90: ,?he‘USSR
delegation expresses serious concern
at the continuing tense situation in and around Cyprus,
a situation which involves further sufferings and
sacrifices for the Cypriot people, both Greek Cypriots
and Turkish Cypriots; it renders the attainment of a
just settlement of the Cypriot problem more difficult
and creates a threat to international peace and security.
In the statement by the Soviet Government concerning
Cyprus of 22 August [S/11465], a full and accurate
assessment was once again given of the situation
that has developed in Cyprus which is so tragic for
the Cypriot people.

95. For more than a month, Cyprus has been an area
of armed conflict. The Republic’s
economy has
suffered catastrophic losses and is in a state of
virtual chaos as a result of the hostilities. Activity
has come to a standstill in the ports through which
Cyprus imports 70 per cent of its food, equipment
and raw materials. The export of agricultural produce
and industrial goods has been blocked. Transport and
the water supply system have been disrupted.

91. As the Soviet delegation has repeatedly stressed,
responsibility for the current dangerous developments
in Cyprus and the further deterioration of the situation
in the region is borne by the well-known NATO
circles which, because of their selfish military and
strategic objectives in the eastern Mediterranean,
are trying to achieve the liquidation of the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus-the
dismemberment
of that
State. For that purpose, the military intervention in
Cyprus is continuing with the obvious connivance of
those who could really oppose it.

%. According to official Cypriot data, the damage to
this small State, even on a preliminary
basis, is
calculated to be many hundreds of millions of dollars,
and the restoration of its economy, disrupted by the
intervention and war, will take years.
97. As a result of the foreign military intervention
and war, a considerable part of the population of
Cyprus, nearly one third-afigure
of more than 200,000
is being mentioned-have
become refugees, deprived
of shelter and driven from their homes.

92. The resolutions of the Security Council on the
immediate ending of the foreign military intervention
against the Republic of Cyprus, the withdrawal of
foreign troops from its territory and the restoration
of constitutional
order in Cyprus have not been
implemented. Foreign troops have not been withdrawn
from Cyprus. Repeated statements by Government
offtcials of countries directly responsible for the events
in Cyprus about their intention to implement
the
Council’s decisions are not being followed up by
specillc deeds. Official statements have been made
about a willingness to withdraw troops from Cyprus.
However, in fact, not only have the troops not been

98. The enormous displacement
of the population
of the island has created the serious problem of
displaced persons and there is a real threat of an
outbreak of epidemics among the refugees. The Soviet
people are particularly able to realize the sufferings
of the Cypriot people, for they will never forget the
tragedy and sufferings they endured when tens of
millions of people were forced, during the years of
the Second World War of 1941-1945, to leave their
12

at the present time is the cessation of the foreign
military intervention
in Cyprus and the immediate
withdrawal without exception of all foreign troops
and military personnel in Cyprus. This would ensure
the creation of the conditions necessary to enable
the Cypriot people-both
Greek Cypriots and Turkish
Cypriots-to
decide the destiny of their homeland, the
sovereign Republic of Cyprus, in conditions of peace
and tranquillity without outside pressure.

homes in the western part of the Soviet Union and
to be evacuated to the east, to the regions of the
Volga, the Urals and Siberia. Those who have not
suffered such hardships find it hard to understand
and appreciate the full extent of a nation’s sufferings
in time of war.
99. As was pointed out to us today by the
distinguished
representative of Austria, the tragedy
of ‘the Cypriot people has also had a direct effect
on the United Nations troops in Cyprus and on some
members of the diplomatic
corps in Nicosia. The
tragic death of an experienced career diplomat, the
United States Ambassador, Mr. Davies, cannot but be
a cause of deep regret. According to recent statements
in the United States press, he had informed his
superiors in good time that the Greek junta in Cyprus
was preparing a revolt against the legitimate Govemment of that country. The Ambassador himself paid
with his life as a result of the events in Cyprus
about which he had warned.

105. The Soviet side understands the need and
importance of ensuring the safety of both communities
of the population of Cyprus. However, this cannot
be ,achieved by outside pressure, particularly by the
use or threat of force. The use of force in Cyprus
cannot lead to a settlement of the Cyprus problem, but
can only make the situation more strained and acute
and create a serious threat to international
peace
and security. The security of the population and the
normalization of the relations between the communities
cannot be achieved by outside pressure.
106. The Soviet delegation considers that the United
Nations must, primarily through the Security Council,
intensify its efforts to achieve a settlement of the
Cyprus crisis in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter. The task of the United
Nations, the Security Council and all Members of
the Organization is to ensure the adoption of effective
measures aimed at preserving
Cyprus as an
independent and sovereign State.

100. The develonment of events in and around Cvnrus
runs counter to the process of the easing of
international tension and consequently affects the vital
interests of all peoples, of the entire world. It is
common knowledge that the tragedy of Cyprus is
causing particular concern to the small and weak
States Members of the United Nations.
101. The Soviet Union reaffirms its position of
principle, which is that the Republic of Cyprus should
remain a single, independent
and sovereign State.
The Soviet Union has consistently and invariably
defended and defends the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus.
It has consistently and firmly taken this line both in
the United Nations and in bilateral contacts with the
parties concerned as well as with members of the
Security Council and other States.

107. Attempts to settle the problem of Cyprus within
the narrow circle of NATO
member States, by
bypassing the United Nations, the Security Council
and its decisions, have failed completely and led only
to a resumption of hostilities in Cyprus. Once again,
and this time fully, it has been possible to see the
groundless and bankrupt nature of the “guarantees”
imposed on Cyprus by the Zurich-London
agreements.
The Council has been informed, in an official statement
by the representative of Cyprus, Mr. Rossides, of the
fact that these “guarantees” were imposed on Cyprus.
Not only have these “guarantees”
failed to ensure
peace and quiet for the Cypriot people, but they are
virtually being used for interests alien to it. There
can hardly be anyone today who doubts that the
entire system of the Zurich-London
agreements has
proved a complete failure and can no longer be
applied. It has died because it has not withstood
the test of time.

102, The Soviet delegation considers that to secure
full implementation
of the Security Council’s decisions
on the question of Cyprus would be in keeping with
the task of normalizing
the situation in Cyprus and
restoring constitutional
order and the legal Govemment of the Republic.
103. The key points for a settlement of the Cyprus
crisis are the complete cessation of foreign military
intervention
against the Republic of Cyprus; the
simultaneous withdrawal of all foreign troops from
its territory; the preservation of the territorial integrity
of the Cypriot
State; and the restoration
of
constitutional order and of the authority of the legal
constitutional Government.

108. There is no doubt that in order to ensure
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Cyprus, new guarantees must be provided which
must be really sound, reliable and effective, and
genuinely international.
109. As indicated in the statement
Government of 22 August,

104. In expressing serious concern at the tense
situation which continues to exist in and around
Cyprus in spite of the cease-tire declaration,
the
Soviet Union steadfastly considers, as in the past,
that the first and foremost task to be accomplished

of the Soviet

6‘ . . . the time has come for a representative
of States, mirroring
the political
image
13

forum
of the

modern world, to take up the discussion of the
Cyprus problem. With this aim in view, it has
become
urgent to convene an international
conference within the framework of the United
Nations, with the participation
of Cyprus, Greece,
Turkey and all States members of the Security
Council. Of course, other countries could also be
involved in the conference, specifically, from among
the non-aligned countries. It is at such a representative international conference that it will be possible,
jointly
and with the direct participation
of
representatives from the Republic of Cyprus, to
work out decisions that would effectively ensure
the existence of Cyprus as an independent, sovereign
and territorially
integral State and would meet the
interests of the Greek and Turkish Cypriots.”

113. What can one say about such fabrications? It
is very difficult to say which they contain in greater
degree: slander or cynicism. Or is it a clear indication
of the attempt of certain NATO forces to resolve the
Cyprus problem as was done before: within the narrow
confines of this military bloc, bypassing the Security
Council and the United Nations in order to serve
military and strategic interests at the expense of the
fundamental interests of the people of Cyprus and
in violation of the purposes and principles of the
Charter.
114. The proposal of the Soviet Union to convene
an international
conference on Cyprus within the
framework of the United Nations was dictated by the
sincere desire of the Soviet Government to arrive as
soon as possible at a just and lasting settlement of
the Cypriot crisis, in accordance with the resolutions
of the Security Council, which would ensure the
cessation of foreign military intervention against the
Republic of Cyprus, the immediate and simultaneous
withdrawal of all foreign troops and military personnel
from the territory of this island, the restoration of
constitutional
order and the authority of the legal
Government, and would also effectively guarantee the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Cyprus as a non-aligned State, a
Member of the United Nations, through the creation
of a new system of effective international guarantees.

110. The convening of such a conference and its
success would undoubtedly
be enhanced if all the
members of the Security Council supported the idea
of holding it. The conference would create a genuine
organizational
basis for the solution of the Cyprus
problem, particularly if it is borne in mind that the
machinery of the negotiations in Geneva, as is now
clear to all, has shown itself to be truly powerless
and bankrupt. The Geneva three-Power Declaration
of 30 July has proved to be ineffective
and
inconsistent
with resolution
353 (1974), and the
Soviet delegation has already stated its negative view
of that declaration in the Council. Now the main
participant
in that system of negotiations
and
“guarantees”
on Cyprus-the
United Kingdom-is
apparently rejecting it, as indicated by the proposals
made recently in the Council by the United representative.

115. The proposal of the Soviet Union to convene a
conference on Cyprus enjoys broad support among the
States Members of the United Nations, in particular
the non-aligned countries. It is actively supported by
two of the three parties involved in the conflict on
Cyprus: Greece and the Republic of Cyprus. Not one
State-not
even one of those which, because of their
narrow motives of self-interest, dislike this proposaldecided openly to reject it. Manoeuvres are being
invented and attempts are being made to do this through
the hands and mouths of others.

111, It is now clear to all that the Geneva negotiations
are a thing of the past and constitute a regrettable
phase in the development
of the Cyprus crisis. A
just and lasting settlement of the Cypriot problem in
accordance with the decisions of the Security Council
and the lofty purposes and principles of the Charter
can be achieved only in a broad-based international
forum within the framework of the United Nations.

116. The situation in Cyprus urgently requires that
the_ United Nations and, in particuhu, the Security
Council immediately
take effective measures in order
to implement the decisions of the Council on Cyprus.

112. In this connexion, we cannot but reject with
deep indignation the slanderous fabrications of some
officials and certain organs of the press to the effect
that the Soviet proposal for an international conference
on Cyprus is allegedly nothing more than propaganda
and an attempt to prolong the conflict and impede the
reaching of an agreement on a settlement in Cyprus.
Those who so distort reality even dare in their
unbridled and fantastic slander to attack the United
Nations and the Security Council, alleging that an
international
conference on Cyprus within
the
framework of the United Nations would be “interference by the United Nations”.
They forget that
the Security Council has now been dealing with the
problem of Cyprus for more than 10 years.

117. Since 22 August, the members of the Council
have held two consultations on the Soviet proposal.
Today the Soviet delegation is entitled to appeal
directly to the members of the Council, to the
representatives
of the Member
States and, in
particular, to the non-aligned countries, of which group
the Republic of Cyprus is an active member, to support
the proposal of the Soviet Union for the urgent
convening of an international
conference on Cyprus
in order to defend the independence and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus and to save that
sovereign State, which is now threatened
with
dismemberment
and with disappearance
as an
independent, non-aligned State.
14

118. This proposal of the Soviet Union is a historical
necessity. The Security Council as a whole, and the
members of the Council individually, would make a
serious mistake if they failed to support this proposal
of the Soviet Union. The members of the Council
have been aware of it since 22 August. There was
time enough to make the most thorough study of it
and to receive instructions. The time has come for
each one of us to say “yes” or “no” to the proposal
to convene an international conference on Cyprus.
We should like to have an answer to this question
today, at the present meeting of the Council.
119. Lie itself and the development of events have
also confirmed the correctness of the other Soviet
proposal [S/f1391 ] regarding Cyprus, namely the
dispatch of a special Security Council mission to
Cyprus. The need for such a measure was confirmed
by the fact that the Secretary-General himself, on his
own initiative and without the authorization of the
Council, decided to take upon himself the functions of
a Council mission and went to Cyprus himself.
However, this is not enough.
120. In this context, one can only express regret that
in the latest report of the Secretary-General [S/11473]
there are no details of the substance of his discussions
with the representatives of the two communities. Yet
it is known that the Government of Cyprus agrees
with the proposal of the Soviet Union to convene an
international conference on the problem of Cyprus.
It would welcome the adoption of this Soviet proposal
by all the interested parties and, of course, by the
members of the Council.
121. From press reports we know also that on
26 August the Secretary-General, after having met with
the Acting President of Cyprus, Mr. Clerides, and with
the leader of the Turkish community, Mr. Denktaz,
stated to journalists that the participants in that
meeting had discussed the proposal of the Soviet
Government regarding the convening of an international conference on Cyprus. In the view of the
Soviet delegation, information from the SecretaryGeneral on this important -matter would promote an
all-round discussion of ways and means of solving
the Cyprus problem and would be very helpful to
the work of the Council today.

‘\

124. The mission of the Council, in addition to the
main task of verifying on the spot how far the decisions
of the Council are being implemented and submitting
a report to the Council with appropriate recommendations, would also play yet another positive and very
important role: the very fact of the presence of a
Council mission in Cyprus would deter the parties
from unnecessary emotionalism and extremism and
from acts of violence in Cyprus and might facilitate
the establishment of contacts between the communities.
125. The tragic situation of the refugees in Cyprus,
their sufferings and the discussion on this matter in
the Council constitute yet another very important
reason which dictates the urgent sending of a Council
mission to Cyprus to investigate the situation on the
spot and to present objective information to the Council
on the conditions in the island as a whole and on the
situation of the refugees in particular.

126. We repeat again that the United Nations, and
above all the Security Council, must take a direct and
very active part in the settlement of the Cyprus
question so that the obsolete and bankrupt system
of “international guarantees” based on the ZurichLondon agreements, which were imposed on Cyprus in
1959-1960for the purpose of preserving the possibility
of interference by NATO in the domestic affairs of
Cyprus and the use of its territory for military and
strategic purposes, will be replaced by an effective
and reliable system of genuine international guarantees
of the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. Such a system
must safeguard the inalienable right of the Cypriot
people to decide their fate and settle their domestic
affairs themselves, without any outside interference.
127. The alarming events in Cyprus require an urgent
political settlement of the Cyprus problem. It is
essential to put an end to the deliberate procrastination
and delays on this matter. The task of eliminating
the hotbed of military tension in the eastern
Mediterranean and of safeguarding the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Cyprus requires responsible actions on the part of
all States which are really interested in intensifying
the process of international detente. That is precisely
the aim of the Soviet Government’s proposal for the
convening of an international conference on Cyprus.

122. We express our regret over the illness of the
Secretary-General and his absence from the meeting
of the Council today, and we sincerely hope that he
will very soon be restored to health.

128. The Soviet delegation is prepared to give the
most careful consideration to any other proposals
designed to achieve those objectives. It is prepared to
co-operate with other members of the Security Council
and of the United Nations as a whole in order. to
achieve a just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus
problem in accordance with the aspirations of the
Cypriot people and on the basis of the lofty principles
of the Charter and the decisions of the Council
regarding Cyprus.

123. It is important to send a Security Council
mission to Cyprus urgently, and the delegation of the
Soviet Union again draws the attention of the Council
to the expediency of sending such a mission. This
would be an important step by the Council which
would be aimed at settling the Cyprus crisis in
accordance with its resolutions and the lofty purposes
and principles of the Charter.
15

129. Should the Security Council fail to act, it will
rightly be subjected to serious criticism
at the
forthcoming
twenty-ninth
session of the General
Assembly. The responsibility
for the fate of Cyprus
is borne not only by the members of the Council but
by all the Members of the United Nations, and above
all by the group of non-aligned countries, since the
Republic of Cyprus is an active member of that
group *

organ of the United Nations for the maintenance
of peace and international security, must concentrate
its efforts on ensuring measures designed to achieve
those noble purposes. The Council as a whole and
each member of the Council individually
must make
every effort to ensure the immediate implementation
of the Council’s decisions on the Cyprus problem,
which constitute the basis for a just and lasting
settlement of the Cyprus crisis in accordance witlr
the lofty principles and purposes of the Charter-that
is, a settlement that will safeguard the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Cyprus, a State Member of the United Nations
and a non-aligned country.

130. With regard to the draft resolution before the
Council, the delegation of the USSR does not intend
to oppose it, even though it regards it as obviously
inadequate. Unfortunately,
there is no reflection in
that text of the main questions relating to the settlement of the Cyprus question: the need for a cessation
of foreign military intervention,
the withdrawal of
foreign troops and military personnel, the restoration
of constitutional
order and the authority of the legal
constitutional
Government,
and the safeguarding of
the territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus.

135. As PRESIDENT
of the Council, I should like
to say that no other representatives have asked to
be allowed to speak before the vote on the threePower draft resolution on the question of refugees.
I shall now put to the vote draft resolution S/11479 as
revised orally.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

13 1. The Soviet delegation would have preferred the
draft contained in a working paper submitted by the
representative of Cyprus, since that text dealt with the
basic questions and aspects of the Cyprus crisis.

The draft resolution

was adopted unanimously.

1

136. The PRESIDENT
(translation j?om Russian):
I shall now call on those representatives who have
asked to be allowed to speak after the vote.

132. In this connexion, we feel it necessary to state
that the question of refugees, although it is a very
serious, acute, tragic and urgent question, is not the
basic issue in the Cyprus crisis and in the settlement
of that crisis. It is an outgrowth, a consequence of
the uprising against the legal constitutional
Government and of the foreign interference in the internal
affairs of Cyprus; it is a result of the presence and
military
activities of foreign troops and military
personnel on that island.

137. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom):
Up until
the time you took the floor, Mr. President, this had
been a helpful and constructive
debate. Having
attacked my country in the way you did, you will no
doubt not be surprised if I retaliate in kind.
138. You saw fit in your position as President of the
Security Council first of all to attack the United
Kingdom for forcing an agreement upon Archbishop
Makarios.
I would point out to you that the
Archbishop
lived with that agreement
perfectly
contentedly for 14 years. Your country voted in favour
of the restoration of the constitutional
arrangements
contained in that agreement of l%O. Indeed, even in
your speech today, you referred to restoring the
constitutional
Government in Cyprus-which,
in the
next breath, you said was forced upon an unwilling
Cyprus administration
by my country in 1960. You
then attacked our motive in the negotiations
that
have taken place so far. You said that the purpose
was to preserve a hotbed of military tension in the
eastern Mediterranean.

133. The Soviet delegation would like to make the
following
statement
with regard to operative
paragraph 7 of. the draft resolution. It is well known
that attempts to settle the Cyprus problem within the
narrow circle of the member States of NATO have
met with complete failure and that there are no grounds
to expect a settlement of the problem by such methods.
The
Soviet
delegation
understands
operative
paragraph 7 of the resolution to be an appeal to find
effective means to implement the main provisions of
the Security Council decisions on the Cyprus problem
and effectively safeguard the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the State of Cyprus.
As the delegation of the USSR has ’ already said
today, those are precisely the aims of the USSR
proposal for the convening as soon as possible,
within the framework of the United Nations, of a
representative
international
conference to consider
the question of Cyprus.

139. If you will forgive me for saying so, Mr. President, your speech was unrealistic, it was irrelevant,
it was unhelpful and it was mischievous. As I said,
until the moment you took the floor we had had a
debate that was addressing itself to the realities of the
situation.

134. The adoption of the draft resolution on refugees
should not divert the attention or efforts of-the Council
from solving the key problems connected with a
settlement in Cyprus. The Council, as the principal

1 See resolution 361 (1974).

16

140. In your speech, Mr. President, you said that the
non-aligned nations in the United Nations were in
favour of the Soviet proposal for a conference.
But you do not speak for the non-aligned nations.
With respect I must say that you represent one of
the most aligned nations in this whole Organization.
The non-aligned group of nations has not in fact said
that it is in favour of the proposed conference. The
Security Council has not said that it is in favour of
the conference. The representatives of the non-aligned
nations sitting round this table have not said that
they are in favour of the conference. Mr. President,
if you thought there was a genuine opinion in favour
of that proposal for a conference, you would no doubt
have had the forensic courage to have presented a
‘draft resolution on the subject for the Council to
consider. You have not done that. You are a man of
great experience in the Organization.
I believe that
the reason you have not presented a draft resolution
calling for a conference on the lines you suggest is very
simply that you know there are not sufficient votes
in favour of it round this table.

144. This resolution-of
which we were one of the
sponsors-has
those broad objectives. Unlike you,
Mr. President, we are grateful to the Secretary-General
for his recent visit to Cyprus. Unlike you, we welcome
the fact that representatives of the two communities
in Cyprus have talked and will, we hope, go on talking.
The United Kingdom is very happy to see these talks
taking place. We are entirely content that they ‘should
take place between the representatives of the two
communities
alone. May I say that that is a very
peculiar position for a country which, according to
you, is trying to force a pro-NATO
settlement on a
non-aligned nation like Cyprus. We are quite content
that these discussions should take place between the
representatives of the communities
alone. We stand’
ready to help them in any way that we can, and I think
both communities know that.
145. Our hope is that while concentrating initially
on the most urgent humanitarian problems, these talks
will broaden in scope to cover questions of political
substance. For in fact, Mr. President, it is difficult
to separate humanitarian and political issues. Our main
concern is that the parties should be talking about the
future of their island. We do not mind where they
talk; we do not mind who chairs the meeting nor,
indeed, who decides the agenda-and
they, Mr. President, certainly do not need any mission to find out
the facts in Cyprus; they are the facts in,Cyprus-but
we do want the talks to succeed.

141. You have also talked about a mission and you
have said that people are in favour of a mission. I put
the same point to you: if in fact there was a groundswell
of opinion in favour of a Security Council mission to
Cyprus I would have expected you, Mr. President, to
have moved an amendment to the draft resolution
which we are considering today; you have not done so.
And again, with respect, that leads me to believe
that in fact you know-and
as President of the
Council you would of course be in a very strong
position to know-what
the reality of opinion round
this table is.

146. All of us in the Council are, I think, gravely
concerned about the desperate plight of the refugees
on the island. And, with respect, I would say to the
representative of Turkey that it is not just a matter,
as far as we are concerned, of dramatic presentation
-to use his phrase. I am not sure whether what he
said was directed at the United Kingdom or at others,
but may I say to him that we take that problem very
seriously and we are deeply concerned about it.
We welcome the fact that the Secretary-General
has
sent the United Nations High Commissioner
for
Refugees to the island. We understand that he is very
shortly to make his report and, for our part, the United
Kingdom has already taken urgent measures to give
some humanitarian
relief to the refugees, several
thousands of whom are at present being cared for in
our sovereign base areas on the island.

142. Nobody could have failed to be struck by the
depth of feeling and by the sincerity that both sides,
the main protagonists in this dispute, exhibited in the
debate this morning. From both of them we had an
exposition of their positions in this case which was at
times moving, obviously, sincere, obviously deeply
felt, and it seems to me that there is a great deal to
be said for both sides of the argument. That is precisely
why our function today should be to try and isolate
the common points of agreement between the two
sides, rather than to try and isolate the points of
discord. Both of them today said they would be
prepared to enter into negotiations once more, and
although the terms upon which they said they would
be prepared to do so differed, that fact on its own is
encouraging and, we hope, it gives us something to
build upon in the future.

147. What is the scope of the refugee problem as
we know it? It is very difficult to get accurate estimates,
but the Cyprus Red Cross is working on a refugee
population of about 200,000 people, approximately
one third of the total population of the island. We
are told that will mean an expenditure per month -of
2.3 million Cyprus pounds on food. We are told that
there is a need for 30,000 five-man tents, which is
an ominous figure and a sombre one. We are told
that there is a need for 11 million Cyprus pounds for
the establishment of 70 to 90 camp sites and a need
for household furniture for no less than 40,000 family
units. Those are sombre estimates and they present a

143. May I, Mr. President, since you raised it yet
again, deal with the United Kingdom’s
role in this
affair. Our role has been and will remain to be able
to do everything we can in the Council, in capitals
and on the ground in Cyprus to promote a just
settlement which is in the interests of the people of
Cyprus as a whole, and we will do everything we
can to alleviate the plight of the refugees.
17

very grave picture, particularly as we believe it is very
important that the situation should not get frozen. Wk
surely do not wish to create yet another group of
semi-permanent
refugees, with all the bitterness and
hatred that this may entail. We would hope very
strongly that any settlement Would enshrine the
principle that any law-abiding Cypriot should be able to
live wherever he or she wishes. And that, Mr. President, is a principle
to which, again, we attach
importance.

United Kingdom did not understand that I spoke as
such and not as President of the Council indicates
that, to put it mildly, he is ignoring the facts. How
can we talk about a realistic approach to assessing
the situation in the eastern Mediterranean if we cannot
even determine what the situation is here at the !
Council table? The United Kingdom representative
is obviously inaccurate and he is misrepresenting the ;
facts. I was speaking about the failure of the,
guarantees imposed on Cyprus, not about the
Constitution of Cyprus; and that the guarantees were
imposed on Cyprus is something we have heard in
an official statement made here at this table by the
I
Cyprus representative.

148. The United Kingdom’s main concern today has
been quite simply that the actions of this Council
should help to bring the parties together, not to drive
them further apart. To bring them together is an
achievement which will require courage and good faith.
We regard as not the least important part of the
resolution that paragraph which:

152. The contacts I have with the representatives of
the non-aligned countries in my capacity as President
of the Security Council and also in my capacity as
Soviet representative are very close and friendly, and
I am better acquainted with their views on the matter
under consideration
and on the USSR proposal
concerning
a conference
on Cyprus than the
representative of the United Kingdom is.

“Culls upon all parties, as a demonstration
of
good faith, to take, both individually
and in
co-operation with each other, all steps which may
promote, . . . successful negotiations’*.
We are indeed asking for restraint, for moderation
and, if I may say so, for magnanimity,
for, as I have
said in the Council before, only a settlement which
is acceptable to -all the people of Cyprus can be a
lasting one. And I do not think, either, that we or the
world should forget that the majority in Cyprus have
rights as well.

153. As to the introduction of draft resolutions and
amendments, each delegation is entitled to decide for
itself when such action should be taken.
154. The reaction of the United Kingdom representative to the statement by the Soviet. representative
is the most convincing evidence that the United
Kingdom representative is still obsessed by the idke
fixe of deciding the fate of the people of Cyprus
within the narrow circle of the NATO countries rather
than against a broad international background within
the framework of the United Nations and that he is
trying to push things backward instead of helping them
to move forward.

149. I am sure, too, that all members of the Council
would wish to pay a tribute to the skill and patience
with which UNFICYP
has conducted itself on the
ground during these difficult days. It has had a hard
time and I, like other members of the Council,
would wish to pay a tribute to those who have died or
been wounded in carrying out that task. I note that
the Secretary-General wilI aim to make recommendations to the Council on UNFICYP’s
future role. This
will of course have to be determined in the light of
whatever settlement is negotiated.

155. Mr. LECOMPT
(France) (interpretation
fion?
French): Since we met last, nearly two weeks ago,
a number of new events have taken place in the
development
of the crisis in Cyprus and in the
procedures in accordance with which a settlement
should be brought about. We cannot separate either
aspect of the problem from the other; we will take
up each in turn. But, first, let me say that I am very
pleased that this Council, which has constantly had
the Cyprus question before it, can today exchange
views on this matter which, in so many ways, is a
tragic one.

150. I do not think this is a time for bitter argument
-certainly
not’as far as Cyprus is concerned. All of
us round this table, I hope, want to see a settlement
in Cyprus which will enable all the people of that
island to live as they would wish-in
peace and
security, with honour and with freedom, and a
freedom to decide their own future. That is the principle
upon which my Government
has approached this
dispute from the beginning and it is a travesty to
describe it in the terms which you, Mr. President,
have used-today. I hope therefore that this resolution
-adopted,
I am happy to say, unanimously-may
serve to promote that result.

156. Let me begin with the questions of procedure
which have just been much discussed. The French
Government has considered very carefuhy a number
of recent ideas, including, of course, the one the
Soviet Government
officially transmitted
to it last
Friday. We thought it only appropriate that one of
the ‘permanent
members of the Security Council
should ask the Council to consider what procedures
should be followed to help settle the crisis and to
stress the fact that some of the present difftculties

151. The PRESIDENT
(trunslarion from Russian):
Speaking as the representative of the UNION
OF
SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS,
I should like to
say that the very fact that the representative of the
18

are the result of the fact that the negotiations called
for in resolutions 353 (1974), 357{l-1974)and 360 (1974)
have not resumed.

make our consideration of the crisis as unemotional
aspossible. There is little to gain from overdramatizing
the situation or by changing procedures when the
interested parties remain deaf to appeals to reason in
one framework or another. Let us face things squarely;
let us see what the root causes of the situation are
and what the Council has already suggested on the
subject. I would say this in that connexion. It is
true-and the French delegation was the first to point
it out here in this very chamber-that on 15 July
a regime which has fortunately been replaced disrupted
the very delicate balance which existed in Cyprus.
I might recall that the nine countries of the European
Community, on 16 July, expressed their opposition
to any intervention or interference which would
call into question the independence and territorial
integrity of Cyprus, and on 17 July they declared to
the Government in Ankara that they understood its
concern about the plight of the Turkish Cypriot
community.

157. We are all well aware of the fact that questions
of procedure are of primary importance and very
delicate. Here we might wonder whether the
negotiations required by the resolutions that I have
just mentioned have been compromised once and for
all. Some say they have; others deny it. Perhaps the
best thing to do would be to hear what the parties to
the negotiations have to say on the subject; and since
there is no unanimous view that the ways and
means recommended by existing international treaties
and the Council have failed, perhaps there is some
reason to continue to believe that it is still necessary
and useful for talks to resume-talks in which the
primary role would be played by the parties: to begin
with, perhaps, between the representatives of the two
Cypriot communities, whom the Secretary-General
has recently been successful in bringing together.
at the same table.

162. It is true that the constitutional structure, or,
rather, the good-neighbourliness which was provided
for in international agreements, functioned to the ,
disadvantage of the Turkish minority in Cyprus. It is,
equally true, however, that the inhabitants of the
island were not massacring one another and that the
situation had not been serious for several years.

158. Of course, that is no reason why we ourselves
should not take an over-all view of the entire problem.
The French Government would make the point,
however, that it is very much attached to the primary
role which in matters of peace-keeping should be
played by the Security Council. The Council can have
no better defenders than its members. It is up to the
Council members to shoulder their responsibilities
and ask whether they might not perform more useful
work in a framework other than that of the Security
Council. The French delegation has never hesitated
to express its opinions very clearly and to put forward
constructive proposals in that capacity.

163. It is true, too, that for the past seven weeks
a violent situation has been imposed on Cyprus,
transforming the independent and sovereign Republic
which is part of the Organization into an arena for
an unequal confrontation between two countries and
two communities growing increasingly hostile.
164. The mere mention of those facts, which are
well-known to everyone, leads to the conclusion that
force alone cannot be the solution. The foundations
of a just peace and a safer order must be defined. The
Council did that in its resolution 353 (1974), a basic.
resolution that poses a number of fundamental
principles: non-interference, cease-fire, withdrawal
of military forces having no right to be in Cyprus,
constitutional
tripartite
negotiations;
order,
Subsequently, in view of the fact that the problem had
worsened, my delegation recalled and supplemented
the principles of resolution 353 (1974) by encouraging
the adoption of Security Council resolution 360
(1974), a resolution which to my regret has once
again been attacked by one of the parties.

159. However, may I repeat that I think the parties
concerned should say what they think about any
proposal that might help them to bring about a peaceful
settlement of their dispute. They should be heard.
For example, do they prefer toremain alone, or would
they like to be assisted by an intermediary, by
several intermediaries, or by a group of States? Would
they like to have a meeting soon, or are they resigned
to letting valuable time pass? It is clear that we cannot
impose any answers to these questions, even if it
is up to us to express encouragement and to consider
certain appropriate frameworks for negotiations.
160. Let me now turn to matters of substance.
Our opinion on the situation in Cyprus is very simple:
there is every reason why people should live in peace
on the island; but there is a confrontation between
exacerbated nationalisms which both seek support
from abroad and thus facilitate or provoke intervention
by other States. Our problem is to deal with those
forms of nationalism, which may also be found
elsewhere in the world.

165. Since that resolution was adopted, or, rather
-because we should not confuse cause with effectsince the events of 14 August, a new emergency has
aviser. The fact that the refugees in Cyprus are so
numerous and so sorely tried poses problems that are
truly tragic and particularly serious in view of the
fact that the failure to negotiate of the parties who
might try to settle those problems compromises the
effectiveness of whatever action our Organization
might take. What can we do other than improvise?

161. If this analysis is correct-and I doubt that
anyone would deny that it is-our first duty is to
19

What can we offer in any case other than means that
are inadequate to relieve the distress ofthe victims and
bind their wounds? In the circumstances, it is necessary
and useful for the Council to have before it a
humanitarian and political resolution especially dealing
with the problems of the refugees.

of this state of affairs, which is at variance with the
decisions adopted here.
168. Now, concerning something else we should not
forget, my delegation would say that maintenance of
the integrity and sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus
is among the necessary preconditions of a settlement.
The binationalism of a State, a legal form to be:’
determined in negotiations, is not a rare” or difficult
thing to set in motion, provided men who must live
together feel they are neither oppressed not
oppressors. I recognize that the island of Cyprus,
occupied by what have delicately been called foreign
troops, is further than ever from giving a feeling of
tranquillity and equity to the refugees and others who
see it undergoing this hour of trial, We hear all too
many disturbing statements those days, some-about
the threat of .guerrilla warfare and others about the
creation of a Turkish Cypriot republic, the unilateral
declaration of which would force the other side to
negotiate.

166. The resolution just adopted unanimously does
have that dual nature. Taking up an idea very
appropriately expressed by several non-aligned
countries in the Council, the resolution takes note of
the outstanding job done by the Secretary-General,
who has promoted a resumption of contacts among the
qualified representatives of the two communities.
Our resolution encourages the Secretary-General to
pursue his efforts in that direction. The essential
role of UNFICYP is noted. But since the goodwill
and great skill of the Secretary-General cannot do
everything, the resolution lays stress on the role of the
authorities on both sides: of the nine operative
paragraphs, five make urgent appeals to the parties
concerned. Those appeals are each and every one
different, but they. are all aimed at the same thing:
to bring about a detente on Cyprus, in particular
through direct intercommunal talks, to which I referred
at the beginning of this statement. It was particularly
necessary to recall that even, and above all, in troubled
times the fundamental rights of human beings should
be respected. That is mentioned in paragraph 3.
Quite rightly, one of the paragraphs of our resolution,
paragraph 4, urges the parties to permit refugees who
wish to do so to return to their homes in peaceful
circumstances such as to guarantee the safety of the
persons concerned. The text is designed to be
practical, but paragraphs 7 and 9 are more political
in nature. Our aim is to establish a certain link
between the concrete appeals in the preceding
paragraphs and the appeals we are making to ensure
that on the basis of these first signs of goodwill
there will be an expansion of direct negotiations
‘encompassing larger, more decisive questions.
Paragraph 9 draws a kind of conclusion. It contains a
further implicit appeal, expressing our conviction
that the speedy implementation of the resolution will
assist the achievement of a satisfactory settlement.

169. While admitting that we have today’ touched
upon only upon part of the problem, I would in
conclusion like to say that mutual understanding,
restraint in the defence- of the interests at issue, a
spirit of political justice and a real willingness to
succeed are necessary if we wish to prevent a
dangerous conflict between the-nations and the feelings
of nationalism I have already mentioned. It is no
accident that the urgent appeals of the resolution we
have just adopted have been made by three European
countries which on their own continent have already
had cruel experience of how harmful nationalism. can
be. Nor is it accidental that France, a member of the
European Community, has co-sponsored this
resolution with the United Kingdom, another country
in the Community which was one of those that took
the initiative in discharging its. special responsibilities
in Cyprus. I must assure the Council that the French
Government, like the Governments of the Nine,
remains basically open-minded about any useful undertaking in this difftcult matter which once again confronts us.
170. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian):
Speaking as the representative of the UNION OF
SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, I should like to
thank the representative of France for saying that he
shares the concern expressed by the Soviet delegation
with regard to the situation in Cyprus and that he is
willing to make every effort to speed up a political
settlement of the problem.

167. In listing, as I have just done, the reasons why
my delegation co-sponsored this resolution, I have not
been afraid to repeat what has already been said by
previous speakers. I was not afraid to do so
because my delegation very willingly took part in
the preparation of the text, which encourages all
forms of proper behaviour, as far as possible removed
from any temptation to use force. We are well aware
of the fact that not all the provisions of previous
resolutions have been put into effect. This is something
to be deplored. I fully appreciate, Mr. President, the
sentiments which you, as representative of the Soviet
Union, have just expressed in connexion with this
failure on the part of the Council to implement
its resolutions. The French delegation can only agree
with those who are alarmed over the continuation

171. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): First
I should like to express to the Secretary-General the
thanks of my delegation and my Government for his.
recent visits to Cyprus, Greece and Turkey to discuss
the situation on Cyprus. In particular, we commend
him for his statesmanlike role in bringing about a
meeting on humanitarian questions in which Acting
President Qerides, Vice-President Denktas and the
20

for Refugees

humanitarian functions, in all areas of Cyprus and in
regard to all sections of the population”.

172. The value of such talks between the leaders
of the Greek Cypriot and the Turkish
Cypriot
communities
cannot be over-emphasized.
For the
sake of all of the people of Cyprus, we urge the
international
community
to make every effort to
help create a negotiating climate which can produce
constructive solutions, particularly
of humanitarian
questions.

177. The effort to render assistance to the people
of Cyprus is a necessary emergency
measure.
However, the imperative and urgent need is to resume
negotiations. A negotiated settlement of the Cyprus
dispute offers the best hope for all of the people on
the island to live in peace and security.

United Nations
participated.

High

Commissioner

178. The United States delegation
supports the
resolution just adopted by the Council and commends
the spirit of compromise with which various points
of view converged to produce it. Perhaps each
delegation-and
I would not exclude my own-would
have preferred some variations in the text. None the
less, in our view the adoption of this resolution can
make positive contributions
to easing the plight of
the refugees and should pave the way for further
efforts to get broader negotiations under way again.

173. We have heard at length today from one
representative of a special formula for peace which his
Government is trying to sell. To persuade others to
accept it, we have heard some fairy tales from another
era-vague
charges of mysterious machinations
by
unidentified members of NATO. These stories might
amuse or titillate the readers of summertime
fiction
on the beaches of the Crimea, but such fairy tales
will not help us solve the real problems of Cyprus.
I think in this regard we can all agree that an absolute
prerequisite
for solving the critical humanitarian
problems on Cyprus is strict compliance with the
cease-fire, as called for in previous Security Council
resolutions.
174. The United States shares the concern of the
Secretary-General
and the parties for the plight of
the refugees from both communities who have been
made homeless. We commend
the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the United Nations
High Commissioner
for Refugees as well as other
humanitarian organizations for their outstanding efforts
to give emergency assistance, particularly
to those
whose lives have been dislocated. We urge all of the
parties concerned to adhere scrupulously to international agreements concerning the human rights of
civilians during times of conflict.

179. In closing, may 1 say a simple but no less
heartfelt “thank you” to those who have spoken words
of condolence on the death of Ambassador Roger
Davies.
180. The PRESIDENT
(translation from Russian):
Speaking as the representative of the UNION
OF
SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS,
I should like to
say that I do not think the Security Council is the
proper place for business jargon and such expressions
as “sell”,
which was used by the United States
representative here. The Soviet Union is not selling its
proposal for the convening
of an international
conference on Cyprus but is seriously and sincerely
proposing a broad international forum to consider the
problem of Cyprus, to consider how to settle that
problem with the participation
of all members of the
Council and under United Nations auspices and how
to replace the obsolete system of ‘guarantees”
for
Cyprus, which has been a complete failure and fiasco,
with a broad international guarantee. The word “sell”
is thus inappropriate, to say the-least.

175. Upon the recommendation
of the late United
States Ambassador to Cyprus, Roger Davies, the
United States has responded to appeals from the
International
Committee
of the Red Cross for
emergency humanitarian assistance. We have donated
$3.1 million as of now. This sum includes a cash
contribution of $725,000, plus air-lifts of relief supplies
and emergency equipment such as tents, blankets and
other provisions. The United States stands ready to
provide additional assistance based on recommendations from the International
Red Cross and the High
Commissioner.
It is our view that such assistance
goes to the heart of the issues before the Council
today. We therefore appeal to the international
community
to join with us in responding to this
humanitarian effort.

181. As to the beaches of the Crimea, they are
magnificent
and the Soviet Union’s proposal for
convening a conference was read with satisfaction
and approval on those beachesdnd
not only on the
beaches of the Crimea, but on other beaches too, and
throughout the territory of the Soviet Union. The
Soviet people fully support this proposal by the
Government of the USSR.
182. While on the subject of beaches, I think we
could say quite definitely that on the beaches of
Miami-and
not only on beaches in the United States
of America-an
article on the question of Cyprus by
the journalist
M. Berlin in the New York Post
of 28 August was read with great interest.

176. The United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in
Cyprus has performed courageously in assisting the
parties and international
relief agencies to carry out
their crucial humanitarian responsibilities.
The United
States underscores its support for resolution 359 (1974),
which demands that all parties co-operate with
UNFICYP
in “carrying
out its tasks, including

183. Mr. HUANG
Hua (China) (translation
from
Chinese): At the meeting on 1 August [I789fh meeting],
21

the Chinese delegation
made a comprehensive
statement of our position concerning the Cyprus
question. Based on this position, we decided to vote
in favour of the draft resolution contained in document
S/11479. Meanwhile, on the basis of our consistent
position, we wish to state our reservation in regard
to paragraph 8, which deals with UNFICYP.

190. We have listened with great attention to the
statements made by the representatives of Cyprus,
Greece and Turkey. The situation of the refugees,
of people uprooted from their homes-whether
of
Greek or Turkish origin-is
very grim indeed. Their
exact number is not yet available to us, but it greatly
shocks us that around one third of the population of
Cyprus have fled their homes in search of a safe haven,
leaving behind their possessions. My delegation must
express its deep regret that the major cause of the
sufferings has been the failure of the parties concerned
in the fighting fully to implement the resolutions of the
Security Council.

184. The Soviet representative has been repeatedly
peddling the so-called new proposal of the Soviet
Government on what it calls the permanent members
of the Security Council jointly or in parallel providing
international guarantees for Cyprus and on convening
an international conference with the participation
of
all States members of the Council plus the parties
concerned.

191. In the spirit of today’s meeting, we should like
to refer especially to resolution 359 (1974), paragraph 4
of which

185. We deem it necessary to point out that this
so-called new proposal of the Soviet Union is nothing
new. As everyone is aware, the Soviet Union has long
harboured aggressive designs on the Mediterranean.

“Demands...
that ail parties co-operate with the
United Nations Force in Cyprus in carrying out
its tasks, including humanitarian
functions, in all
areas of Cyprus and in regard to all sections of the
population on Cyprus”.

186. In the recent tense situation in Cyprus, it has
taken great pains to exploit the contradictions,
fan
the flames, sow discord and create confusion so as to
gain profit thereby. While making a show of its force
in rivalry with the other super-Power, it has made a
host of declarations both within and outside the United
Nations. Recently, it put forward a so-called new
proposal on convening an international conference; it
has stressed time and again its proposal for dispatching
a so-called United Nations special mission and it talks
about the establishment of a so-called “international
guarantee” by the five permanent members, as though
it was so much concerned about the interests of the
Cypriot people and the peace in this area. As a matter
of fact, its sole aim is, to put it bluntly, to subject
Cyprus with great haste to the over-all intervention
and guarantee of this super-Power under the cover of
hypocritical words, so that it can further expand its
influence in this area and contend with the other
super-Power for control ,and hegemony over the
eastern Mediterranean.
As the Chinese saying goes,
“The trick is all too evident to every man in the
street”.

192. My delegation finds it increasingly difftcult to
understand a situation where the parties concerned
seem to have chosen to ignore the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We know the Cyprus problem is
very complex, but it is going to become even more so
if parties continue to disregard the Council /resolutions.
193. My delegation would like to appeal to the parties
to ensure the full implementation
of the Council
resolutions and help facilitate the efforts undertaken
by UNFICYP
to lessen the suffering and hardship
of the population
of Cyprus, be it of Turkish or
Greek origin. UNFICYP
should be enabled to continue
to undertake its humanitarian and relief measures, a
task that its offtcers and men have carried out with
great devotion and in an exemplary fashion. We must
ensure that no obstacles will be placed in the way of
UNFICYP
in carrying out these activities.
194. My delegation
is happy to note that the
Secretary-General
has succeeded in bringing the
leaders of the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot
communities together, in his efforts to overcome the
difficulties concerning the humanitarian aspects of the
problem. We hope that he will be able to-find a solution
for the problem of refugees which will include the
possibility of those among them who wish to do so
returning to their homes and possessions. The efforts
of the Secretary-General
with respect to the talks
between the two communities should, in the view of
my delegation, be continued and eventually be enlarged
in scope in order that he may assist the parties
concerned in their endeavours to reach a negotiated
settlement regarding the future of the island.

187. Consequently, in order to uphold the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus,
it is imperative to guard against and oppose any
schemes of all outside forces, particularly
the two
super-Powers.
188. The PRESIDENT
(trunslution
from Russian):
Speaking as the representative of the UNION
OF
SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS,
I should like to
say that we have just heard an astounding example
of how reality can be distorted.
189. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): My delegation
would like to express its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his report and pay a tribute to his efforts
to alleviate the sufferings of the civilian population
caught in the fighting in Cyprus.

195. With regard to negotiations
aiming at the
restoration of peace, normality
and constitutional
order in Cyprus, my delegation is of the view that
22

the two communities of the island-the
Greek Cypriot
community
and the Turkish Cypriot communitywhich will be primarily and directly affected by the
future constitutional
and political order, and whose
lives are going to be vitally influenced by it, should
indeed be the parties which must come together and
talk. The United Nations should be able actively to
assist the two communities in their talks in order to
achieve an agreed solution for the problem of the future
political order in Cyprus. Of course, we do realize
that from a realistic point of view Greece and Turkey
will certainly exercise great influence on the talks. It
seems to my delegation, however, that the future of
Cyprus as a sovereign and independent
country
should be discussed and agreed upon by the people
of Cyprus themselves. No outsiders, however closely
involved, should do it for them.

Cyprus as a non-aligned
guaranteed.

State are preserved

and

200. Before ending I should like to put it on record
that our affirmative vote on the resolution just adopted
does not in any way compromise or prejudice our
position on resolution 360 (1974).
201. Mr. MVOGO-ENAMA
(United Republic of
Cameroon) (interpretafion
from French):
We wish
to express the hope that the Secretary-General
will
have a speedy recovery, and at the same time we would
like to express to him our profound gratitude for the
important. report contained in document S/ 11473,
which he prepared after his recent trip to Cyprus
and to the capitals of the Powers which are guarantors
of the independence,
sovereignty
and territorial
integrity of Cyprus. The report gives us a glimmer of
hope about the future of Cyprus. It is encouraging to
note that, as the Secretary-General says, all the parties
profoundly wish to reach a negotiated settlement in
spite of the many obstacles which are still delaying a
solution.

196. My delegation has listened with great interest to
the proposals made by the representative of the Soviet
Union with regard to the convening of an international
conference on Cyprus within the framework of the
United Nations and the sending of a special mission
of the Security Council to Cyprus. We think that
these ideas merit serious study, especially if the Geneva
talks do not seem to succeed in bringing the Cyprus
problem nearer to a solution. My delegation hopes in
due time to be able to give its views on those ideas.

202. In voting for the resolution just adopted by
the Council my delegation wished to express its
profound concern over the serious humanitarian
problems of the entire population
of Cyprus. My
delegation wishes to support all the initiatives our
Secretary-General
has taken to try to find a solution
to this problem.

197. Indonesia’s view continues to be that Cyprus
should remain a sovereign, independent and nonaligned country if the solution of the problem of Cyprus
is going to contribute to peace and security in the
area and in the world. It was with those considerations
in mind that my delegation voted for draft resolution
S/l 1479.

203. All the inhabitants of Cyprus have the right to
remain where they have always lived. This is perfectly
in keeping with a generally accepted principle,
a
principle contained in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights: the right of every one to freedom of
movement,
and especially to remain where he is.
Every inhabitant of Cyprus has the right, then, to
remain where he has always lived-in
his home.

198. Mr. AL-KHUDHAIRY
(Iraq): My delegation
voted in favour of draft resolution S/11479 as Iraq,
like all other non-aligned
countries,
is deeply
concerned at the tragic human misery and sufferings
which the Cypriot people in its two communities
are enduring. A peaceful solution to this humanitarian
problem becomes an urgent matter.

204. My delegation hopes that the parties concerned,
whose great respect for human rights cannot be
doubted in any way, will not allow themselves to
be forced to violate one of the basic principles of
this Declaration. The Cypriots who are now away
from their homes because of the course of events
should be allowed to return home without further
let or hindrance.

199. However, we believe that efforts leading to such
a solution must include efforts to solve the political
and fundamental aspects of the whole question. It is
somewhat impractical
and unrealistic to attempt to
separate the two aspects of the problem-that
is, the
humanitarian and the political. The interested parties
therefore-as,
indeed, paragraph 7 of the resolution
which the Council has just unanimously
adopted
stresses-must
enter into negotiations
so that
peaceful and permanent settlement of the problem of
Cyprus may be achieved in an atmosphere
of
understanding and mutual good faith. Every effort
must be made by all parties to encourage the process
of negotiations between them and to see to it that all
obstacles to these negotiations,
be they real or
imagined, are surmounted and removed, so that the
independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of

205. With regard to the future of the island my
delegation has the hope that the talks envisaged in
paragraph 2 of the resolution just adopted by the
Council will not be confined to humanitarian problems.
We believe that those talks should relate primarily
to the elements which can serve as a basis for a
settlement of the problem in Cyprus which respects
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Cyprus.
206. Mr. CAMPBELL
(Australia): The Australian
Foreign Minister has announced a Government grant
23

of 50,000 Australian dollars to the International
Committee of the Red Cross to assist its relief work
in Cyprus. My Government shares with others the
deepest concern for the welfare of those unfortunate
persons whose lives and livelihoods have been
disturbed as a consequence of recent events on the
island. This contribution, which corresponds to
approximately $US 75,000, is a partial national
response to the appeal which has been launched by
’ the Committee to finance extended Red Cross activities
on Cyprus over the next few months because, as
Senator Willesee stated, it was hoped that Australians
who were concerned about the distress of refugee
Cypriots would supplement the Government’s grant
by making their own individual contributions to the
Red Cross appeal.
207. In this connexion it is of course relevant that,
as the representative of Turkey mentioned this
afternoon, Australia has provided a welcome for a
number of settlers from Cyprus and has been enriched
by their contributions to our community.

General in particular, in the exclusive interests of
Cyprus and its people. We should like to think that
such simple terms of reference will continue to guide
the Council’s deliberations and thus assistthe Cypriots
to settle their future for themselves. We feel that the
Council has today adopted a fresh and constructive
approach in this direction. The United Kingdom
delegation, representing one of the guarantor Powers,
has played a straight forward part in this approach,
together with the other two sponsors-Austria and
France. From today’s statements we can hope for
a similar spirit on the part of the other two guarantors
and, above all, that new promise for Cyprus will flow
from the talks between the leaders of the Cypriot
communities.
213. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO (Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic) ffrunslarion from Russiun):
The Byelorussian delegation voted in favour of the
draft resolution submitted by Austria, France and the
United Kingdom in spite of its limitations and
inadequacy and in spite of the fact that it does not,
unfortunately, touch upon the basic problems on the
solution of which the settlement of the Cyprus problem
as a whole depends. In that context, our delegation
feels it must state its position of principle with regard
to that problem.

208. The proportions of the refugee problem provide
the most stark and tragic demonstration of the fact
that it is the plight of the people of Cyprus with
which we are confronted and to which we must give
our first consideration. No other State Member of the
United Nations can advance any interest in this
situation to which we should give greater priority.
209. The problem of Cyprus is now taking on a
different and perhaps a truer shape. When perhaps a
quarter of the population become refugees in their
own small land it is high time to approach the Cypriots
as people and not as a prize. The people of a Member
State cannot continue to alternate between the status
of hostage and that of refugee. They must be made
free to settle their own future. Their problem has now
assumed its own momentum and its own imperatives,
and these, we should like to hope, are being responded
to by the community leaders of Cyprus in the interests
of their common homeland. My delegation’s support
has therefore been placed behind the talks between
Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktas as a starting point for
developing settlement proposals for the problem
over-all.

214. For a month and a half the question of Cyprus
has been on the agenda of the Security Council. It
would seem that during that time some progress might
have been achieved. However, the fact is that the
situation in Cyprus continues to be disturbing. The
internal political problems in that country are still
acute. The international problems related to events in
Cyprus are causefor serious concern. As the SecretaryGeneral noted in his report, “The situation in Cyprus
is still a matter of deep concern as far as international
peace and security is concerned” [S/11473, pa&. 91.
215. The course of events itself and their development show convincingly that the reasons for the critical
situation in Cyprus are to be found in the open outside
military interference in the internal affairs of that
country. The dramatic events on the island are the
result of action by certain circles in NATO which
are planning to transform Cyprus into an advance
post in the Eastern Mediterranean from which to
combat the national liberation movement in that area.
In addition, they would like to divide the island, as
that would make it easier to turn Cyprus into a
NATO military bridge-head. All this is directed not
only against the Cypriot people but also against
international detente. It constitutes a threat to the
general peace and security of peoples. Unquestionably
the dangerous development of events around Cyprus
could have been prevented if, immediately following
the outbreak of the military rebellion on the island,
all interested countries and all members of the
Security Council had taken the swift and effective
measures called for by the situation: if they had
secured the immediate withdrawal
. of all foreign forces

210. Obviously, these leaders will place first things
first as they see them; and the first thing would be’
co-operation to relieve the humanitarian plight of the
members of their own communities.
211. We very much regret the absence of the
Secretary-General. His presence and his continued
efforts are much needed. We wish him a speedy and
comfortable recovery. His report in document S/l 1473
is most modest. It was an accomplishment and a
considerable contribution to assist in bringing about
talks between the community leaders.
212. There is a larger role yet to be played by the
United Nations in general and by the Secretary24

219. Finally, our delegation wishes to state that our
understanding of paragraph 7 of the resolution is that
that paragraph creates an opportunity for trying to find
ways of resolving the Cyprus problem in the interests of
the people of Cyprus and with full respect for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Cyprus. We feel, however, that this
question should not be resolved within the narrow
framework of the NATO countries. It is our deep
conviction that the most positive solution, the one
offering a real prospect of settling the Cyprus problem,
is the Soviet proposal for an international conference
within the framework of the United Nations. The
Byelorussian delegation fully and totally agrees with
the assessment of the situation in and around Cyprus
given in the statement by the Soviet Government of
22 August [S/11465]. Our .delegation supports the
concrete proposals contained in that statement which
are addressed to the settlement
of the Cyprus
problem.

and military personnel and the restoration of the
legitimate constitutional
Government
in Cyprus and
all its agencies. But that is not what happened. It
would not have suited. those forces and those circles
which disliked the previous course followed by the
Government
of Cyprus and its independent
and
constructive foreign policy as a non-aligned country.
.216. Our delegation remains deeply convinced that
one of the first tasks to be dealt with in overcoming
the dangerous crisis in Cyprus is the full and immediate
implementation
of the basic provisions of resolutions
353 (1974) and 357 (1974). The adoption of those
resolutions was welcomed by the Member States
but it was not followed by any practical measures to
implement
them, in particular
to implement
the
provisions for putting an end to foreign military
intervention and effecting the immediate withdrawal
from the territory of Cyprus of all foreign troops and
the restoration
of the legitimate
constitutional
Government. No measures were taken to ensure strict
respect for the independence,
sovereignty
and
territorial integrity of Cyprus.’

220. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR has
already had an opportunity
at one of the earlier
meetings to express its views on the Geneva
negotiations between the guarantor countries and on
their outcome
as reflected in the well-known
Declaration. Subsequent events have confirmed the
correctness of the view that the Declaration is not
in the interests of the speedy’ implementation
of
resolution 353 (1974) and that the existing LondonZurich system of guarantees has no sound basis
and has become bankrupt. The reasons for its failure
lie in the fact that the system is essentially
a
continuation of the policy of colonialism, against which
the people of Cyprus waged a long and stubborn
war. Accordingly, the efforts being made supposedly
to solve the Cyprus problem on the basis of the
Zurich-London agreements are without any foundation
and cannot defuse the explosive situation around
Cyprus.

217. Many facts, already referred to by numerous
representatives, indicate that the most varied aspects
of the life of the people of Cyprus are undergoing
a serious crisis.. The, economy has been seriously
damaged. Hundreds of thousands of Cypriots, both
Greek and Turkish, are suffering privation, particularly
refugees who have been uprooted from their native
soil and find themselves without homes or means of
subsistence. The problem of refugees in Cyprus has
unquestionably become an acute one. But the reasons
for it are clear. They are related to outside intervention
in the internal affairs of Cyprus and to the delay in
finding a political settlement to the Cyprus problem,
to the detriment of the interests of the country’s
population, its two communities,
Greek and Turkish.
This in turn is aggravating
the already difficult
intemai economic and social problems, the problems
involved in normalizing life on the island.

221. The approach proposed by the Soviet Union is
essentially a new one and reflects the interests of
the people of Cyprus. It calls for the convening, within
the framework of the United Nations, of a new
international
conference
reflecting
the political
situation of the world today and provides that the
permanent members of the Security Council should
give effective guarantees
of the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Cyprus-guarantees
that the decisions taken at the
international conference will be implemented.

218. Our delegation is in favour of alleviating the
suffering of the people of Cyprus, the thousands and
thousands of refugees. It voted in favour of the draft
resolution
submitted by Austria, France and the
United Kingdom in spite of the fact that it is limited
in scope. It should be noted that this text says
nothing about the immediate implementation
of the
basic provisions of resolutions 353 (1974) and 357
(1974), which provide for the withdrawal of all foreign
troops from the territory of Cyprus, the restoration
of constitutional order and the legitimate constitutional
Government,
and respect for and strict observance
of the independence,
sovereignty
and territorial
integrity of that State. This all naturally weakens
the resolution that has been adopted. We are deeply
convinced that, without a political
settlement
in
Cyprus, there can be no definitive and satisfactory
solution of the problems that have arisen there.

222. We also think it would be appropriate
to
consider the Soviet proposal to send a special mission
of the Security Council to Cyprus. We think that
the timeliness of this proposal has become even more
evident. The Byelorussian delegation feels that sending
the mission would be a practical and positive step
by the Council. It would help to enhance and make
more active the role of the United Nations and, in
particular, of the Council. As the representative of
25

Indonesia noted earlier in this meeting, these proposals
merit serious attention and study. As for today’s
attempts by some representatives to distort the
substance and the nature of these proposals, they
simply do not stand up to criticism. The futility of
these attempts is obvious. The arguments on which
they are based are like soap bubbles-no matter how
big you mike them, they still burst.

Cyprus problem in the interests of the people of that
country and defending the status of Cyprus as a nonaligned State.
227. World public opinion expects the Security
Council to take urgent and effective measures to
protect the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus and to strengthen
peace and security in that area.

223. The task of settling the Cyprus problem
continues to be an urgent one and it must be completed
without delay. A great many countries, expressing
concern over the critical situation in Cyprus, are
turning to the United Nations and the Security Council
with an appeal that they should take effective measures
in the interest of the people of Cyprus. Public nongovernmental organizations are addressing themselves
to the Council with similar appeals. Let me cite as
an example a letter addressed to the members of the
Security Council by the World Peace Council and
signed by Ramesh Chandra, an Indian citizen who is
an outstanding public figure and winner of the Lenin
Peace Prize. The letter states:
“World opinion will never forget and will never
find justification for the toll of human victims,
the agony suffered by so many people and the
extensive material damage inflicted upon this
beautiful island..:The World Peace Council supports
’ the struggle of the people of Cyprus, both Greek
and Turkish, for the right to live and prosper in
an indivisible, sovereign and independent State
possessingfull territorial integrity and free from any
foreign intervention and from all foreign troops
and bases.”

228. Mr. OULD MOULOUD (Mauritania) (interpretation from French): My delegation has on a number

of occasions during this debate said how devoted it
is to the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus and to the
preservation of peace in that part of the world. Today
we can only reiterate that position very firmly.
229. My delegation has also stated that it welcomes
the fact that weapons have fallen silent on Cyprus,
and we have the firm hope that negotiations will
resume very soon to make it possible to find an,
appropriate and constructive solution to all of the
many problems that so acutely beset that Republic.
230. The Mauritanian delegation is pleased with the
results of the Secretary-General’s recent trip to
Cyprus. We are particularly pleased that the leaders
of the Republic of Cyprus have agreed to meet at
regular intervals to discuss current problems and find
appropriate solutions.
231. Once again we should like to offer our thanks
to the Secretary-General for his efforts and to say
how much we admire his action and welcome
everything he has done recently in the humanitarian
sphere. We regret that he is not able to be with us
today, and we wish him a speedy recovery.

224. The special conference in support of the struggle
of the people of Cyprus for their freedom and
independence held recently in Cairo on the initiative
of the Afro-Asian Peoples’ Solidarity Organization
bluntly warned against turning the island into an
object of collective neo-colonial domination under
cover of NATO; it also expressed the intention of
helping Cyprus to remain a sovereign, independent
and neutral State.

232. The Mauritanian delegation sympathizes with
the inhabitants of the Republic of Cyprus, and we feel
for the people of Cyprus in their present sufferings.
That is why we joined in previous initiatives of
certain members of the Council aimed at attenuating
that suffering and at putting an end to it once and
for all. That is also why we voted today in favour of
the draft resolution submitted by the delegations of
Austria, France and the United Kingdom.

225. In conclusion, our delegation feels it must once
again stress that what is needed is a new genuinely
international system that would be capable of
protecting Cyprus against any infringement from
without of its sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity and creating conditions that would enable the
people of Cyprus themselves, both Greek and Turkish,
to decide their fate independently and to determine
the future of their country in peace and tranquillity.
We feel that this is what would be achieved by
itiplementation of the concrete proposal of the Soviet
Union, and our delegation appeals for support for the
Soviet proposal, support for the efforts of the Soviet
Union to settle the problem of Cyprus.

233. My delegation, as in the past, continues to
believe that it is a matter of urgency for the Cypriots
themselves to resume talks with a view to settling
their problems. Above and beyond the immediate
humanitarian tasks, which in the opinion of my
delegation are of paramount importance, as hardly
needs emphasis, my delegation believes that the
Council should devote its efforts to the search for
new ways and means of promoting such a meeting
of Cypriots, which cannot be replaced by anything,
in order to ensure the maintenance and consolidation
of the territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus.

226. The Byelorussian delegation will also give due
attention to other proposals aimed at settling the
26

their leadership-and
this appears in the reports of
the Secretary-General
I am going to quote-to
be
segregated against their wilLThere were some, such as
those along the green line, who left to save themselves
from the fighting in certain small suburbs in that area
such as Omorphita
where there was fighting;but
they went in the early period of 1964. The leadership,
accompanied by officers of the Turkish army, went
into various Turkish villages and collected villagers,
taking them against their will. They frightened some of
the inhabitants of mixed villages by saying the Turkish
air force was ‘going to bomb those villages and they
had better leave to save themselves. They told others
that the Greeks were going to do something to them.
They collected these people in the enclave in order
to niake a separate, big enclave such as the one they
created outside Nicosia. And the reports of the
Secretary-General
record cases in which those who
wanted to leave and tried to do so were shot by
their leadership. So they were never prisoners or
hostages or were enclosed by the Greek Cypriots or
by the Government.
On the contrary, there Turkish
Cypriots were segregated to prevent them from
associating with the Greeks in the hope of maintaining
enmity and division for the purpose of partition.

234. The PRESIDENT
(translation from Russian):
I shall now give the floor to those representatives
who have asked to speak in exercise of the right
of reply. I call upon the representative of Greece.
235. Mr. CARAYANNIS
(Greece): I just wish to
say that on the morning of the day on which the
news of Ambassador Davies’ death arrived in New
York I paid a visit to Mr. Scali to offer my condolences.
Since there is an assumption that those who committed
the crime were of Greek descent, I should like to tell
the representative of the United States and the Council
that, perhaps with the sole exception of the two
children of Ambassador Davies, nobody in this world
felt more grief or more strongly condemned that crime
than did the people of Greece.
236. The PRESIDENT
(translation from Russian):
I call upon the representative of Cyprus.
237. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): Following the lead of
my colleague from Greece, I would say that I had
the honour of sending a letter of condolence on
the ‘occasion of the most regretted death ,of a great
ambassador,
Ambassador
Davies. In that letter
I expressed my condemnation of the act, particularly
since I personally am against any kind of violence,
but more so if it originates with my people in a case
such as the death of Ambassador Davies. But of
course, as has been mentioned, one cannot prevent
extremist crimes, and we have seen similar things
in the United States and in other countries.

241. The follo&g
is from the report of the SecretaryGeneral dated 8.December 1966:
“the Turkish Cypriot leadership does not favour the
return of refugees to their homes and deters them
from going back to their villages*’
[S/7611,
para. 1391.

238. Now allow me to give some necessary answers
to the representative
of Turkey, particularly
with
regard to his attempt to present the situation of the
Turks in Cyprus as one in which they have for
10 or 11 years been forced to be refugees, deprived
of their residences, enclosed in places where they
could not circulate-in
all seriousness and earnestness,
as though he believed in those stories, without
realizing that there is a sheaf of reports of the
Secretary-General covering the entire period showing
exactly the reverse.

Force had been used to prevent
been shot while escaping.

them.

Many

had

I now quote the report of the Secretary-General
10 March 1966:

of

“some steps should be taken by the Turkish Cypriot
leadership towards relaxing its policy of discouraging
Turkish Cypriots from circulating freely in places
outside its control” [S/7192, par. 94.
The Secretary-General’s
states:

239. During this critical period, I have never wanted
to answer the Turkish representative on this point
because I thought it would be a waste of time. But,
since I have today realized that there are some at
least who believe that, or partly believe it, or want to
appear to believe it, thus equating the two sides,
I must say a few things on this score, because this
cannot go on. It reminds us of a period during which
it was a doctrine that the bigger the lie the more it
was believed. And this is a big lie. I must quote
from the Secretary-General’s
reports.

report

of

10 June

1965

“The Turkish Cypriot leaders have adhered to a
rigid stand against any measures which might involve
having members of the two communities
live and
work together... The result has been the seemingly
deliberate policy of self-segregation by the Turkish
Cypriots.” [S/6426, para. 106.1
242. So I wish to put an end to this story because
it is a wholly fictitious story. The Secretary-General,
in his report of 8 December 1966, in referring to the
Turkish prohibition of freedom of movement in their
areas, states:

240. The representative of Turkey says the Turkish
Cypriots were deprived of their homes. What is the
reality? 1 shall read actual quotations. He has not
quoted any of the Secretary-General’s
reports. The
reality is that the Turkish Cypriots were forced by

“This ban appears to be enforced as a matter
of political principle”-they
present them from27

going out of the enclaves and from associating
with the Greeks-“ with little attempt at justification
on practical grounds” [S/761 1,. para. 1091.

leadership. This is the situation which Mr. Olcay
wants to present as being parallel to the situation
of the Greek Cypriots, who today are thrown out of
their houses, have their properties taken away and
are subjected to mass massacres.

It is a political policy to keep the Turks away, to
put them in enclaves and not allow them to go out.
And now we hear Mr. Olcay, with his suave voice
and manner, speak about the poor Turks who for
11 years have been enclosed in enclaves as prisoners
of the Greeks, and he hopes that members of the
Council may believe that story.
243. The Secretary-General,
1967, states:

246. I did not want to bring all this up in the
Council, but I shall have to. This is the analogy. I
am referring to the policy of the Turkish army in the
area it has occupied of throwing out the population
and of not allowing any Greek to enter. Those who
do try to enter are killed. I promised that I was
going to give details in this connexion, and I shall
do so now:.

in his report of 13 June

“The Turkish Cypriot leadership denies Greek
Cypriots access to the Turkish Cypriot enclaves
and to most Turkish Cypriot villages at all times,”

“17 August 1974: at the village of Gaidhouras
(Famagusta), villagers trying to get in to feed and
water their animals were arrested and executed.
One out of 12 survived. The rest were shot down
merely for going there to water their animals which
were dying.”

wherever the Turkish Cypriots were in control, no
Greek could enter those enclaves, whereas the
Turkish Cypriots had full freedom of movement
‘everywhere and anywhere as long as they were
allowed by their oppressive leadership and the TMT
underground organization of Turkish officers to go out
without being killed by them-

247. Mr. Olcay balances this off with what was
happening with the Turkish Cypriots in the enclaves,
where houses were being built for them and they
were not allowed to go back.

“ . . . even if accompanied by UNFICYP
personnel,
while it keeps to a minimum the number of Turkish
Cypriots allowed to leave those enclaves to’visit
Government-controlled
areas. . . . The Govemment, for its part, maintains that there is complete
freedom of movement for all in the areas under its
control.*’ [S/7969, para. 105.1

248. The Secretary-General
8 December 1967, states:

in

his

report

of

“For a considerable time, the ‘Government ‘has
urged the refugees to return to their homes . . . it
has repaired or rebuilt abandoned Turkish Cypriot
houses. . . . It is known taht the Turkish Cypriot
leadership does not favour the return of the refugees
to their former homes located in Govemmentcontrolled areas at present. To justify this position,
the Turkish Cypriot leadership stresses considerations of security and safety of the refugees,
although there can be little doubt that one of the
major reasons for its attitude”-it
is not security“is a political, one . . . the maximum possible number
of Turkish
Cypriots must remain outside the
Government’s authority.”
[S/8286, para. 127. ]

244. That brings me to another relevant point.
Admittedly,
during the fighting in early 1964 there
was, of course, some killing, and when houses were
left they were destroyed by time and perhaps by
the interference by others. I have here a letter
addressed to Mr. Denktag by Mr. Clerides in February
1971 giving a list of houses that were repaired and
a list of houses that were going to be repaired.
Mr. Clerides said:
“You will no doubt appreciate that repaired
buildings if unoccupied deteriorate, both due to
natural causes as well as due to the unfortunate
practice of the furtive removal of building material
from houses long deserted.”

249. Now what was the reason for all this? It was
to prepare for what is happening now--for the forcible
dismemberment
and partition of Cyprus, which could
not be achieved unless the Turks forcibly kept up
hatred between the Greeks and the Turks of Cyprus.
And I have said repeatedly in the Security Council
that the Greeks and Turks of Cyprus lived in harmony
over the years before and after independence, and that
it was only by force that their relations were broken.

That shows that the experience of Mr. Clerides
was that, although the Turks were given houses,
they were not allowed to return, and therefore the
houses deteriorated.

250. I do not want to take too much more of the
time of the Council, but I have considerable material
here. The reports of the Secretary-General
are
there-sometimes
they were twice sometimes four
times in a year-from
1964 until today. They can be
consulted and it can be verified that even more than
I have said is true. Not only has there not been

245. Again, we have statements of the SecretaryGeneral to this effect. The Turks do not return to
the houses built for them. A report of 8 December
1966 shows that 343 houses were built,
but
unfortunately
in most cases the Turkish Cypriot
owners have not been allowed to return by their
28

any oppression of the Turkish Cypriots, but, on the
contrary, every effort has been made on their behalf.
That was done not only from humanitarian
considerations but also in the interest of the Greek Cypriots
and the Government,
which desired to achieve a
unitary State by accommodation,
friendship
and
co-operation, and not by hatred.

The reference in that article was undoubtedly
__----..to
Turks, but the word “barbaric” was tisediibtaecause
they were Turks but because the actions were barbaric.
That is precisely the way in which I myself used
the word today, and Mr. Olcay took objection.
The article in The Sun spoke of barbaric acts at
gunpoint. That is the same kind of “gunpoint”
at
which Turkey tried to impose its conditions on the
Geneva negotiations. The article in The Sun goes on:

251. Mr. Olcay hates the Galo Plaza report merely
because Galo Plaza provided a solution of workable
independence, and independence is anathema to the
Turkish Government.
Anybody who proposed any
kind of workable independence
was anathema to
the Turks, although they use the word “independence”, and are so happy that the idea of enosis
can be used in order to destroy independence. Galo
Plaza said that the question of enosis must be put
aside. Although
the right of self-determination
clearly belongs to the people of Cyprus, they must
put it aside. He said that, since there were Turks
who do not like that idea and wanted to go away
they should be compensated. Can that be equated with
the forcible moving of populations?
Mr. Olcay
compares the suggestion by Galo Plaza that those who
wanted to go away should be compensated with the
forcible movement of populations that the Turkish
Government is now trying to carry out on Cyprus.

“The villagers are from Trimithi,
Karmi and
Ayios Yeoryios, three farming communities west of
the holiday town of Kyrenia. They had been trapped
since the fighting began two weeks ago and were
only evacuated to Nicosia by the United Nations
forces on Saturday. And today at a Nicosia
orphanage, they told their tales . . . simply and
without any prompting.
“A 20-year old girl . . . described how she was
raped and watched horrified as her fiancC and six
other men were shot dead in cold blood . . . a
few minutes after they had been promised that they
would not be harmed.
“She said: ‘After the shooting, a Turkish soldier
grabbed me and pulled me into a ditch. I struggled
and tried to escape but he pushed me to the
ground. Another Turkish soldier who was watching
us had a nine-nonth-old baby in his arms and I, trying
to save myself, called out that the child was. mine.
They laughed at me and threw the baby to the
ground. I was then raped and fainted soon
after’.” [Wff.]

252. Pursuing this trend about the enosis movement,
and the imphcation that everything Greek should be
barred, Mr. Olcay said that in my statement today
I had spoken about things Greek, historically
and
ethnically, emphasizing in a very nationalistic
way
the Greek character of Cyprus. In my statement I did
not use the word “Greek”
at all in reference to the
historic part of Cyprus. On the contrary, I spoke
about the particular historic identity and character of
Cyprus. I did not speak in any nationalistic spirit.

Those are barbaric acts, not because those who
committed
them were Turks, but because the acts
are barbaric in themselves. I would not have gone into
this if Mr. Olcay had not taken objection to my using
the words “barbaric acts”.

253. Also, the representative
of Turkey tried to
interpret what I had said about the acts of barbarism
committed by the Turks in Cyprus as a reference to
their nationality.
The connexion between barbarism
and Turkey is not mine; it is Mr. Olcay’s. I spoke
about the acts and not about the nationality of those
committing them. Barbaric acts can be committed by
persons of any nationality
and they are no less
barbaric when they are committed
by persons who
are not Turkish.

255. There is another point to which I must refer.
It has been said here that the Turkish Cypriots are
being used as hostages, that they, too, are in a
difficult position and are suffering. I have before me
the report of the Secretary-General,
which clearly
shows that UNFICYP
maintains a total of 35 observation posts in Turkish
Cypriot
villages
under
Government control and in mixed villages. The report
contains a long list of those villages. UNFICYP
is
there watching and observing, and it has not reported
any crimes in those villages. But UNFICYP
is not
allowed to enter the area occupied by Turkish
forces; if it does, its movements are interfered with.
Thus, the report states:

254. Reporting on the situation in Cyprus, the wellknown newspaper The Sun of London wrote the
following:
“A horrifying story of atrocities by the Turkish
invaders of Cyprus emerged today. It was told by
weeping Greek Cypriot villagers rescued by United
Nations soldiers. They told of watching their loved
ones tortured and shot. They told of barbaric
rape at gunpoint . . . and threats of instant execution
if they struggled”. [See S/l 1461.1

“The’ United Nations P&e
has encountered
some problems of freedom of movement in the
area of Turkish control. These problems are now
under discussion.“.[S/11468,
para. 3.1
The discussions go on, but UNFICYP
is not allowed
--uth
to enter the area and see for itself. However
29

cannot be hidden: the facts about the crimes
happening there do come out.
256. This sort of comparison between what happened
in one area and what happened in another is ludicrous;
it should be stopped. I do not say that there are no
excesses. Surely there have been excesses, because
there is a kind of frenzy that grips some men when
they find themselves in a climate of massive destruction
such as that being experienced in Cyprus now. But
we condemn such acts wherever thev occur. I would
say that those who commit these acts are the enemies
of the cause of Cyprus. For the cause of Cyprus
is based on moral grounds, it has all the moral
values and the principles of the Charter behind it

L&ho

in United

Nations,

New York

and it does not depend on force and crimes. Therefore,
I would say that anyone on the Greek Cypriot
side who commits such crimes in an enemy of the
Greek Cypriot cause and actually serves the cause
of Turkey by emulating Turkish conduct.
257. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian):
I call upon the representative of Turkey.
258. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I should like the record
to show that I do not propose to answer the
representative of the Greek Cypriot community.
The meeting rose at 3.20 p.m.

00500

74-82001-April1983-2,200
