S/2020/430

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 May 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 22 May 2020 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Secretary-General and the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith copies of the briefing by Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, as well as the
statements delivered by the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican
Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam, in
connection with the video-teleconference convened on 20 May 2020 regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
these briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
President of the Security Council

20-07023 (E) 010620 080620

*2007023*

S/2020/430

Annex I
Statement by the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Nickolay Mladenov
I brief the Security Council today three days after a new coalition Government
was sworn into office in Israel following a year of political uncertainty. I look
forward to working with the new ministers on the challenges that lie ahead.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is not behind us. Managing
its socioeconomic impact affects both the Israeli and Palestinian peoples, and it
will remain a serious challenge. Beyond the health aspects of the crisis, we need to
ensure that cooperation among all sides continues in the interest of peace. To this
end, the United Nations will work with the leaders of Israel and Palestine, as well as
with our regional and international partners, to create the conditions for returning to
meaningful Israeli-Palestinian negotiations.
Our unfaltering commitment to achieving a negotiated two-State solution
remains resolute. The Secretary-General has warned on many occasions of the
danger of unilateral action. The continuing threat of annexation by Israel of parts
of the West Bank would constitute a most serious violation of international law,
deal a devastating blow to the two-State solution, close the door to a renewal of
negotiations and threaten efforts to advance regional peace and our broader efforts
aimed at maintaining international peace and security.
Recent polls show that the Israeli public is divided on the issue. However,
countries of the region and many in the international community have clearly stated
their positions regarding annexation.
The Palestinian leadership announced yesterday evening that it sees
itself absolved
“as of today, of all the agreements and understandings with the American and
Israeli Governments and of all the obligations based on these understandings
and agreements, including the security ones”
and calls on Israel to assume its obligations as the occupying Power. This statement
by President Mahmoud Abbas further calls for negotiations under international
auspices, including by the Quartet, to advance a negotiated two-State solution.
Tomorrow, I will be meeting with the Palestinian Prime Minister in order to better
understand the practical side of the decision by the leadership and its implications
on the ground.
If there is one concern we all share, it is that everyone needs to work together
to prevent escalation and radicalization. However, if I may speak openly and very
frankly on the issue, whatever our individual assessments of the Palestinian reaction
to the Israeli threat of annexation may be, that reaction is certainly one thing — it
is a desperate cry for help. It is a call for immediate action and a cry for help from
a generation of leadership that has invested its life over a quarter of a century in
building institutions and preparing for statehood.
The Palestinian leadership is not making threats. It is calling for urgent action
to preserve the prospects for peace, and it is doing so at a time where a new, younger
generation, with its own aspirations for the future, is stepping forward. Many of these
young people feel betrayed and increasingly cynical. This new generation, born in
the aftermath of the Oslo Accords, is disillusioned from a quarter of a century of
efforts that have not led to statehood. We do not know what future they will carve
out for themselves, but whatever future young Palestinians and Israelis do decide to
build, we have an obligation to prevent violence and protect the chances for peace.
2/27

20-07023

S/2020/430

I therefore ask the Security Council today to join the Secretary-General in his
call in opposition to unilateral steps that will hinder current diplomatic efforts to
create the conditions for bringing Israelis and Palestinians back to the table. We owe
this to all the young Palestinians and Israelis out there. I also call on my colleagues
in the Middle East Quartet — the United States, the Russian Federation and the
European Union — to work with the United Nations and quickly come forward
with a proposal that will enable the Quartet to take up its mediation role and work
jointly with countries of the region to advance the prospects for peace. Israel must
abandon its annexation threats, and the Palestinian leadership must re-engage with
all members of the Quartet. Everyone must do their part.
Returning to the situation on the ground, let me note that it continues to
be dominated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Despite growing political tensions,
Palestinian and Israeli authorities have continued their notable coordination around
efforts to limit the spread of the virus and are taking careful steps to reopen their
economies and lift virus-related restrictions.
Relatively successful prevention efforts in the occupied Palestinian territory
have thus far ensured that the limited capacity of the health system has not been
overwhelmed. However, there remain considerable concerns regarding the ability
of the Palestinian health sector to cope with a potential surge in cases, especially
in Gaza. In particular, there are continuing shortages of critical supplies, including
testing materials, personal protective equipment, ventilators and essential intensive
care unit equipment, owing to funding gaps and a shortage in global supply.
The United Nations and its partners have continued to work to address these
gaps and their ramifications. Thus far, over 50 per cent of the amount requested in
the COVID-19 inter-agency response plan — some $23 million — has been raised.
Including resources outside the response plan, some $39.5 million have been mobilized
to support COVID-19-related activities in the occupied Palestinian territory.
Pursuant to an agreement between the Palestinian and Israeli authorities,
over 10,000 Palestinian labourers crossed into Israel from the West Bank on 3 May.
They are part of an estimated 40,000 who were granted permits to stay in Israel
until the end of Ramadan. On 4 May, Israel approved new regulations obligating
employers in Israel to provide medical insurance and appropriate accommodation
for Palestinian workers.
In Gaza, the health system continues to face immense challenges despite the
low number of positive COVID-19 cases. As of the end of April, 44 per cent of
essential medicines and 30 per cent of essential medical supplies in the Strip had less
than a month’s stock remaining.
The Rafah crossing with Egypt opened in one direction for three days between
12 and 14 May to allow for the return of 1,168 people to Gaza. Travel through the
Erez crossing has been limited largely to urgent medical cases and those persons’
companions, as well as to staff of international organizations and returning Gaza
residents. Approximately 460 people have been allowed to return to Gaza and some
225 others to exit through that crossing.
As elsewhere around the world, the socioeconomic impacts of COVID-19 on
Palestinians have been immense. Tens of thousands of Palestinians have lost their
jobs, small and medium enterprises are unable to operate, children cannot attend
school in person and violence against women and children has increased. As always,
the most vulnerable are at the greatest risk of suffering. Recent gains in Gaza relating
to water, sanitation, electricity and livelihoods are at extreme risk of being fully
reversed. COVID-19 has damaged Gaza’s economy across sectors: around 13,000
industrial workers have temporarily lost their jobs and virtually all restaurants and
20-070233/27

S/2020/430

hotels have ceased operations, leading to the release of over 10,000 workers, while
perhaps half of all employees in the information and communications technologies
sector have also been laid off.
The Palestinian people are experiencing the same shock and uncertainty
as the rest of humankind; however, their Government is unable to respond to the
socioeconomic effects with the same agency as an independent sovereign State.
It cannot avail itself of the conventional monetary and fiscal tools that sovereign
countries ordinarily use in times of economic distress. It cannot influence interest
rates, print money, devalue its currency or access international capital markets to
finance the deficit spending needed to compensate those who have lost jobs and
support businesses to stay afloat. The vulnerable fiscal position of the Palestinian
Authority has been further damaged by the COVID-19 pandemic. Its revenues are
down sharply owing to restrictions on movement and business operations and to
lower demand for goods. Given the additional spending required to respond to and
recover from the pandemic, estimates are that the Palestinian Authority’s fiscal
deficit could exceed $2 billion this year.
Israel has announced a soft loan of $233 million for a period of four months
against future Palestinian clearance revenues. It will provide a critical fiscal lifeline
for the Palestinian Authority. However, unless combined with a long-term response
and reform strategy, including a resolution of the outstanding fiscal issues, that
lifeline only postpones difficult fiscal decisions. Working with its international
partners, the Palestinian Authority must also adopt emergency budget measures to
address the pandemic along the lines recently laid out by the World Bank.
An additional complicating factor, as of 9 May, is an amendment to an
Israeli military order that purportedly holds Palestinian commercial banks liable
for processing payments from the Palestinian Authority to Palestinian security
prisoners, their families or the families of those killed in attacks. This development
injects more uncertainty into the already vulnerable Palestinian financial system.
On 24 April, the Jerusalem District Court issued a decision ordering the temporary
confiscation of some $128 million from the Palestinian Authority as compensation
to families of victims of attacks against Israelis during the second intifada. The
Court ruled that the sum would, at least in part, be collected from Palestinian
Authority clearance revenues withheld since March 2019 under Israeli legislation
concerning payments by the Palestinian Authority to security prisoners or families
of Palestinians killed in attacks.
Clashes between the Israeli security forces and Palestinians continued
during the reporting period. Overall, in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
two Palestinians, including a teenager, and an Israeli soldier were killed. Sixty-five
Palestinians, including six children, and two Israelis, one child and one soldier, were
injured in various incidents. On 28 April, a Palestinian man stabbed a 62-year-old
Israeli woman in the Israeli city of Kfar Saba, moderately wounding her; he was
arrested. On 12 May, an Israeli soldier was killed by a stone thrown at his head
during an arrest operation by Israeli security forces in the village of Ya’bed near
Jenin. Later that day, a Palestinian man was shot and wounded by Israeli security
forces at the Kalandia checkpoint after reportedly attempting a stabbing attack
against those forces. On the following day, a Palestinian teenager was shot dead
by Israeli security forces during clashes in the Fawwar refugee camp, near Hebron,
during an arrest operation. On 14 May, a 19-year-old Palestinian man was shot dead
by Israeli security forces after carrying out a suspected ramming attack near Hebron;
an Israeli soldier was wounded in the incident.
In Gaza, the calm that has prevailed in recent months continued. On 6 May,
a rocket was fired from Gaza towards Israel. In response, Israeli forces targeted
4/27

20-07023

S/2020/430

Hamas facilities in the Strip. No injuries were reported in either incident. On several
occasions, Israeli forces opened fire, injuring four Palestinians.
In the light of the COVID-19 crisis, concerns remain over the situation of
Palestinian children in Israeli custody. On 11 May, Jamie McGoldrick, the United
Nations Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator, UNICEF and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights issued a joint statement calling
on Israeli and Palestinian authorities to immediately release children in detention
and emphasizing that the best way to uphold the rights of detained children amid a
dangerous pandemic in any country is to release them and to put a moratorium on
new admissions to detention facilities.
During the reporting period, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs recorded 20 incidents in which Israeli settlers injured Palestinians or
reportedly damaged their property, with a high concentration of incidents reported
in Nablus and Ramallah governorates. In the same period, there were reports of
23 incidents of stone and Molotov cocktail-throwing in which Palestinians injured
Israeli civilians in the West Bank or reportedly damaged their property. On 18 May,
Israel’s District Court in Lod convicted an Israeli man of the horrific murder of three
members of the Palestinian Dawabsheh family, including a toddler, who were killed
as they slept when their family home in the West Bank village of Duma was burned
down in 2015.
As the Secretary-General noted in his policy brief last month,
“[a]cross every sphere, from health to the economy, security to social
protection, the impacts of COVID-19 are exacerbated for women and girls
simply by virtue of their sex.”
According to recent reporting by UN-Women, Palestinian women and girls are
disproportionately affected by the pandemic, which is creating and exacerbating
pre-existing gender-specific risks and vulnerabilities and is expected to widen
inequalities, especially in the economic sphere. In that context, I remain concerned
by the increase in incidents of gender-based violence, especially in situations where
families are confined to small living spaces and exposed to increased socioeconomic
pressures. Non-governmental organizations in the West Bank and Gaza have reported
a rise in cases of life-threatening incidents of gender-based violence and have raised
concerns about the ongoing lack of protection, shelters and referral services.
In early May, the Israeli Ministry of Defence approved the seizure of
municipal planning authority from the Hebron municipality in relation to the AlIbrahimi Mosque/Tomb of the Patriarchs. The move was justified by the goal of
making the site accessible to persons with disabilities, while stating that the project
would not change prayer arrangements or the status quo. The order was issued on
12 May, allowing 60 days for objections. The Palestinian leadership, the Hebron
municipality, the Waqf and Islamic authorities, among others, have condemned the
move, with some arguing that it violates the 1997 Hebron Protocol. Any change to
the delicate balance at holy sites not agreed by the stakeholders threatens stability
and must not be made unilaterally.
Meanwhile, the Israeli authorities demolished 32 Palestinian-owned
structures owing to lack of Israeli-issued building permits. Consequently, 16 people,
including 10 children, were displaced and another 170 were otherwise affected.
Of the structures demolished by Israeli authorities during the reporting period, all
32 were in Area C of the West Bank. While there has been an overall decline in
demolitions and displacement, any such steps are contrary to Israel’s obligations
under international law and must stop.

20-070235/27

S/2020/430

Turning to the region, in the occupied Golan, the overall security situation
remains stable despite continued violations by both parties, including breaches of
the ceasefire line and the presence of unauthorized personnel and equipment in the
areas of separation and limitation. On 30 April, the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) observed three missiles fired from the Alpha side
impacting the Bravo side, a helicopter on the Alpha side firing a missile across the
ceasefire line, as well as a rocket exploding in the area of separation. The Israel
Defense Forces informed UNDOF that they had conducted a strike on the Bravo side.
On 3 May, UNDOF observed one aircraft flying from the Alpha side and crossing
the ceasefire line, followed on 4 May by two drones from the Alpha side crossing
the ceasefire line and hovering over the area of separation. These developments have
the potential to escalate the situation between Israel and Syria. The parties have an
obligation to respect the terms of the Disengagement Agreement.
In Lebanon, the Government began formal discussions with the International
Monetary Fund on 13 May, following the adoption of a national financial recovery
plan. Amid an uptick in new COVID-19 cases, the Government reimposed a total
lockdown on 13 May for four days, with the exception of essential services, to allow
for enhanced contact tracing and testing and to inform the next steps for containment.
The situation in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area of
operations, including along the Blue Line, remained mostly stable. UNIFIL convened
a tripartite meeting with the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense Forces
under COVID-19 restrictions on 14 May to urge the parties to avoid provocative
actions and fully utilize UNIFIL’s liaison and coordination arrangements to preserve
the cessation of hostilities.
In conclusion, let me return to my initial words. I firmly believe that the
time has come for all sides to do their part in the coming weeks and months in
order to preserve the prospect of a negotiated two-State resolution to the conflict
in line with relevant United Nations resolutions, international law and bilateral
agreements. Those efforts must begin immediately; there is no time to lose. The fate
of the Palestinian and Israeli people must not be determined by destructive unilateral
actions that cement divisions and may put peace beyond our reach in our lifetime.

6/27

20-07023

S/2020/430

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve
I thank Special Coordinator Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his statement.
On Sunday 17 May, the new Israeli Government was sworn in, bringing an
end to months of political uncertainty. We look forward to working with the new
Israeli Government in a constructive and comprehensive way in the spirit of the longstanding friendship that binds us. We hope that this Government will be a partner for
the relaunch of the peace process in line with international law and through direct
negotiations between the parties.
We remain deeply concerned about certain provisions in the coalition
agreement regarding the prospect of annexation by Israel of parts of the occupied
Palestinian territories. If put into practice, these would constitute a clear breach
of international law, including the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
resolutions of the Council. Belgium, together with its European partners, will not
recognize any changes to the pre-1967 borders other than those agreed upon by the
parties through direct negotiations, including with regard to Jerusalem. We will
continue to distinguish between the territory of the State of Israel and the territories
occupied since 1967.
As friends and close partners of Israel, we strongly advise the Israeli
Government against taking steps towards annexation. We also call on the international
community, especially those States with influence, to spare no effort to prevent any
such steps. As stated by European Union High Representative Borrell, “steps towards
annexation, if implemented, could not pass unchallenged”. Indeed, annexation
would risk entailing significant legal, political, security and other consequences —
not only for Israel but also for the wider region. Furthermore, annexation would
further undermine any prospect for a just and durable solution and would mean the
irreversible end of any prospect of negotiation about any meaningful peace plan.
We call on all partners to refrain from unilateral decisions that would undermine
or seriously hamper prospects for a return to the negotiation table. We also call on
parties to continue implementing all agreements and understandings. In that regard,
we note with concern the recent announcement by President Mahmoud Abbas.
The framework for the solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has been set
out in detail in numerous Council resolutions. With a view to ending the conflict,
Belgium remains committed to a negotiated two-State solution that meets Israeli and
Palestinian security needs and Palestinian aspirations for statehood and sovereignty,
ends the occupation that began in 1967 and resolves all permanent status issues,
including those related to borders, the status of Jerusalem, security and refugees.
It is important that the international community increase its efforts to help
achieve a just and lasting peace. We stand ready to work with all relevant stakeholders
to renew international and multilateral efforts aimed at achieving that goal, be
it through existing frameworks, such as the Middle East Quartet, or new ones.
However, we stress the need for such efforts to be fully in line with international law
and the internationally agreed parameters, and to take place on the basis of direct
and meaningful negotiations between the parties. Only a solution that is acceptable
to both sides will be able to pave the way for sustainable peace, not only for Israel
and Palestine, but for the wider region, as a whole.

20-070237/27

S/2020/430

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for the briefing.
During our previous video-teleconference on the situation in the Middle East
(see S/2020/341), Mr. Mladenov warned the Council against the dangerous prospect
of the annexation of parts of the occupied West Bank. He shared his concern with us
again today, which is widely echoed by the international community.
We have heard the loud and clear voice of Palestinian people. The League
of Arab States, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and many other United
Nations Member States have also reasserted their objection in that regard.
China is also deeply concerned about reports of the plan to annex part of
the occupied Palestinian territory. Such a plan, if implemented, would seriously
violate international law and relevant United Nations resolutions and imperil the
two-State solution. The two-State solution is the only viable way forward to resolve
the Palestinian question. We urge the relevant parties to stop any unilateral actions
and refrain from escalating conflict and tension. It is also our firm position that no
country should back such unilateral actions. China shares the view that the Security
Council should discharge its mandate and do its part to prevent such dangerous
unilateral actions.
The Palestinian question is at the root of the turbulence in the Middle East.
The issue is indeed testing human conscience and international justice. Independent
statehood is the inalienable national right of the Palestinian people and it is not
something to be traded. Concrete efforts must be made to implement resolution
2334 (2016), including ceasing all settlement activities, stopping the demolition of
Palestinian-owned structures and preventing violence against civilians. More efforts
are also needed to advance the political process and pave the way for the early
resumption of peace talks between Palestine and Israel in accordance with relevant
United Nations resolutions, the land for peace principle and the Arab Peace Initiative.
In the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we encourage
Israel and Palestine to strengthen public health cooperation, and Israel to lift the
blockade against Gaza. We commend United Nations agencies, including the World
Health Organization and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), for helping Palestine address the pandemic.
The international community should scale up assistance to the Palestine people,
including through increased financial support to UNRWA. China stands with the
Palestinian people in their fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. We have provided
personal protective equipment and test reagents to Palestine and have held several
videoconferences to share know-how and experience.
The Palestinian people can also count on China’s continued support of their
just cause to restore legitimate national rights. We fully support Palestine in building
an independent and sovereign State on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. We will work closely with the international community in
the pursuit of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

8/27

20-07023

S/2020/430

Annex IV
Statement by the Special Envoy to the Security Council of the
Dominican Republic, José Singer Weisinger
I would like to thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
The Dominican Republic reiterates its deep concern, already expressed several
times, regarding the Israel-Palestine conflict and its enormous consequences for the
civilian population and for the stability of the whole Middle East region.
And now, with the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the wellbeing of many people with long-standing vulnerabilities is threatened even more.
With cases already confirmed, we may, sooner rather than later, be dealing with the
consequences of years of neglect and inaction that have made this one of the most
serious protracted humanitarian situations in the world and have already caused
the loss of many generations. Therefore, urgent concerted action among States and
humanitarian organizations is needed to address the needs of the affected population
in a dignified and sustained way.
The conflict that persists in the occupied Palestinian territory, as well as
the further deterioration of the humanitarian and socioeconomic situation there,
exacerbates the level of uncertainty about the future of the peace process in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. At the root of that conflict remains the unresolved issue
of the right of the Palestinian people to their national independence and sovereignty.
The Dominican Republic considers that, at this particular juncture, it is imperative to
redouble conciliation efforts between the parties, with the support of the international
community, in order to open the door for meaningful and constructive discussion
that addresses the challenges they face together.
We must avoid at all cost unilateral actions that could create deeper wounds
and further enhance the already deep resentment and mistrust that prevail in
this conflict. The COVID-19 pandemic is a common enemy for both Israelis and
Palestinians and, as such, the only way they can fight it is through collective and
joint action based on solidarity and a common sense of humanity.
Meaningful and fair dialogue around the numerous obstacles that threaten
the two-State solution must continue with the realization of the indisputable
interdependence of the two countries, the need for collaboration and, on the basis
of international consensus, the fact that the only way forward for Palestinians and
Israelis is to negotiate a two-State solution in order to live in peace, side by side.
Therefore, we encourage all parties to immediately end all actions that undermine
support for the two-State solution and ultimately hinder peace.
We are pleased to learn that, following an agreement with the Palestinian
Authority, the State of Israel has reopened a number of crossings — in a move that
allows thousands of Palestinians in the occupied West Bank seeking employment
opportunities to return to work. We encourage that type of coordination between
the Israeli and Palestinian authorities, as it can promote the much-needed dialogue
to relaunch negotiations towards a peace plan and, ultimately, alleviate the living
conditions of the affected populations. As an international community, we believe
that our collective action must be aimed at supporting the parties in an impartial and
effective way towards real and sustainable solutions.
To conclude, we reaffirm the need to increase our efforts to continue working
tirelessly until we can resume a meaningful and constructive dialogue, based on
mutual respect and on the internationally agreed parameters. That will pave the way
for a new stage towards building a true peace between Israelis and Palestinians.
Women, children and young people on both sides deserve a future of peace, progress
and justice. Let us be the ones who helped them achieve their aspirations.
20-070239/27

S/2020/430

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
We congratulate Israel on the formation of the new Government. As an
immediate priority, we call on the new Government and the Palestinian Authority to
continue their coordination regarding the continued threat of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and to guarantee the delivery of humanitarian aid to those
in need.
In that context, we recall the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire,
as well as the joint appeal by the five United Nations special envoys to the Middle
East. We welcome the efforts by the United Nations, including the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, in supporting the
fight against the virus.
Secondly, the initiative taken by the United States has given us the impetus to
revive the Middle East peace process. We urge parties to make efforts to resolve the
conflict. We call on Israel and Palestine to take steps towards resuming direct and
meaningful negotiations, in line with the relevant United Nations resolutions, leading
to a negotiated two-State solution and taking into account the legitimate aspirations of
both parties and Israeli security concerns. We hope that the international community,
regional actors and the Middle East Quartet will continue efforts towards finding
a lasting solution. We encourage the parties to engage in constructive negotiations.
Estonia is concerned that unilateral steps, such as the annexation of parts
of the occupied Palestinian territories, could undermine the viability of the twoState solution and increase instability in the region. We are worried about the
announcement by President Mahmoud Abbas yesterday with regard to terminating
agreements with Israel and the United States. We call on the Palestinian Authority
to reconsider the decision and to remain committed to its obligations based on those
agreements, especially those related to security.
Estonia strongly urges the parties to refrain from acts of violence, terror and
incitement. We condemn the firing of rockets from Gaza into Israel, as well as any
other form of violence targeting the civilian population.
Finally, to engage in direct negotiations, both parties need Governments
with legitimate and democratic mandates. We also expect Palestinians to announce
elections. We encourage all Palestinian factions to work towards reconciliation,
which would enable them to address common challenges, as well as the needs and
expectations of the Palestinian population. That is a necessary element in reaching
a two-State solution.

10/27

20-07023

S/2020/430

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas De Rivière
[Original: English and French]
First, I thank Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing.
Allow me to voice France’s growing concerns regarding the threat of
annexation. Like the overwhelming majority of the Council, we expressed our
worries last month regarding the prospect of annexation of parts of the West Bank
after the signing of the Israeli coalition agreement (see S/2020/341). However, the
inauguration of the new Israeli Government brings us closer to that prospect.
We look forward to continuing to work with the Israeli authorities in a
constructive and comprehensive way, in the spirit of the long-standing friendship
that binds us to Israel and of our unshakable commitment to Israel’s security.
Nevertheless, I want to echo Minister Le Drian’s statement and reiterate that any
annexation of any part of the West Bank, including only settlements, would represent
a violation of international law, which strictly prohibits the acquisition of territory by
force. It would jeopardize the two-State solution envisaged in previous negotiations
and agreements. It would also undermine the prospect of peace talks, for which the
Council unanimously calls.
Annexation is not in the interest of the Palestinians, the Israelis, the Europeans
or the international community. The implementation of such a unilateral step would
further threaten regional stability. It would also be detrimental to Israel’s role in the
world, its integration in the regional context and its relationship with its partners.
France therefore again warns the Israeli Government against such a move,
which would not be without consequences for its relations with the European Union.
We will not recognize any changes to the June 1967 lines unless agreed to by both
parties. In that regard, let me recall that resolution 2334 (2016) creates obligations
for third parties by calling on Member States to distinguish between the State of
Israel and the territories occupied since 1967. We recall the importance for all parties
to respect existing agreements.
In that context, it is more urgent than ever to restart peace negotiations.
France firmly believes that only negotiations aimed at establishing two States living
in peace and security along secure, recognized borders on the basis of the 1967 lines,
with Jerusalem as the capital of both States, are likely to lead to a just and lasting
peace in the region. That is also the position of the European Union, based on the
Council’s resolutions.
Together with the European Union, we stand ready to support any effort made
on that basis, in line with international law and by means of negotiations between
the parties. We are working closely with our European, as well as our Arab, partners
on that issue. We therefore stand ready to support any initiative aimed at relaunching
credible negotiations. As we have already said, we are ready to consider President
Abbas’s proposals to the Council in February (see S/PV.8717).
We also believe that Palestinian unity is of paramount importance in the
current situation. That can be achieved only through credible reconciliation talks.
The Palestinian Authority should set a time frame for the holding of general
elections in Gaza, the West Bank and East Jerusalem once the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic is under control. Those elections could foster Palestinian
reconciliation, which is also essential for peace. That responsibility lies in the hands
of the Palestinian Authority.
20-0702311/27

S/2020/430

Finally, I am glad to hear that the spread of the pandemic is, for now, more
or less under control, but efforts should not be stopped as long as the risk remains.
Let me once again commend the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), as well as the other United Nations
agencies, for their exemplary role in response to the pandemic. I also welcome the
new agreement reached between Israel and the Palestinian Authority on the issue
of clearance revenue and call for it to pave the way for a comprehensive agreement.
Nevertheless, more needs to be done in order to promote cooperation and
dialogue between the parties apart from combating the pandemic. As the already
dire economic situation in Palestine is likely to worsen, France has advanced its
annual budgetary contribution to the Palestinian Authority. Furthermore, the French
Development Agency has provided financial support to the Ministries of Health
and National Economy. France also continues to support the UNRWA response to
COVID-19. The meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
the International Assistance to Palestinians on 2 June will give us the opportunity to
once again renew our commitment to supporting a viable two-State solution.
France, along with its European partners, will continue to promote
multilateralism and support for the international rules-based order. The Charter of
the United Nations prohibits the acquisition of territory by force. The Council has
established the internationally agreed parameters on which the two-State solution
is based, in particular the distinction between Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territories in resolutions 242 (1967) to 2334 (2016). The Security Council should not
remain silent about any violation of international law.
Today we are at a crossroads for the Middle East peace process. As Council
members, it is our responsibility to unite to promote peace, not chaos.

12/27

20-07023

S/2020/430

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany
to the United Nations, Juergen Schulz
We congratulate Israel on the formation of a Government, and we look forward
to continuing our close cooperation with the new Government. Germany remains
steadfast in its strong commitment to Israel’s security and its right to exist, as well
as to peace in the Middle East. Now is the time to engage the new Government
through dialogue.
However, we are seriously concerned about the provisions in the coalition
agreement as well as remarks made by members of the new Israeli Government
regarding a possible annexation of the occupied Palestinian territories in the West
Bank. We firmly believe that unilateral action in that regard would be extremely
harmful to a peaceful resolution of the conflict. It would have serious, negative
repercussions for the viability of the two-State solution and the entire peace process,
as well as for regional stability and the rules-based international order itself. It would
also negatively affect Israel’s standing within the international community at a time
when we need closer cooperation.
As a close partner and friend, we therefore strongly encourage the Israeli
Government not to implement any measures that would constitute a violation of
international law. We will not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines,
including with regard to Jerusalem, unless agreed to by Israel and the Palestinians.
We will continue to distinguish between the internationally recognized territory of
the State of Israel and the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, in accordance
with our obligations under international law.
Germany remains convinced that a negotiated two-State solution based
on international law and the internationally agreed parameters is the only viable
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that meets the security needs of both sides,
fulfils Palestinian aspirations for statehood and sovereignty, ends the occupation
that began in 1967, resolves all permanent-status issues and guarantees equal rights
for all inhabitants.
We must find ways to revive the political process and resume direct and
meaningful negotiations between the parties in order to resolve the final-status
issues and to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace. The starting point
for any discussion or negotiations should be the relevant United Nations resolutions,
international law and the internationally agreed parameters. The format of such
direct and meaningful negotiations must be agreed by both parties. We would support
reviving the Middle East Quartet or establishing an alternative multilateral format.
In the absence of such negotiations, the parties to the conflict must refrain
from taking any measures that could further deteriorate the situation on the ground
and undermine the viability of a negotiated two-State solution, especially where
such measures would bring closer a de facto one-State reality with unequal rights for
Israelis and Palestinians.
We also note with concern yesterday’s announcement by President Abbas with
regard to cooperation agreements, including security cooperation with Israel. We
call on both Israel and the Palestinian Authority to remain committed to the Oslo
agreements and their obligations thereunder.
Resolution 2334 (2016) remains the most crucial guideline and must be fully
implemented with regard to settlement activities as well as acts of terror, violence
against civilians, incitement, provocative actions and inflammatory rhetoric. We
reiterate our position that Israeli settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
20-0702313/27

S/2020/430

territories are illegal under international law and severely undermine the prospects
for ending the occupation and for achieving a negotiated two-State solution.
We call upon Israel to end the expansion of settlements, including the latest
construction plans for Efrat, Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and the E-1 and E-2 areas,
the legalization of settlement outposts and the ongoing demolition and confiscation
of Palestinian structures and land.
We are also deeply concerned by the latest acts of violence and by the deaths
and injuries on both sides. Germany condemns all attacks on Israel in the strongest
possible terms, including those against Israeli security forces, and the repeated
firing of rockets from Gaza into Israel by Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad.
Israel has the right to defend itself and respond appropriately and proportionally
to attacks against its territory or citizens. Incidents in which innocent civilians are
indiscriminately targeted or subjected to violence must be thoroughly investigated
and the perpetrators of any crimes must be held accountable.
Finally, we remain concerned about the impact of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories, while noting
the important achievements by both sides in containing the pandemic. We reiterate
our call on both parties to enhance their coordination and cooperation in order to
further mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak in Israel, the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, and Gaza, bearing in mind their respective responsibilities
and obligations under international law, in particular international humanitarian law.
We commend the United Nations and all its agencies, in particular the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, for their
efforts to respond to the humanitarian implications of the COVID-19 pandemic in
the occupied Palestinian territories. Considering the increased risks to the health
of detainees posed by COVID-19, particularly Palestinian children and other
vulnerable persons, we encourage Israel to consider taking appropriate action on
humanitarian grounds.

14/27

20-07023

S/2020/430

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Republic of Indonesia
to the United Nations
I thank the Special Coordinator Mladenov for his important and, as usual,
very comprehensive briefing on the situation on the ground.
This month marks the seventy-second anniversary of a catastrophe for the
Palestinian people known as the Nakba, when more than 700,000 Palestinians were
ousted from their homes and stripped of their lands in Palestine. Since then, there
has been only tragedy after tragedy for the Palestinian people. And just yesterday,
the President of the State of Palestine announced their withdrawal from a previously
made agreement with Israel. That is indeed unfortunate. However, we realize it is to
be expected given the oppression and injustice suffered by the Palestinians all these
years. Against that backdrop, let me share a number of pertinent points.
First, the catastrophic situation can be brought to an end only by ending the
Israeli occupation. We must never forget that Israel’s illegal occupation of Palestinian
land is the root cause of this protracted problem. Compounding it is Israel’s illegal
settlement policy in the occupied territories, which blatantly disregards international
law and opinion, including resolution 2334 (2016). Without addressing the root cause,
the Palestinian people will never escape their suffering. As Indonesia has repeatedly
stressed, the Security Council has the responsibility to put an end to this situation,
and to prevent the proposed annexation of large parts of the West Bank.
I therefore come to my second point: it is the solemn duty of the Council
to act against that annexation plan. There should be no ambiguity on this matter.
Annexation constitutes a flagrant violation of international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations, the Fourth Geneva Convention and various United
Nations resolutions. It puts the two-State solution in jeopardy. Israel’s insistence
on continuing on the path of annexation will destroy any prospect for peace, create
regional instability, usher in a new cycle of violence and eventually undermine
Israel’s security interests.
Rather than stand idly by, the Security Council, in affirmation of its mandate
to maintain international peace and security, must address Israel’s illegal actions.
Moreover, I also urge the international community at large to stop Israel’s creeping
annexation through various means, including halting any support to businesses
related to the illegal settlements. In that regard, let me remind this body that
resolution 2334 (2016) calls on all States “to distinguish, in their relevant dealings,
between the territory of the State of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967”
( para. 5). We would therefore be complicit if we allowed Israel to continue its
journey to annexation.
Let me now turn to my third point, regarding the coronavirus disease mitigation
efforts in the occupied Palestinian territories. Palestinians face the looming threat
of annexation amid the equally formidable threat of the pandemic. With the ongoing
demolitions of homes, forced evictions and displacement of families, Palestinians
are facing a health, humanitarian and human rights crisis. We join all others in
appealing to the international community to strengthen support to United Nations
agencies and civil society organizations, which are making a difference on the
ground. We also applaud all health and humanitarian personnel, working tirelessly
to address this multitude of crises.
We warn that the accelerating “creeping annexation” by Israel of Palestinian
lands definitely threatens to destroy the vision of two States. We cannot allow this to
happen, as it would generate a perpetual catastrophe affecting the region and beyond.
20-0702315/27

S/2020/430

I would also like to echo what Special Coordinator Mladenov said and the
warning of the Secretary-General of the danger of taking unilateral actions that
would hinder ongoing diplomatic efforts to create the conditions for bringing
Israelis and Palestinians back to the negotiating table. It is time to resume credible
multilateral negotiations on the Palestinian question, guided by the internationally
agreed parameters, and to implement the two-State solution, as called for by President
Abbas and echoed by Nickolay just now.
I once again reaffirm Indonesia’s unequivocal solidarity with, and support
for, the Palestinian people in achieving their inalienable rights, including the
establishment of a contiguous independent State of Palestine, within the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
In conclusion, I agree that there has been enough talking; what is needed now
is for all Council members to implement the various relevant Council resolutions so
as to get all parties to sit back down together again.

16/27

20-07023

S/2020/430

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing on the situation in Palestine. I
would like also to welcome with us this morning Minister Riad Mansour, Permanent
Representative of the Observer State of Palestine, and Mr. Dany Danon, Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations.
Through its many resolutions, the Security Council has expressed its views
on all aspects of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The General Assembly has done
the same. Through those resolutions, the cardinal principles that should pave the
way for dialogue and lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians have been
clearly defined.
The occupation by force and annexation of Palestinian land is illegal and must
end, in accordance with the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016).
The continuation of Israel’s colonization policy, which has been established as
a system of administration of the Palestinian territories, is likewise illegal.
The disproportionate use of force against often unarmed Palestinian civilians,
including women and children, is unacceptable and contrary to international law.
With resolution 1515 (2003), inter alia, the Council, together with the
international community, further enshrined the two-State solution — of Israel and
Palestine living side by side in peace and security, on the basis of the 1967 borders —
as the basis for the resolution of this conflict.
What progress have we achieved since then in resolving this crisis? Not very
much, I would say. On the contrary, Israel’s policy of annexation of Palestinian land
makes the two-State solution almost illusory, and the prospect of the annexation
of a large part of the settlements in the West Bank and the Jordan Valley does not
encourage us to be optimistic.
Faced with this situation, the Niger believes that we must do everything
possible to support all initiatives that could enable us to help the countries and the
peoples of this tormented region of the world to find benchmarks for reconciliation,
peace and peaceful coexistence.
As former South African President Nelson Mandela said, “to make peace with
an enemy, you must work with that enemy and that enemy becomes your partner”.
Perhaps it is this spirit that has led Israel and Palestine to establish cooperation,
which we welcome, in the context of the fight against the coronavirus disease
pandemic. Indeed, the realization that neither walls nor checkpoints could protect
the populations on either side from the virus is a step in the right direction. We hope
that the Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority will use that cooperation
to overcome their differences and return to the negotiating table, in accordance with
the relevant Council resolutions.
At this particularly difficult time for all the peoples of the world, we urge the
Palestinians and the Israelis to respond favourably to the appeal of the SecretaryGeneral to build a framework for cooperation and to pool their efforts in order to
effectively combat the spread of the coronavirus and its disastrous consequences for
populations already exposed to various deprivations.
May this blessed month of Ramadan strengthen this nascent dynamic of
cooperation between Israel and Palestine, and may it enable the peoples of this region,
the cradle of the three great religions, to enjoy peace, security and development.
20-0702317/27

S/2020/430

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. We are
grateful to Nickolay for all his efforts and support him and his initiatives and ideas.
As never before, international cooperation and action are needed to advance
the Middle East peace process. Plans for the annexation of Palestinian territories
threaten to undermine this process. President Mahmoud Abbas announced yesterday
that the Palestinian Authority is free from its commitments under the Oslo Accords.
As a result, the door to any prospects for the two-State solution may be closed. It
proves that no time should be wasted. We see no alternative to two States, Israel
and Palestine, living peacefully, side by side. In this regard, we reiterate our call to
refrain from any unilateral action that may undermine prospects for such a solution.
Russia, as a member of the Middle East Quartet of international mediators, is
ready to fully engage in efforts to safeguard the principles of the settlement, which
are enshrined in the relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions,
the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. They provide a basis for the
creation of an independent, sovereign, territorially contiguous Palestinian State
within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We say no to violence. At the same time, we say no to the annexation of
Palestinian territories, but also to that of the Syrian Golan Heights and of Lebanese
territories. We say no to continuation of settlement activities, the demolition and
confiscation of Palestinian property, and violent clashes.
Events show the urgent need to engage in efforts to salvage the peace process.
We are ready to support and facilitate them as a member of the Quartet. We are also
ready to engage with key countries of the region to consolidate collective efforts and
to hold Quartet meetings with their participation. We will continue dialogue with
countries in the Middle East and with the League of Arab States.
Palestinian unity is more necessary than ever. We will continue our efforts in
this regard, and greatly appreciate the role of our Egyptian friends.
We urge Palestinians and Israelis to continue coordination on fighting the
coronavirus disease pandemic. We share concerns about possible consequences of
the spread of the disease in the Gaza Strip. But even without the pandemic, the
humanitarian situation in Gaza is dire. We note that medical equipment has been
delivered by the World Health Organization and the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). However, given
the humanitarian situation in Gaza, these efforts should be enhanced. The work
of UNRWA, and support for it from the international community, become more
important than ever. We see no alternative to the Agency as an important element for
maintaining stability and providing assistance to Palestinian refugees in the region.

18/27

20-07023

S/2020/430

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I wish to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines continues to follow with concern the
developments affecting the State of Palestine and its people. We are deeply concerned
about Israel’s latest announcement, regarding the annexation of large areas of the
West Bank as early as July, and we call for the cessation of the construction of new
settlements and of all other illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem.
Annexation constitutes a serious violation of international law and severely
undermines the viability of the two-State solution. My delegation remains committed
to the international consensus on the illegality of the Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and the rest of the occupied
Arab territories.
Moreover, we remain concerned with the continued deterioration of all
Palestinian territory occupied by Israel since 1967 and call on all parties to abide by
their obligations under international law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention
and the relevant General Assembly and Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2334 (2016). We reaffirm our support for a negotiated two-State solution
based on the pre-1967 lines with mutually agreed land swaps. Any solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict must adequately and justly address the needs of both sides.
Resolution 2334 (2016) calls for “immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence
against civilians, including all acts of terror, as well as all acts of provocation and
destruction” ( para. 6). However, we continue to receive reports of clashes between
Israeli forces and civilians across the West Bank and in the Gaza Strip, resulting in
injuries and loss of human life. We condemn these acts of violence and call on Israel
to abide by its obligations and responsibilities under international law.
Amid these worrisome developments, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) continues to face chronic
financial deficits. We urge the international community to continue providing
funding for UNRWA and bilateral programmes in the West Bank and Gaza, in order
to improve and preserve access to primary and secondary medical care for refugee
and non-refugee populations.
To conclude, we urge Israel, the occupying Power, to reverse the settlement
policy in the occupied territories, including East Jerusalem. A comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the Palestinian question should take into account the
legitimate concerns of both the Palestinian and the Israeli sides and should include
internationally guaranteed provisions for bringing an end to the occupation and
achieve the two-State solution.

20-0702319/27

S/2020/430

Annex XII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of South Africa
to the United Nations, Xolisa Mabhongo
Let me begin by thanking Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his
briefing today. It is indeed a sobering account of the persistent reality facing millions
in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Allow me to make a few remarks on the issue of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) in the occupied Palestinian territories. South Africa fully supports the
call by the Secretary-General as well as the Envoys to the Middle East urging all
warring parties in the region to end hostilities and turn their focus to the challenge
posed by COVID-19. We should, however, emphasize that in the case of Palestine
there are no warring parties in the conventional sense, given the asymmetrical nature
of power in the context of an occupation. We support and continue to call for the
unhindered passage of humanitarian aid, medical supplies and volunteers providing
medical assistance to all parts of the occupied territories.
My delegation commends the Palestinian Authority for the efforts it has
undertaken amid difficult circumstances to ensure the health and safety of
Palestinians in the occupied territories during these unprecedented times brought
on by the COVID-19 pandemic and express solidarity with the people of Palestine.
We call on Member States as well as the rest of the international community to
support the efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in providing much-needed humanitarian assistance to
Palestinian refugees.
I would now like to turn to the reality that the Palestinian people currently
face. The Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations begins with the quote:
“We the peoples of the United Nations determined to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought
untold sorrow to mankind.”
We must acknowledge that we have failed the people of Palestine. Entire
generations of Palestinian children have known nothing but violent oppression and
the untold sorrow of being stripped of their lands, identity and human rights. On
15 May, Palestinians observed Nakba Day, when, 72 years ago, the world stood by
and watched while hundreds of thousands of Palestinians were forced to flee or were
expelled from their homes, villages and towns. Very few have been able to return
and reclaim their heritage. It is perhaps ironic that the history of our Organization,
which is meant to bring about global peace and security, runs almost concurrently
with that of the period of occupation that began with the Nakba.
The stated purpose of the United Nations is, according to Article I of
the Charter,
“To maintain international peace and security, and to that end: to take
effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats to
the peace”.
In that regard, we have again failed the people of Palestine. To date no action has
been taken to stop the building of settlements on illegally occupied land; to stop
the confiscation and destruction of Palestinian land and property; to stop the illegal
blockade of Gaza, essentially forcing 3 million people to live in an open-air prison;
or to stop the annexation of territory illegally acquired through the use of force.
All of those actions are violations of international law and a threat to the
maintenance of international peace and security, and no collective measures have been
20/27

20-07023

S/2020/430

taken towards the prevention or removal of the threats to peace facing the Palestinian
people. We, the Security Council, the wider United Nations membership and the
international community, cannot allow such flagrant violations of international law
to continue. The prevailing situation undermines our credibility.
South Africa reminds members of the Security Council that the fate of the
State of Palestine and the two-State solution, which has been endorsed by Member
States for decades, is aligned with international law, including General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions. These cannot be disregarded or ignored.
We, as members of the Security Council and indeed the United Nations, all
subscribe to a collective set of norms and values that should govern our behaviour
towards one another. Those principles are described in Article 2 of the United
Nations Charter, including its paragraph 4, which states:
“All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat
or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence
of any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the
United Nations.”
It is the obligation of the United Nations and the Security Council in particular to act
against those who go against these norms and values.
It is perplexing that during these unprecedented times, as the international
community addresses the global challenge of the COVID-19 pandemic, Israel is
exploiting the situation to further advance its de facto annexation of Palestinian
land. The dangerous prospect of Israel continuing with its unilateral actions and the
annexation of large parts of the occupied West Bank and the Jordan Valley not only
shows belligerence but also threatens efforts to advance regional peace. These acts
are illegal and also risk undermining the viability of a negotiated two-State solution,
which will have negative consequences for the entire peace process.
The international community must therefore act more decisively now to end
the occupation and reset the path towards a viable two-State solution guided by
international law. Additionally, South Africa would like to emphasize that any steps
taken towards formalizing the annexation of illegally occupied land or territory
should not go unchallenged.
Any peace plan for the Middle East cannot allow Palestinian statehood to
devolve into an entity devoid of sovereignty, territorial contiguity and economic
viability. In that regard, a solution must be premised on a just settlement, with just
laws, that is rights-based and that facilitates equality and equity for all who have a
right to live in the territories of Israel and Palestine. This includes sovereign equality
between States.
We therefore call on the parties and other States to refrain from taking any
unilateral action that would jeopardize the two-State solution and remove any
option for the parties to find a path towards negotiations in line with international
agreed parameters.
South Africa reiterates that the only viable and sustainable option for a
peaceful resolution of this conflict is the establishment of a viable Palestinian State,
existing side by side in peace with Israel within internationally recognized borders
based on those existing on 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line
with all relevant United Nations resolutions, international law and internationally
agreed parameters.
The future of the region hangs in the balance. The actions of a few in the
coming days and months will determine whether future generations will continue
to live under the threat of the scourge of war or if they will be able to enjoy the
freedoms and peace envisaged at the founding of the United Nations.
20-0702321/27

S/2020/430

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United Nations
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his extensive briefing.
A few days ago, alongside Palestinians worldwide, we commemorated the
seventy-second anniversary of the Palestinian Nakba, or catastrophe, in remembrance
of the pain of countless victims of occupation, discriminatory treatment, violations
of fundamental human rights and continuing aggressive unlawful practices by the
Israeli occupying Power over the course of more than seven long decades. Nakba Day
constitutes a renewed occasion for Tunisia to reaffirm its commitment to maintaining
its steadfast and principled support for the Palestinian cause and the indivisible and
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, which are not time-bound.
It is high time that the international community as a whole, and the Security
Council in particular, assume their responsibility to compel Israel, the occupying
Power, to abide by its obligations under international law, put an end to its aggressive
policies, cease all settlement activities and refrain from attempts to implement its
long-planned illegal de facto annexation of Palestinian land.
Amid alarming rhetoric and constant announcements by Israeli officials of
unlawful plans to annex parts of the Palestinian territory, on 30 April, the Council
of the League of Arab States adopted resolution 8522, in which the Arab Ministers
of Foreign Affairs unanimously affirmed that,
“the implementation by the Israeli occupation government of its plans to
annex any part of the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, constitutes
yet another war crime added to the long record of Israeli atrocities perpetrated
against the Palestinian people”,
and called upon the international Quartet to convene an urgent meeting to salvage
the prospects for peace and the two-State solution.
This is a moment of truth for all of us. In the light of the speech of the Israeli
Prime Minister asserting Israeli sovereignty over the Israeli colonies in Palestinian
territories, starting on 1 July, and considering that the annexation of parts of those
territories is a priority of his Government, the international community must react
by upholding international law, including the relevant Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2334 (2016), and strongly rejecting and preventing any such unilateral
illegal move, which would undermine all efforts to revive the peace process.
This Israeli Government attitude once again demonstrates its complete
disregard of international law and is a blatant violation of the relevant Council
resolutions and the agreements signed with the Palestinians. It is well known that the
denial of rights, the persistence of injustice and oppression, and continuing aggressive
practices against defenceless civilians all lead to frustration and exacerbate feelings
of helplessness and persecution, which will make the situation in the region even
more complex and undermine any prospects for peace.
The Palestinian people are facing the unprecedented challenges posed by
the spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic, on top of the already harsh living
conditions due to Israel’s illegal occupation and collective punitive measures,
including through the seizure of Palestinian tax revenues. The endless Israeli
blockade has also created an alarming humanitarian situation in Gaza.
We stress the need for the international community to continue to express its
solidarity with and support for the Palestinian Authority, including public health
response and economic recovery efforts. Likewise, substantial and urgent support
22/27

20-07023

S/2020/430

for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East is also essential to help meet the most pressing needs of Palestine refugees.
In conclusion, we reiterate Tunisia’s commitment to peace and international
legitimacy as a strategic choice, as well as to its principled position that security
and stability can be restored in the region only through a just and comprehensive
peace based on the two-State solution, as set forth in the Arab Peace Initiative,
and the internationally endorsed terms of reference. That peace must ensure the
establishment of an independent, sovereign State of Palestine along the 4 June 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and must resolve all final status issues.
That would usher in a better future of stability and prosperity for all the peoples of
the region.

20-0702323/27

S/2020/430

Annex XIV
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations, Jonathan Allen
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Mladenov for
his briefing.
I would like to begin by welcoming the swearing in of the new Israeli
Government. The United Kingdom looks forward to working with that Government
on a whole range of bilateral and regional issues, not least peace in the Middle East.
However, we remain deeply concerned about the prospects of the annexation
of parts of the West Bank. Annexation of any part of the West Bank by Israel would
be a clear violation of international law and would profoundly damage efforts to
restart peace negotiations. We instead encourage the new Government of Israel
and the Palestinian Authority to work towards a lasting agreement based on a
two-State solution.
To that end, the United Kingdom appreciates the proposals that the Palestinian
Authority has made for renewed dialogue. As part of this, we look to the Palestinian
leadership to offer detailed proposals for a settlement and find a means of restarting
discussions with the United States, which retains a key role in the Middle East
peace process.
We are disappointed by the announcement made by President Abbas yesterday.
Now is the time for more cooperation between Israel and the Palestinian Authority,
not less. Security cooperation is particularly important. Instability is in no one’s
interest except that of extremists. It is critical that both Israel and the Palestinian
Authority work together to meet their obligations under the Oslo Accords and refrain
from unilateral actions that could set back the cause of peace.
The United Kingdom remains committed to achieving a negotiated settlement
leading to a safe and secure Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian
State, based on 1967 borders with agreed land swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital
of both States and a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement for refugees.
We reiterate our call on the Government of Israel to halt any activity that
makes peace more difficult to achieve. That includes the advancement of settlement
plans, including in Givat Hamatos, Har Homa and in the E-1 area. All settlements are
illegal under international humanitarian law. Settlement construction in those highly
sensitive areas threatens to further undermine the viability of a future Palestinian
State with its capital in East Jerusalem. We also remain concerned by the continued
demolition of Palestinian property and the repeated incidents of settler violence.
Perpetrators must be held to account.
At the same time, we call on the Palestinian Authority to tackle incitement
and anti-Semitism, which create a non-conducive environment for cooperation and
negotiations. The United Kingdom strongly condemns the use of racist, hateful or
anti-Semitic language.
We remain deeply concerned by the ongoing cycle of violence. Recent weeks
have seen the killing of an Israel Defense Forces (IDF) soldier in Jenin and the
killing of a number of Palestinians across the West Bank. Among those Palestinians
killed was 15-year-old Zaid Al-Qaysiya from Hebron, who died as a result of IDF
live fire. Every Israeli and Palestinian has the right to live in peace and security.
The ongoing violence underlines the fact that a just and lasting resolution that
ends the occupation and delivers peace for both Israelis and Palestinians is long

24/27

20-07023

S/2020/430

overdue. We urge continued calm in Gaza. Indiscriminate attacks against civilians
are unacceptable.
Finally, I would like to thank the Government of Israel for pledging, on behalf
of Israel, $60 million to the international fund for vaccines at the Coalition for
Epidemic Preparedness Innovations summit on 4 May. During this global crisis,
cooperation is vital, and we continue to welcome the ongoing cooperation between the
Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority towards tackling the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19), as well as the important part played by the United Nations.
It is our hope that the positive cooperation we have seen in response to
COVID-19 will translate into cooperation to achieve a negotiated settlement to the
Middle East peace process.

20-0702325/27

S/2020/430

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States to
the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. As always, his efforts and those
of his team are to be applauded, and I thank him warmly once again. I know that he
does not have an easy job and, therefore, there is all the more reason to tell him how
much we appreciate the fairness with which he works to address this conflict.
At recent Council meetings on this issue, we have highlighted the encouraging
cooperation that has occurred between Israelis and Palestinians in the fight against the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Combating the virus, as well as that cooperation,
are both still important, but that is not what I am going to focus on here today.
Today I want to speak about what needs to be done to move in the direction of
meaningful progress in the Middle East. We listened closely to what each Council
member has to say about this matter and what they said in February, March and
April. So, I want to note, as I have before, that we understand that many of them have
concerns with, and objections to, elements of the Trump Administration’s vision
for peace.
But statements of concern from Council members will get us only so far. What
is needed right now, if we hope to take even a first step in the right direction, is for
the parties to sit down with one another. The Council cannot dictate the end of this
conflict. We can only encourage the parties to sit down together to determine how
they wish to make progress.
For those here who have concerns, I want to stress that this monthly briefing
is not where the real problem-solving will take place. It will take place at a table at
which both the Israelis and the Palestinians are seated.
The question for us should be not only about our individual concerns. The
question is how we can each play a more proactive role in getting the parties to speak
directly with one another to address their concerns. If both sides are serious about
talking, it is time for them to prove it. And if the Council is serious about wanting to
see progress in the Middle East, then I urge all present to look seriously at the steps
they can take to encourage direct negotiations.
President Trump presented our vision for peace because we think it is
realistic and implementable. We heard this morning about President Abbas’s recent
announcement. With regard to that, we as the Council need to encourage the
Palestinians to see this initiative as an opportunity to realize their aspirations. But it
is also a starting point, as I have said many times.
I truly believe that we all want to see an end to this conflict. Moreover, we
have all expressed a conviction that conversation between the parties is the only way
forward. But if that conviction is sincere, then we must concentrate our efforts on
bringing the parties to the table, not on Council statements that, I think, we all have
to admit have grown a little bit repetitive.
Let me close by quoting President Trump:
“All humanity should be able to enjoy the glories of the Holy Land. This part
of the world is forever connected to the human soul and the human spirit.
These ancient lands should not be a symbol of conflict but eternal symbols
of peace.”

26/27

20-07023

S/2020/430

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing.
We noted with concern the latest developments on the ground, especially the
humanitarian situation in Gaza and the illegal settlement enlargement. Given these
circumstances, allow me to emphasize the following points.
First, we commend the effective coordination between Israel and Palestine
in the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). This very positive gesture
proves that parties to a conflict can always cooperate if they share the goal of saving
people’s lives.
However, we remain deeply concerned over the dire humanitarian situation
in Gaza. A possible outbreak of COVID-19 could bring overwhelming devastation
to the already poor health-care conditions and pose a deadly threat to 2 million
people there. We call for a full lifting of the Israeli blockade in Gaza to facilitate
the response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We once again express our appreciation
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) for its tireless efforts in the occupied Palestinian territory. Last week
Viet Nam pledged a new budget donation to UNRWA, and we wish to see increased
support on the part of the international community for the Agency.
Secondly, we share other Council members’ concerns about continued
settlement activities and the annexation plan for the occupied Palestinian territory.
Just two weeks ago, Israel’s Defence Minister approved the construction of some
7,000 new housing units in the settlement of Efrat, in the West Bank. Unilateral
actions like those are illegal under international law and constitute the biggest
obstacle to the peace process. We call on Israel to immediately stop such attempts and
to fulfil its obligations under resolution 2334 (2016) and other relevant resolutions.
Thirdly, we are deeply concerned that hostilities are almost an everyday
occurrence in the occupied Palestinian territory. Last week there were reports of
violent incidents in the West Bank, resulting in the deaths of a 15-year-old Palestinian
and an Israeli soldier, and injuring dozens of Palestinian civilians. We urge the
parties concerned to refrain from acts of provocation or violence. The peace process
can be revived only on the basis of efforts by the parties to de-escalate tensions.
Fourthly, Viet Nam fully supports the mediation efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Coordinator. We welcome all other initiatives and efforts
seeking a just, comprehensive and lasting solution that ensures the legitimate
interests of both Palestinians and Israelis. We urge the Middle East Quartet to play
its role in encouraging the long-awaited resumption of peace talks between Israel and
Palestine on the basis of internationally agreed parameters, including the relevant
United Nations resolutions.
Finally, we firmly believe that the only viable solution to the conflict is a twoState solution that establishes an independent and sovereign Palestinian State along
the pre-1967 lines, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

20-0702327/27
