Resolatiom adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

including the drawing up of an electoral law and of
an independence constitution ;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate action, in consultation with the administering
Power and the Special Committee, to ensure the presence of the United Nations in the Territory for the
supervision of the preparation for, and the holding of,
the election envisaged in paragraph 5 ( b) above and
to participate in all other measures leading towards the
independence of the Territory;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution to the administering Power
and to report to the Special Committee on its implementation ;
9. Decides to maintain the question of Equatorial
Guinea on its agenda.
1641st plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.
2356 (XXII). Question of French Somallland
The General Assembly,
Having._ considered the question of French Somaliland
(Djibouti),
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2228 (XXI) of 20 December 1966,
Having considered the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to French Somaliland (Djibouti), 27
Considering the circumstances in which the referendum organized by the administering Power took place
on 19 March 1967,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
French Somaliland (Djibouti) to self-determination
and independence in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Regrets that the administering Power has not cooperated with the United Nations in the application
of resolution 1514 (XV) and did not implement General Assembly resolution 2228 (XXI) ;
3. Calls upon the administering Power to create the
political conditions necessary for accelerating the implementation of the right of the people to self-determination and independence, including the full exercise of
political freedoms, and to allow the return of all refugees to the Territory;
4. Urges the administering Power to co-operate fully
with the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and with the United Nations in accelerating the process
of decolonization in the Territory and to grant independence to the inhabitants at an early date;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of the situation in French Somaliland
(Djibouti) and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session;
6. Decides to keep the question of French Somaliland
(Djibouti) on its agenda.
1641st plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.
21 Ibid.,

chapter XII.

55

2357 (XXII). Question of American Samoa, Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling)
Islands, Dominica, Gilbert and Ellice Islands,
Grenada, Guam, Mauritius, Montserrat, New
Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena, St.
Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent,
Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Swaziland,
Tokelau Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands
and the United States Virgin Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands,
Cayman Islands, Cocos_ (Keeling) Islands, Dominica,
Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Grenada, Guam, Mauritius,
Montserrat, New Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena,
St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Swaziland, Tokelau Islands,
Turks and -Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin
Islands,
Having examined the chapters of the report of tlw
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories, 28
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961, 1~10 1 \'. \' 11 1
of 17 December 1962, 1956 (XVIII) of 11 December
1963, 2066 (XX) of 16 December 1965. 20(19 ( \'. \'.) of
16 December 1965, 2189 (XXI) of 13 December 1966,
2232 (XXI) of 20 December 1966 and 2288 ( XXl I) of
7 December 1967,
Noting the constitutional changes that were introduced in February and March 1967 in the Territories
of Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-NevisAnguilla and St. Lucia and that are envisaged for the
Territory of St. Vincent,
Noting further the decision taken by the Special Committee that General Assembly resolution 15 I 4 ( X\')
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and other relevant resolutions continue to apply to these Territories,
Deeply concerned at the information contained in the
report of the Special Committee on the conti11uati<1n of
policies which aim, among other things, at the disruption of the territorial integrity of some of these Territories and at the creation by the administering Powers
of military bases and installations in contravention of
the relevant General Assembly resolutions,
Deplorinp the attitude of some administering I 'owers
which continue to refuse to allow United Nations visiting missions to visit these Territories,
Conscious that these situations require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations i11 the
achievement by the peoples of these Territories of their
objectives, as embodied in the Charter of the United
Nations and in the Declaration on the Granting of f 11dependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Aware of the special circumstances of geographical
location and economic conditions of some of these Territories,
l. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the I mplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of I112s Ibid., chapters XI, XIV to XVIII, XX and XX!ll

S6

General ANembly-Twenty-aeeond Senion

the establishment of military bases and installations in
these Territories is incompatible with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) ;
5. Urges the administering Powers to allow United
Nations visiting missions to visit the Territories and to
extend to them full co-operation and assistance ;
6. Decides that the United Nations should render
all help to the peoples of these Territories in their
efforts freely to decide their future status;
7. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
pay special attention to these Territories and to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session on
the implementation of the present resolution ;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide all possible assistance in the implementation of
the present resolution.
1641st plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

dependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to these Territories;"
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
these Territories to self-determination and independence;
3. Calls upon the administering Powers to implement without delay the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
4. Rntwates its declaration that any attempt aimed
at the partial or total disruption of the national unity
and the territorial integrity of colonial Territories and
21 The President of the General Assembly, before putting
the text of the present resolution to the vote, pointed out that,
in at>proving chapter XI of the Special Committee's report,
relatms to Swaziland, the Assembly would be deciding that,
subject to the consent of the donor Governments, the contribution• 10 far made to the Fund for the Economic Development
of Ba1utoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland, established under
General Assembly resolution 2063 (XX) of 16 December
1965, would be transferred to the United Nations Development
Programme.

*

*

*

Other decisions
Report of the Tr111teeahip Council
(Item 18)
At its 1641st plenary meeting, on 19 December 1967, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Fourth Committee,ao took note of paragraphs 10 to
15 of the special report of the Trusteeship Council on its thirteenth special session,11
regarding the composition of the Council.
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countrlea and Peoplea
(Item 28)
At its 1594th plenary meeting, on 3 November 1967, the General Assembly
took note of the decision of the Fourth Committee11 to transmit to the Chairman
of -the Sixth Committee, in connexion with that Committee's consideration of
item 87 (Consideration of principles of international law concerning friendly relations and co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations), the statements made at the 1697th and 1704th meetings of the
Fourth Committee, on 19 and 27 October 1967, by the representative of South
Africa.
At its 1613th plenary meeting, on 30 November 1967, •the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Fourth Committee,11 adopted the following text
as representing the consensus of the members of the Assembly :
"Having considered -the chapter of the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Aden," including the report of the United Nations Special Mission on Aden,111
the General Assembly takes note of that report and expresses its appreciation
of the work done by the Special Mission. In wishing peace and prosperity
to the Territory on its accession to independence, the General Assembly
reaffirms the unity and territorial integrity of the whole Territory, including
all the islands as prescribed in General Assembly resolution 2183 (XXI) of
ao 01/itial R,cords of llu Gl1tWIU Assnnbly, TWfflly-second S11.sitm, .AMJests, a1enda.
item 1~ document A/7009, para. 14.
11,l,id., document A/fN8,,

.

II Ibid., a,enda item 23, document A/6884, para. 11.

II Ibid., document A/6921), para. 9.
"Ibid., addendum to a,enda item 23 (A/6700/Rev.l), chapter VI.
Ill Ibid., chapter VI, annex III.
