S/2020/890

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 September 2020
Original: English

Situation in South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2514
(2020), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) until 15 March 2021 and requested me to report to the Council
on the implementation of the Mission’s mandate every 90 days. It covers political and
security developments between 1 June and 31 August 2020, the humanitarian and human
rights situation and progress made in the implementation of the Mission’s mandate.

II. Political and economic developments
2.
On 17 June, the President of South Sudan, Salva Kiir, and the First Vice President, Riek Machar, reached a decision on responsibility-sharing ratios for
gubernatorial and State positions, ending a three-month impasse on the allocations of
States. Central Equatoria, Eastern Equatoria, Lakes, Northern Bahr el-Ghazal, Warrap
and Unity were allocated to the incumbent Transitional Government of National
Unity; Upper Nile, Western Bahr el-Ghazal and Western Equatoria were allocated to
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition (SPLM/A-IO); and
Jonglei was allocated to the South Sudan Opposition Alliance. The Other Political
Parties coalition was not allocated a State, as envisioned in the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, in which the
coalition had been guaranteed 8 per cent of the positions.
3.
On 29 June, the President appointed governors of 8 of the 10 States and chief
administrators of the administrative areas of Abyei, Ruweng and Pibor. On 17 July, the
governor of Jonglei was appointed, a decision objected to by the National Democratic
Movement (a member of the South Sudan Opposition Alliance), which argued that it had
further prevented it from participating in the Revitalized Transitional Government of
National Unity because its nominee had not been considered. The Upper Nile governor
position remains vacant owing to disagreement over the nomination of Lieutenant
General Johnson Olony, whom the President refused to appoint.
4.
Although the Revitalized Agreement requires 35 per cent participation of
women in all institutions of governance, only one woman nominated by SPLM/A -IO
was appointed as governor. On 2 July, women leaders issued a communiqué addressed
to the President, calling on the parties to adhere to the 35 per cent quota.

20-11243 (E)

100920

*2011243*

S/2020/890

5.
On 10 August, a high-level committee on the formation of State and local
governments reported that the parties had agreed on 10 State governors, one of whom
was a woman, and their deputies, 10 speakers of State assemblies and their deputies and
79 county commissioner positions. They also agreed on 35 county councils, 17 ministers,
51 members of State assemblies, 5 State advisers, 6 chairpersons, 6 commission deputies
and 8 specialized committees in each State. The responsibility for nominating mayors,
their deputies and secretaries-general was entrusted to the governors.
6.
As a result of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, political activity
remained limited. The First Vice-President and the Vice-President, James Wani Igga,
along with other cabinet members who had previously tested positive for COVID -19,
resumed their duties. The resumption of duties did not, however, translate into full
normalcy in government operations because pandemic-related restrictions prevented
sustained engagement among parties, stakeholders and mediators. While efforts were
undertaken to employ online modes of interaction, technical and organ izational
challenges hindered those initiatives.
Implementation of the Revitalized Agreement
7.
The Strategic Defence and Security Review Board made no progress towards a
broader framework for security sector reform, including with regard to the visio n,
size, composition and budget of the national army, the security service and other
organized forces, as envisioned in the Revitalized Agreement.
8.
Limited progress was made towards the implementation of transitional security
arrangements, with plans to train, graduate and deploy the necessary unified forces
remaining unfulfilled. Training centres and cantonment sites continued to be deserted
by forces owing to a lack of food, water, medicine and essential services. Most
government forces were not yet part of the unification process and remained in
barracks throughout the country, while the opposition parties sent a significant portion
of their forces to such centres and sites.
9.
On 13 and 14 July, the Joint Defence Board held a workshop on the restructu ring
of security organs, the army, the police, prisons, the National Security Service, wildlife
services and fire services. On 11 August, the Board submitted the harmonized command
structures of the necessary unified forces to the National Transitional Committee.
10. The activities of the National Constitutional Amendment Committee continued
to be deferred owing to COVID-19-related restrictions. Similarly, delays in the
reconstitution of the Transitional National Legislative Assembly impeded the
consideration and passing of necessary laws.
Peace process developments
11. On 19 August, the Governance Cluster, chaired by the First Vice-President,
deliberated on all outstanding tasks and the impact of the pandemic on the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement. The cluster decided that all
outstanding and scheduled tasks would be extended for a period of six months.
12. The power vacuum at the subnational level, a result of delays in the appointment
of State governors, contributed to increased tensions and violent intercommunal
clashes, threatening the gains outlined in the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities
between the Government of the Republic of South Sudan and the Sudan People ’s
Liberation Movement/Army (in Opposition). On 4 June, the Deputy Minister of
Interior, Mabior Garang de Mabior, resigned, citing, among other reasons, the
deteriorating security situation throughout South Sudan, which he attributed to the
failure of the parties to implement the peace agreement.
13. On 23 June, the President appointed a high-level committee to investigate the
security situation in Jonglei and the Greater Pibor Administrative Area. Headed by the
2/18

20-11243

S/2020/890

Vice-President, it was tasked with engaging with community elders and other
stakeholders to contain intercommunal violence. The committee is expected to organize
a peace conference to achieve an agreement among the concerned communities.
14. On 9 July, the President, in his Independence Day address, expressed concern
about a spike in intercommunal and intracommunal violence, adding that the
Government would initiate dialogue with the affected communities and undertake
full-scale disarmament of the civilian population while ensuring the participation and
representation of marginalized groups in the Government.
15. On 14 July, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) held its
thirty-sixth Extraordinary Assembly of Heads of State and Government online. Regional
leaders appealed to the President to dissolve the Transitional National Legislative
Assembly by 26 July and reconstitute it within seven days of the dissolution. They also
requested the Government to take remedial measures to rectify the alterations made to
the constitutional amendment bill and to provide resources to complete unfinished
transitional security arrangements. Because the outstanding pre-transitional tasks
remained pending after 13 August, the regional leaders resolved that the IGAD Chair
should engage directly with the parties to assist in concluding the pending matters.
16. On 16 August, Major General Charles Tai Gituai took over from Lieutenant
General (Retired) Augustino Njoroge as Interim Chairperson of the reconstituted Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission. The Commission has not had a permanent
Chairperson since the departure of its former one, Festus Mogae, in September 2018.
17. On 31 August, the President chaired a signing ceremony, held in Juba, for the
initial peace agreement between the transitional Government of the Sudan and the
Sudanese Revolutionary Front.
Economic situation
18. The economy of South Sudan continues to face fiscal distress resulting from low
oil prices in the global market and COVID-19 response measures that caused a
decrease in non-oil revenue. The disease also had a negative impact on small
businesses, while intercommunal and intracommunal conflict and flooding in certain
areas eroded livelihood opportunities. In addition, the Government’s ability to finance
the peace process and respond fiscally to the health and socioeconomic impacts of
COVID-19 were diminished.

III. Security situation
19. The security situation deteriorated at the subnational level, with complex
conflicts emerging among ethnic groups operating along with increasingly fractious
alliances and targeted security campaigns. Localized conflicts consumed multiple
areas of Jonglei, Lakes, Unity, Warrap and Western Bahr el-Ghazal with multifaceted
objectives involving civilian and uniformed combatants, along with varied levels of
support from national stakeholders.
20. While the appointment of State governors is expected to stem some of the
tensions, political and ethnic fractures continue to drive subnational conflict.
Disarmament campaigns that are being rolled out in Lakes and Warrap to contain
localized violence have generated additional security concerns, with heightened
insecurity affecting Tonj East in particular. Likewise, as a result of a lack of progress
towards mediation with non-signatories of the Revitalized Agreement, conflict with
the National Salvation Front (NAS) has continued in a different geographical
location, but with reliance on the same tactics and consistent levels of intensity.

20-11243

3/18

S/2020/890

21. The onset of the rainy season has done little to contain localized violence.
Frequent spikes are indicative of a volatile security environment and the inability of
the centre to negotiate relations with the periphery through non-violent means.
Greater Upper Nile region
22. The situation in greater Jonglei remained of concern, as a series of four interrelated
developments dominated the area. First, a group of Dinka Bor and Gawaar Nuer advanced
from Bor in the first week of June to quickly overrun Manyabol and Gumuruk. The group
remained active, in particular in areas south of Pibor, throughout July and into August.
Second, additional Lou Nuer groups mobilized and joined the clashes in late July, which
led to a spike in displacement and increasing concerns about a potential attack on Pibor.
However, the groups withdrew to Akobo and other parts of northern Jonglei by early
August. Third, insecurity in greater Jonglei was affected by a continuation of Murle
attacks in Dinka and Nuer areas. Lastly, on about 22 July, more than 1,000 armed Dinka
Bor young people arrived in Central Equatoria by barge, then in Eastern Equato ria, from
which they threatened displaced Murle communities in the southern part of the Greater
Pibor Administrative Area. Their arrival and the threats made were well coordinated and
allegedly supported by uniformed forces on all sides. By mid-August, most of the groups
had withdrawn from the Greater Pibor Administrative Area and were in the process of
moving back to their home areas. Further details on the scale and impact of the nearly
two-month-long conflict in the Greater Pibor Administrative Area will emerge as the
security situation stabilizes and access is enabled.
23. In Unity, cycles of cattle raiding and revenge attacks continued along increasingly
precarious political and security fault lines. While raiding by Government -aligned
militias from Mayom into surrounding areas subsided following the intervention of the
newly appointed governor, Joseph Nguen Monytuil, revenge attacks continued, in
particular along the Warrap boundary. Similarly, low-intensity clashes continued
around central and southern Unity, with tensions developing between SPLM/A-IO
uniformed forces and disparate armed youth groups. In several incidents, casualties
were recorded when SPLM/A-IO forces clashed with organized youth groups in Leer,
Mayendit and Panyijiar. In a series of incidents, SPLM/A-IO uniformed forces from
Guit allegedly attacked four villages in the Ruweng Administrative Area, leading to a
counter-attack by Pariang militias on an SPLM/A-IO position.
24. In Maban, Upper Nile, tensions within the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North (SPLM-N) related to the defection of Major Adam Magazi spilled
over into refugee camps, resulting in a marked increase in armed forces activity,
which included clashes with Mabanese militia and the occupation of a school by
forces of the SPLM-N Malik Agar faction. In early August, those forces retreated to
the Sudan, however, concerns that they remain active in the refugee camps persist.
25. The nomination of Lieutenant General Johnson Olony as governor in Upper Nile
led to heightened tensions between the Shilluk and the Padang Dinka. A series of
localized incidents were observed, ranging from disputes over the renaming of Shilluk
villages with Dinka names to violent clashes over fishing areas, including the use of
heavy weaponry and the movement of forces. Tensions were also escalated following
the killing of the Malakal public prosecutor, a Shilluk and brother of the National
Democratic Movement leader Lam Akol.
Greater Equatoria region
26. In June, tensions around the southern portions of Central Equatoria subsided.
However, towards the end of July and throughout August, renewed clashes were noted
between NAS and the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces around the Lobonok
gold-mining areas, with a spillover towards Juba and into Eastern Equatoria. NAS
4/18

20-11243

S/2020/890

and counter-NAS activity shifted largely to the greater Mundri area in Western
Equatoria following a South Sudan People’s Defence Forces campaign in late May,
which dislodged NAS from areas around Yei, Lainya and Wonduruba, in Central
Equatoria. In late July, the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces renewed efforts to
dislodge NAS from bases near Kedibo, while NAS launched a series of road attacks,
disrupting the key link to Juba, and threatened the SPLM/A-IO base in the area.
27. Tensions and clashes in Western Equatoria remained linked to a split within
SPLM/A-IO and ethnic divisions. Major General James Nando, who had defected
earlier in 2020, was implicated in the recruitment and training of Azande young
people, in particular in the Tambura area. On 18 July, a senior Balanda SPLM/A-IO
leader, Brigadier General Santo Ali, was killed by Azande militia outside Tambura.
Tensions subsided after the Government intervened, with Nando recalled to Juba.
However, simmering inter-ethnic animosity, along with personal rivalry between
Nando and the newly appointed SPLM/A-IO governor, Lieutenant General Alfred
Futiyo, is likely to result in additional insecurity.
Greater Bahr el-Ghazal region
28. The recruitment and deployment of disarmament forces in Lakes and Warrap
dominated the security context in the region. An uptick in intercommunal violence
was observed ahead of the disarmament process owing to fears of selective and biased
disarmament. Linkages between senior security officials and their home areas in the
Dinka heartland exacerbated perceptions of manipulation of community dynamics to
pursue national political objectives. Those concerns came to the fore in mid -June,
when a combination of government security forces and armed young people k illed a
prominent gelweng (Dinka young people organized to protect cattle), entrepreneur
and leader of the 7 October Movement, Kerbino Wol. Similarly, on 8 and 9 August,
clashes between disarmament forces and armed young people in Romich, Tonj East,
resulted in the deaths of more than 140 persons.
29. Tensions related to the deployment of disarmament forces were recorded in
Western Bahr el-Ghazal as a result of a failed attempt by SPLM/A-IO to ambush the
convoy of the head of the disarmament forces, Lieutenant General Rin Tueny. An
SPLM/A-IO commander, Brigadier General Gabriel Bol Wek, and 11 soldiers were
subsequently detained by the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces. In retaliation,
SPLM/A-IO kidnapped nine civilians. On 19 August, interventions by the
Government, with support from the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism and UNMISS, enabled the exchange of
hostages and ended the stand-off.
Intercommunal conflict
30. Intercommunal violence deepened throughout the country, in particular in
greater Jonglei, Lakes, Unity, Warrap and Western Bahr el-Ghazal. The conflict
dynamics in greater Jonglei between joint Lou Nuer-Dinka attacks on Murle
communities in the Greater Pibor Administrative Area and subsequent reprisal attacks
by Murle on Lou Nuer areas left scores of persons dead and thousands displaced. In
Tonj, Warrap, armed confrontation between two Dinka subsections led to the
deployment of the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces to prevent further violence.

IV. Humanitarian situation
31. Persistent intercommunal violence, the pandemic and seasonal floods continued
to drive humanitarian needs in South Sudan. In Jonglei and the Greater Pibor
Administrative Area, more than 150,000 persons were displaced internally as a result
20-11243

5/18

S/2020/890

of clashes between armed youth groups, with 7,000 displaced persons provided with
physical protection at the UNMISS base adjacent area in Pibor. Armed conflict in
Central and Western Equatoria and Warrap also displaced thousands of civilians.
32. In an Integrated Food Security Phase Classification report issued in February
2020, hunger was projected to affect nearly 6.5 million persons in South Sudan from
May to July 2020. Approximately 1.75 million persons in 33 counties were estimated
to be in emergency food insecurity (Integrated Food Security Phase Classification
phase 4), more than a quarter of them in Jonglei and affected also by intercommunal
violence. In addition, 4.7 million persons in 37 counties were at risk of crisis food
insecurity (phase 3). The presence of desert locusts in several counties in Eastern
Equatoria further compounded existing threats.
33. More than 1.6 million persons remained displaced internally, while 2.2 million
sought refuge in five neighbouring countries. The number of internally displaced
persons decreased slightly as a result of the return of those displaced to their homes
and owing to the closure of some displacement sites. According to the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, in June, more than 11,000 refugees returned
spontaneously, bringing the number of returnees in 2020 to more than 65,000.
34. Widespread insecurity hindered humanitarian assessment and response, and in
some instances led to a reduced footprint or a suspension of operations. COVID-19related travel restrictions, including border closures, quarantine policies and visa
restrictions, continued to affect the mobility of aid workers and their overall response.
With the onset of the rainy season, flooding in Unity and Jonglei affected more than
500,000 persons, while inaccessible roads posed significant operational challenges
for humanitarian workers. The looting of supplies during subnational violence
remained a significant impediment to the humanitarian response. A total of 10 looting
incidents was recorded, compared with 1 during the same period in 2019. In Eastern
Equatoria, humanitarian personnel were subjected to frequent robbery and violence
along major roads. In early August, an international non-governmental organization
(NGO) convoy comprising two vehicles was ambushed by an unknown armed group
on the Yei-Lasu road in Central Equatoria.
35. The number of humanitarian access incidents reported increased. A total of 87
incidents was recorded in June and July in 2020, compared with 86 during the same
period in 2019. In June, subnational violence in Jonglei resulted in the relocation of
66 humanitarian staff members. On 28 June, a clearly marked ambulance transporting
an injured person to a hospital was shot at in Lakes, killing the driver, a national staff
member of an international NGO. On 13 July, two aid workers providing health -care
and nutrition services to community members in Pajut town, Jonglei, were killed
when an unknown armed group attacked the town, bringing to 122 the number of
humanitarian workers killed in South Sudan since the conﬂict began, in 2013.
36. Through the Humanitarian Response Plan for 2020, at the end of June, some
5.1 million persons were provided with life-saving assistance and protection services,
which represented 69 per cent of the 7.4 million persons targeted, including those who
were provided with assistance through COVID-19 response activities. As at 21 August,
according to the Financial Tracking Service, $617 million was secured against the
$1.9 billion requested in the plan. The appeal was revised in June to reflect emerging
needs. In the COVID-19 addendum to the plan, an additional $390 million was
requested, increasing the overall humanitarian appeal from $1.5 billion to $1.9 billion.
37. As at 30 August, 2,527 persons tested positive for COVID-19, from which 1,293
recovered and 47 died, according to the Ministry of Health of South Sudan. The United
Nations and partners continued to support nationally led COVID-19 prevention and
preparedness efforts, in particular in the areas of surveillance, case management,
infection prevention and control, risk communication and community engagement, and
6/18

20-11243

S/2020/890

water, sanitation and hygiene services at the national, State and community levels. As at
early August, 2.24 million persons were provided with improved access to water,
sanitation and hygiene services; 4.1 million persons were assisted with food and/or
livelihoods and cash transfers; 1.1 million persons were assisted through medical
consultations; more than 800,000 persons were provided with protection services, such
as child protection and gender-based violence support; and more than 600,000 persons
were provided with emergency shelter and non-food items.

V. Implementation of the Mission’s mandated tasks
A.

Protection of civilians
38. UNMISS continued to protect civilians both outside and inside protection of
civilians sites. The primary threats comprised killings, abductions, sexual violence
and the looting of civilian property, among other violations. Those violations were
perpetrated predominantly during intercommunal clashes between armed groups of
young people in Jonglei and the Greater Pibor Administrative Area. Using an
integrated approach, UNMISS responded to the threats at several levels. The Mission
leadership continued to exercise its good offices, carrying out sustained engagement
with senior government officials in Juba.
39. At the subnational level, UNMISS supported the South Sudan Council of
Churches, civil society, women leaders and local authorities in fostering dialogue with
Dinka, Lou Nuer, Gawaar Nuer, and Murle community leaders to address
intercommunal violence. The dialogue in reduced tensions among various leaders,
increased information-sharing on youth mobilization and the development of
strategies to dissuade young people from further violence.
40. In parallel, the UNMISS force established several temporary operating bases;
conducted confidence-building patrols to key violence-affected areas, such as
Manyabol, Likuangole and Gumuruk; and, together with United Nations police,
reinforced its presence in Pibor to provide physical protection to 7,000 displaced
civilians seeking protection in the UNMISS base adjacent area. Through the provision
of air assets to an international NGO, UNMISS provided critical life-saving support
for the evacuation of 17 seriously wounded civilians from Pieri to a hospital in Bentiu.
41. In Warrap, UNMISS supported the implementation of the revitalized Marial Bai
agreement, which sets out norms for cattle migration from Warrap to Western Bahr
el-Ghazal. The Mission organized awareness campaigns in eight border areas between
the two States and obtained commitments to refraining from actions that could
undermine the agreement. Concurrently, the UNMISS force established a temporary
operating base in Tonj, projecting a robust and proactive posture to build confidence,
deter intercommunal violence and protect civilians. In greater Equatoria, the Mission
conducted short- and long-distance integrated patrols in areas affected by clashes
between NAS and the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces.
42. Within the protection of civilians framework, and in support of the implementation
of the peace process at the grass-roots level, UNMISS conducted six workshops,
community dialogues and peace campaigns. The Mission focused on capacity -building
activities for traditional authorities, women and young people and disseminated copies
of local and national peace agreements, reaching a total of 692 participants. The scale of
the engagements remained limited owing to COVID-19-related restrictions.
43. In view of changes in the operational context, UNMISS conducted security risk
assessments for the Bor and Wau protection of civilians sites. No external threats to
internally displaced persons living at the sites were identified through the

20-11243

7/18

S/2020/890

assessments. Consequently, the Mission made arrangements to change the designation
of the camps and hand over camp administration responsibilities, including policing
and security, to the Government, in line with chapter III of the Revitalized Agreement.
The changes have allowed the Mission to enhance efficiencies and increase its
protection footprint beyond the protection of civilians sites by redeploying forces.
44. Gradual changes in posture resulted in a significant reduction in the deployment
of formed police units of the UNMISS force and United Nations police for static
duties around the Wau and Bor protection of civilians sites. The UNMISS force
continues to maintain patrols around the external perimeter of the sites with a readily
deployable quick reaction force. Community watch groups currently manage
pedestrian access control and crime watch within the sites, communicating any
concerns to United Nations police for follow-up action, including the deployment of
formed police units, if necessary. The Mission has maintained its security provision
with regard to humanitarian activities in the protection of civilians sites.
45. In anticipation of the change in designation of the protection of civilians sites,
which continue to house nearly 170,000 persons, the Mission undertook joint planning
with humanitarian actors in the Bor and Wau protection of civilians sites and prepared
an enabling strategy to support continued security and protection for the camps. The
actions included making transition arrangements, such as for the co-location of United
Nations police, and, where necessary, supporting capacity improvement for the South
Sudan National Police Service in law enforcement and justice administration.
46. United Nations police continued to expand its outward protection posture and
footprint beyond protection of civilians sites as a prioritized operational intervention
initiative, focusing on deterring and mitigating violence against civilians, improving
confidence and security and fostering a secure environment. A total of 113
confidence- and trust-building patrols, 32 short-duration patrols, 11 long-duration
patrols, 15 dynamic air patrols and 238 high-visibility patrols were conducted.
47. The UNMISS force conducted 27,030 patrols, including 784 short-duration
patrols, 99 long-duration patrols, 139 dynamic air patrols and 13 riverine patrols.
Rule of law and accountability
48. UNMISS continued its support for national accountability measures with regard
to security incidents affecting protection of civilians sites. A total of 13 persons
suspected of being responsible for serious security incidents within the sites in Juba,
Bentiu and Malakal were detained at UNMISS holding facilities. UNMISS referred
eight persons to national authorities for investigation and prosecution.
49. UNMISS continued to support justice actors at the national and State levels in
alleviating crowding in prisons and places of detention to advance critical COVID -19
prevention and response measures through the development of a coordination and
advocacy tool. The Mission funded and initiated a sewing project at Juba Central Prison
to manufacture 10,000 non-surgical face masks for prisoners and staff. UNMISS is
seeking to bolster the COVID-19 preparedness of security service hospitals through the
provision of basic personal protective equipment, thereby leveraging those institutions
to reduce the strain on and augment civilian response efforts. A basic needs assessmen t
of five service hospitals (three of the South Sudan National Police Service, one of the
National Prison Service of South Sudan and one of the South Sudan People’s Defence
Forces) has been undertaken. Avenues of possible funding are being assessed.
50. To mitigate migration-related violence in Warrap and Western Bahr el-Ghazel,
UNMISS, in coordination with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the International Organization for Migration and World Vision, launched a
two-year project funded by the reconciliation, stabilization and resilience trust fund.
8/18

20-11243

S/2020/890

In response to the community’s calls for accountability, as outlined in a communiqué
of 18 June, the UNMISS-led component will be focused on the promotion of
accountability for serious migration-related crime, including supporting the
establishment of a mobile special court, a mechanism found in national law through
which traditional leaders serve as advisers to statutory judges, and enabling it to
deploy as a rapid response mechanism at the onset of violence.
51. In the context of providing support for the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement, on 23 June, UNMISS supported the Joint Transitional Security
Committee through the provision of pedagogical materials to instructors of t he army,
the police, the prison service, the wildlife service and the fire brigade. The Mission
also provided technical advice on oversight reforms envisaged in the Revitalized
Agreement. In June, UNMISS utilized its chairing of the regular meeting of a working
group on public finance management to convene development partners and
representatives of the diplomatic community to discuss potential support for the
oversight and technical committees established by the Ministry of Finance. UNMISS
reviewed and provided inputs to the terms of reference for the committees to
encourage the increased participation of civil society and ensure that public financial
management reforms (including the institutional strengthening of the Anti-Corruption
Commission and the National Audit Chamber) are aligned with chapter IV of the
Revitalized Agreement and International Monetary Fund recommendations. The
Mission continued to support the Financial Intelligence Unit by initiating a gap
analysis of the national anti-money-laundering legal framework.
52. To advance critical reforms related to the peace process, UNMISS is
undertaking a review of the South Sudan criminal law framework and offering
technical advice, including on compliance with international and regional standards
and best practices and the harmonization of national criminal laws. A review of the
Interpretation of Laws and General Provisions Act is aimed at ensuring that
legislation is interpreted and applied clearly and consistently. In coordination with
the United Nations Development Programme, the Mission is providing technical
advice to the Ministry of Gender, Child and Social Welfare on developing a draft
family law for South Sudan.

B.

Monitoring and investigating human rights violations
53. UNMISS documented a total of 264 incidents, including arbitrary killings,
abductions, conflict-related sexual violence, arbitrary arrests and detention (including
proxy detention), torture and ill-treatment, forced military recruitment and the looting
and destruction of civilian property. The incidents resulted in at least 870 civilian
casualties (529 persons killed and 341 wounded), including of at least 50 women and
34 children. Of those incidents, 184 were attributed to community-based militias and
civil defence groups; 28 to the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces; 20 to NAS; 15
to SPLM/A-IO; 6 to the National Security Service; 3 to elements loyal to South Sudan
People’s Defence Forces-affiliated Major General James Nando; 1 each to the Rapid
Support Forces of the Sudan and the SPLM-N Malik Agar faction; and 1 to clashes
between government forces and SPLM/A-IO elements loyal to Brigadier General
Santo Ali. Attribution for two other incidents remained pending.
54. As a result of the pervasive involvement of heavily armed community-based
militias or civil defence groups, supported in some circumstances by organized forces,
intercommunal violence continued to have devastating consequences on local
populations, resulting in at least 488 persons killed and 312 injured. In Jonglei and the
Greater Pibor Administrative Area, protracted violence between members of the Murle
community on the one hand and allied Dinka Bor and Gawaar and Lou Nuer on the other
accounted for 30 per cent (132 persons killed and 125 injured) of civilian casualties.

20-11243

9/18

S/2020/890

55. On 12 June, the President issued an executive order for the reassignment and
promotion of 12 senior South Sudan People’s Defence Forces commanders to the
military high command in Juba, including those of six individuals who had previously
been identified in UNMISS Human Rights Division investigations as having been
involved in serious human rights violations. Two of the individuals are included on
the United Nations sanctions list. In July, at least two individuals allegedly involve d
in serious human rights violations were appointed as governors. The appointments
indicated a considerable lack of political will to hold to account alleged perpetrators
of human rights violations, in particular those with reported command responsibility.
56. In the context of COVID-19, the right to health continued to be constrained,
with multiple reports of persons suffering from a variety of illnesses, including
COVID-19, and being denied medical treatment owing to stigmatization and fears of
infection on the part of health-care workers in the absence of adequate personal
protective equipment.
57. UNMISS continued to receive reports of censorship, harassment and arbitrary
arrest and detention by the National Security Service of journalists, activists an d other
civilians expressing critical or dissenting views from those of the Government. In June,
for example, National Security Service personnel arbitrarily arrested and detained a civil
society activist for several days in connection with a public awareness campaign in
which transparency and accountability in government spending were demanded.
58. UNMISS welcomed a decision by the South Sudan Court of Appeals to quash
the death sentence of a juvenile convicted in November 2017 for a murder committed
when the defendant was 15 years of age. However, two inmates at Juba Central Prison
were executed in July, and the Supreme Court decided suddenly and without
explanation to condemn an inmate sentenced by a trial court to life imprisonment
without an opportunity to appeal the decision.
59. Despite an overall climate of impunity, UNMISS documented four court
decisions in which seven members of the security forces were sentenced to terms of
imprisonment for serious crimes, including sexual violence.
60. UNMISS carried out nine human rights due diligence policy risk assessments
before travel and material assistance were provided to non-United Nations security
forces in support of the implementation of the peace process.
Child protection
61. The number of children affected by grave violations increased, from 32 in the
previous reporting period to 55 (46 boys and 9 girls). The increase was attributed
mainly to late verification of the number of children affected by recruitment and use
during incidents that had occurred in 2018 and 2019.
62. A total of 37 boys were verified as victims of recruitment and use, 7 girls were
verified as survivors of rape in seven violations, 4 children (3 boys and 1 girl) were
abducted, 3 children (2 boys and 1 girl) were killed and 2 boys were injured. In
addition, two attacks on health-care facilities and one incident involving denial of
humanitarian access were verified. Children were affected in Central Equatoria
(25 boys and 1 girl), Western Equatoria (4 boys and 6 girls), Upper Nile (14 boys and
1 girl), Western Bahr el-Ghazal (2 boys and 1 girl) and Unity (1 boy).
63. SPLM/A-IO perpetrated violations that affected 43 children (37 boys and 6
girls), the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces perpetrated violations that affected 2
girls and NAS perpetrated violations that affected 8 children (7 boys and 1 girl).
Violations against 2 boys were unattributed because they had been injured by
explosive remnants of war. The two attacks on health-care facilities were attributed to
NAS, while the incident involving denial of humanitarian access remains unattributed.
10/18

20-11243

S/2020/890

64. Notwithstanding COVID-19-related challenges, UNMISS delivered 13
awareness-raising sessions on child protection to 202 members of the security forces,
including 107 members of SPLM/A-IO, 79 members of government security forces,
13 necessary unified forces officers and 3 South Sudan Opposition Alliance officers.
In addition, 97 community members (94 men and 3 women) and 37 government
officials (33 men and 4 women) benefited from awareness-raising activities.
65. The country task force on monitoring and reporting on violations against
children and armed conflict began to support the establishment of high-level
ministerial and national-level technical committees as key oversight structures
responsible for the implementation of the recently signed action plan to end and
prevent all grave violations against children perpetrated by armed forces and groups
in South Sudan.
Conflict-related sexual violence
66. Notwithstanding an overall decrease in political violence, conflict-related
sexual violence remained prevalent and was perpetrated by parties to the conflict,
community-based militias and other armed elements, exploiting protracted insecurity
and a lack of protection by the authorities. UNMISS verified 21 incidents of such
violence, involving 29 survivors, including 7 girls and 2 men. The victims were
subjected to rape (11), gang rape (8), forced marriage (5), forced nudity (2), sexual
slavery (1) and attempted rape (2). Among the victims were girls as young as 10 years
of age, as well as 3 pregnant or lactating women and 1 mentally incapacitated minor.
At least 20 of the survivors received medical support. The incidents were attributed
to the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces (8), SPLM/A-IO (4), community-based
militias (3), the National Security Service (2), NAS (1) and the forces under Major
General Daniel Dongo (1). The perpetrators’ affiliation in two incidents had not been
determined conclusively at the time of reporting.
67. UNMISS documented eight additional incidents of conflict-related sexual
violence that had occurred prior to the reporting period, involving eight survivors,
including three girls. The incidents were attributed to the South Sudan Peopl e’s
Defence Forces (5), the National Security Service (1) and community-based militias
(1), with 1 incident pending attribution.
68. An SPLM/A-IO commander allegedly involved in widespread conflict-related
sexual violence, including sexual slavery, which was documented in a joint 2018
public report by UNMISS and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, was appointed as Governor of Western Equatoria State. The Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
continues to advocate the release of the abducted women and girls.
69. On 19 June, to mark the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual
Violence in Conflict, the South Sudan Council of Churches issued a statement urging
parties to the conflict and community-based militias to end conflict-related sexual
violence. In addition, the council expressed concern about the use of conflict -related
sexual violence by militia groups as a means of settling disputes through the
abduction of women and children, forced marriage and rape in States such as Jonglei
and Warrap. Church leaders appealed for the release of abducted women and girls, as
well as for comprehensive, stigma-free services for all survivors. The Mission and
partners discussed issues related to advocacy and accountability for conflict-related
sexual violence through radio programmes throughout South Sudan.
70. In a positive step towards accountability, in June, civilian courts in Kuacjok,
Warrap and Wau, Western Bahr el-Ghazal, convicted a South Sudan People’s Defence
Forces soldier and a South Sudan National Police Service officer, respectively, of
conflict-related sexual violence against children, sentencing them to prison terms
20-11243

11/18

S/2020/890

ranging from 5 to 10 years and ordering them to pay financial damages to the
survivors’ families. In July, the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces established a
court martial in Yei to try soldiers accused of conflict-related sexual violence and
other serious human rights violations. At least 13 alleged perpetrators of nine rapes
and two gang rapes, involving 11 survivors, were prosecuted by the tribunal in
ongoing trials. However, domestic law provides that civilian courts exercise
jurisdiction over offences perpetrated against civilians.

C.

Creating conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance
71. In continued support for humanitarian partners, UNMISS conducted 99 long duration patrols and 784 short-duration patrols across the country to support the
delivery of assistance or the protection of humanitarian workers, including through
the establishment of temporary operating bases.
72. UNMISS provided force protection to 169 integrated missions, enabling access
to high-risk areas. In addition, it conducted 967 force protection patrols supporting
convoys and humanitarian partners, including NGOs.
73. The Mine Action Service responded to requests from humanitarian
organizations in Central Equatoria, Upper Nile and Western Bahr el-Ghazal to survey
and remove explosive ordnance. At the request of authorities in Malakal, Upper Nile,
an assessment was conducted of a potential cemetery and an access road in
preparation for COVID-19-related deaths.
74. The Mine Action Service deployed 20 teams, which surveyed and released
586,683 m² of land, including civilian infrastructures, to local communities for
productive use and destroyed 8,402 explosive items and 304,589 rounds of small arms
ammunition.

D.

Supporting the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement and
the peace process
75. My Special Representative and Deputy Special Representatives continued to
exercise good offices to support the peace process, including the implementation of
the Revitalized Agreement, through sustained engagements with senior government
officials, opposition leaders and regional partners. UNMISS supported the launch of
a programme for the Political Parties Forum to enhance representatives ’ skills in
organizational policy development.
76. UNMISS expanded previous initiatives to implement innovative approaches to
collaborate with partners and stakeholders. The Mission hosted several political
round-table discussions on Radio Miraya, facilitating dialogue and bridging the gap
between the public and political leaders. Such discussions allowed the Mission to
disseminate coherent messaging while applying sustained pressure in support of the
implementation of the peace agreement, including the need to address outstanding
tasks and for robust intervention in response to increasing intercommunal violence,
which can reverse peace dividends.
77. My Special Representatives participated in the thirty-sixth Extraordinary
Assembly of IGAD Heads of State and Government, at which consistent United
Nations support for South Sudan and for the efforts of IGAD to address the challenges
posed by the pandemic was extended.

12/18

20-11243

S/2020/890

E.

Women and peace and security
78. UNMISS continued to advocate the adherence to the minimum quota for women
across governance institutions, as part of the Mission’s strategy on gender and women
and peace and security. Taking advantage of the gubernatorial appointment process,
the Mission actively engaged with women peacebuilders in support of efforts to
advocate the appointment of women to local government offices. The Mission
provided technical support to develop State-level directories of women leaders
aspiring to occupy public decision-making positions.
79. UNMISS continued to provide State-level task forces with technical assistance
and advisory services to address the concerns of women at high risk of exposure to
COVID-19. In response to an increase in the number of cases of sexual and genderbased violence, UNMISS collaborated with the Gender-Based Violence Sub-Cluster
to identify high-risk areas in which to deploy patrols and integrated field missions to
ensure a safe environment.
80. Owing to COVID-19-related restrictions, opportunities for direct engagement
with women peacebuilders and leaders remained limited. Nevertheless, the Mission
organized an online series of key leadership engagements with women’s civil society
organizations.

VI. Mission staffing, the status of deployments, and conduct
and discipline
81. On 20 August, the number of UNMISS civilian personnel stood at 2,649,
comprising 874 international staff members (242 women, or 27 per cent), 1,385
national staff members (197 women, or 14 per cent) and 390 United Nations
Volunteers (154 women, or 39 per cent).
82. The police strength stood at 1,824 of an authorized 2,101 officers, comprising
611 individual police officers (184 women, or 31 per cent), 1,143 personnel in formed
police units (216 women, or 18 per cent) and 70 corrections officers (16 women, or
22 per cent).
83. Of the authorized 17,000 troops, UNMISS troop strength stood at 14,528
military personnel: 192 military liaison officers (31 women, or 16 per cent), 363
military staff officers (62 women, or 17 per cent) and 13,973 military contingent
personnel (665 women, or 4 per cent).
84. COVID-19-related measures affected the Mission’s efforts to implement the
three-pronged strategy (prevention, enforcement and remedial action) to address
possible misconduct. The reduction in the number of newly onboarded ci vilian
personnel, as well as the temporary suspension of military and police component
rotations, resulted in diminished training requirements. Nevertheless, the Mission
focused on improving the compliance rate of mandatory online training on United
Nations Standards of Conduct, including the prevention of sexual exploitation and
abuse. In addition, the Mission provided direct and indirect online training to 4,407
uniformed personnel.
85. UNMISS continued to maintain contact with community-based complaint
mechanism gatekeepers and the Conduct and Discipline Focal Points in field locations
and ensured the provision of outreach materials. Online engagement with heads of
field offices, field staff unions and national staff associations was organized regarding
a wide range of conduct and discipline issues. The Mission continued to engage
actively with the national task force on the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse.

20-11243

13/18

S/2020/890

86. In accordance with the applicable policy, all information on misconduct was
processed in a timely manner. From 1 June to 31 August, 10 allegations were recorded
in the Misconduct Tracking System, including one allegation of sexual exploitation
and abuse. All identified victims of sexual exploitation and abuse continued to receive
support from the Mission’s Senior Victims’ Rights Officer in South Sudan.

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law and the security of United Nations personnel
87. As at 31 August, UNMISS recorded 36 Status of Forces Agreement violations,
compared with 64 in the previous reporting period. Of those, 23 violations involved
movement restrictions by the Government, impeding the Mission’s ability to
implement its mandate.
88. The Government imposed restrictions on UNMISS imported goods and
equipment, including rations and fuel. At the end of July, 46 UNMISS-contracted
trucks were prevented from entering the country. Following negotiations, the trucks
were allowed to enter; however, in August, UNMISS faced similar delays. The
Government continued to delay clearances unduly to import critical equipment,
including arms and ammunition, notwithstanding advance notification.
89. The Mission continued to experience access denial to patrols throughout the
country. Notably, on 19 July, South Sudan People’s Defence Forces and National
Security Service personnel present at the Jur River checkpoint on the outskirts of Wau
blocked an UNMISS quick reaction force that was mobilized to rescue the two
International Organization for Migration personnel who had been ambushed by
unknown gunmen.
90. The whereabouts of two national staff members arrested in 2014 remain
unknown. The Government has neither granted UNMISS access to them nor provided
information on their condition, notwithstanding regular requests. UNMISS recorded
two new arrests and detentions of Mission personnel by the Government, involving
two national staff members. Both were released after being detained for periods
lasting from a few hours to a few days.
91. The Government continued to impose stringent conditions on entry visas into
South Sudan for newly deployed UNMISS uniformed personnel. While progress has
recently been made towards the approval of the backlog of visas for UNMISS
Individual Uniformed Personnel, earlier delays and stringent conditions imposed by
the Government had a negative impact on UNMISS activities.
92. UNMISS recorded two incidents of interference with the implementation of the
Mission’s mandated tasks. On 16 June, armed young people from Jonglei imposed a
no-fly zone over the Greater Pibor Administrative Area with immediate effect until
further notice. The restriction applied to all United Nations relief, commercial and
military aircraft flying in and out of the Greater Pibor Administrative Area. On
18 June, a group of Murle young people in Gumuruk threatened to shoot down any
UNMISS flight over the Greater Pibor Administrative Area owing to rumours that the
Mission was supplying weapons and ammunition to the Dinka and Gawaar Nuer.
93. UNMISS continues to notify the Government of the violations through notes
verbales and regular engagement. A monthly matrix of the incidents prepared for the
Security Council is also shared with the Government.

14/18

20-11243

S/2020/890

VIII. Performance evaluation of the uniformed components
94. Two infantry battalions were evaluated, including with regard to mandate
comprehension and support, command and control, training and discipline, sustainment
and health. One was rated as “excellent” across all dimensions and the other as “above
average” overall. It was recommended that one of the units improve its language
capacity. Owing to the pandemic, several units were not evaluated as planned.
95. Five formed police units were evaluated, covering, among others, mandate
comprehension, command and control, protection of civilians, sustainment, training,
conduct and discipline and health. Although all units were rated satisfactory overall,
four were identified as having deficiencies in sustainment. A performance
improvement plan was put in place for each unit, and progress is monitored through
the quarterly evaluation process.

IX. Observations and recommendations
96. I am deeply concerned about the escalating intercommunal violence throughout
South Sudan, in particular in Jonglei, Lakes, Warrap, Unity and Western Bahr
el-Ghazal. Readily available weapons and the increased involvement of armed
uniformed personnel have intensified the nature and scale of erstwhile local conflicts.
Such violence can no longer be viewed parochially as intercommunal. It is imperative
to end the cycle of violence and impunity, which continues to fuel serious human
rights violations, of which civilians, in particular women and children, often bear the
brunt. In this regard, the decision of the President to appoint a high-level committee
to address the situation in Jonglei and the Greater Pibor Administrative Area is a step
in the right direction, and I assure him of the support of UNMISS and United Nations
partners to facilitate the work of the committee. I am also concerned by reports of
increasing numbers of sexual and gender-based violence cases and related impunity,
and I hope for the speedy reconstitution of the Transitional National Legislative
Assembly and the consideration of the draft anti-gender-based violence bill. Although
the Government’s efforts to ensure accountability for serious crimes are to be
welcomed, the Government is encouraged to put in place measures to preclude the
execution of death sentences in all circumstances, including through a moratorium
and commutations.
97. The confluence of persistent intercommunal violence, the pandemic and
seasonal floods for the second consecutive year in some areas has exacerbated an
already dire humanitarian situation. The unprecedented levels of violence in the
greater Jonglei area, for example, have left hundreds of persons dead and tens of
thousands displaced. I therefore urge the Government and international partners to
continue to support relief efforts and address underlying causes of the conflict to
alleviate the suffering of the people of South Sudan.
98. I am alarmed by the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces civilian disarmament
efforts in Tonj that have resulted in violence against civilians, including deaths,
displacement and the looting of the essential public and economic infrastructure. I
therefore urge the Government to substantively implement the Revitalized
Agreement, including its security sector reform provisions.
99. I note that the ceasefire among the parties to the Revitalized Agreement
continues to hold. The parties must, however, guard against the risk of widespread
intercommunal violence quickly unravelling progress. In the same vein, the
continuing tension between the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces and
SPLM/A-IO forces on the one hand and NAS on the other remains worrisome. I urge

20-11243

15/18

S/2020/890

the parties to abide by the Rome Declaration on the Peace Process in South Sudan
and take concrete steps towards building confidence.
100. While I welcome the progress made by the parties towards the allocation of
States and the appointment of nine governors, the impasse regarding the
reconstitution of the transitional national assembly, the appointment of the Upper Nile
State governor and the formation of the remaining State government institutions is
regrettable. The Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity has to act in
a unified way to resolve outstanding issues to ensure deliberate and substantive
progress towards the full implementation of the Agreement, including the 35 per cent
quota for women’s participation and representation in government.
101. More than 1.6 million South Sudanese are displaced internally, 2.2 million have
sought refuge in neighbouring countries and approximately 6.5 million are food
insecure. The support of international partners remains vital to stabilize the situation
through the Humanitarian Response Plan. As at 21 August, $617 million was secured
against the $1.9 billion requested for the plan. I urge the donor community to continue
to contribute generously to close the existing gap.
102. I strongly condemn the attacks that peacekeepers and humanitarian workers
continue to face while serving the people of South Sudan. The attack on, and killing
of, a humanitarian worker in Lakes, who was in a clearly marked ambulance, and the
killing of two aid workers, who were providing health-care and nutrition services to
community members in Pajut town, Jonglei, are unacceptable. I call upon the
Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity to investigate those incidents
expeditiously and bring the perpetrators to justice.
103. I also urge the authorities to urgently remove entry and access restrictions and
other operational impediments placed on the Mission and humanitarian partners.
Those delays have a negative impact on UNMISS operations and capabilities, as well
as on the mobility of aid workers and their overall response to urgent life-saving needs.
104. COVID-19 response measures continue to exacerbate inequalities and pose a
challenge to the national infrastructure, in particular health systems. UNMISS is
supporting South Sudan in responding to the global pandemic while simultaneously
supporting national and State authorities in upgrading medical capabilities to reduce
mortality rates from preventable diseases. The United Nations will continue to stand
with South Sudan in these trying times.
105. I reiterate my acknowledgement of the critical role and influence of regional
partners who, while beset by their own challenges related to the pandemic, remain
steadfast in their commitment to supporting South Sudan on its path to durable peace.
In this regard, I welcome the recent meeting of IGAD Heads of State and Government,
at which regional leaders reinvigorated the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement. I express my appreciation to the IGAD Heads of State and Government,
and I urge the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity to harness this
regional support to accelerate the implementation of the agreement. I also renew my
call for an expeditious appointment of a reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission Chairperson.
106. I endorse the efforts of UNMISS to adjust its force posture gradually in view of
changes in the operating context, as confirmed by Security Risk Assessments for the
Bor and Wau protection of civilians sites, in which it was indicated that external
threats of physical harm to the internally displaced persons therein no longer exist.
The gradual shift, which should culminate in the redesignation of those sites, has
allowed the Mission to enhance efficiencies and increase its protection footprint
beyond the protection of civilians sites by redeploying forces and expanding the area
and depth of its patrols through a more mobile and nimble posture. UNMISS will
16/18

20-11243

S/2020/890

continue the initiative in concert with representatives of internally displaced persons,
humanitarian partners and State authorities.
107. Lastly, I convey my appreciation to the uniformed and civilian personnel of
UNMISS and to my Special Representative, David Shearer, who, despite the challenges
posed by the pandemic, continue to implement the United Nations mandate for South
Sudan tirelessly. I also thank the troop- and police-contributing countries. I am grateful
to the United Nations country team and humanitarian partners for providing vital
assistance throughout the country, often in an insecure environment. Lastly, I
acknowledge the indispensable efforts of the IGAD Heads of State and Government;
the Chair of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat; the Executive
Secretary of IGAD, Workneh Gebeyehu; the Special Envoy of IGAD, Ismail Wais; and
the Community of Sant’Egidio towards ensuring peace in South Sudan.

20-11243

17/18

S/2020/890

18/18

20-11243
