S/2008/804

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 December 2008
Original: English

Letter dated 19 December 2008 from the Secretary-General
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my report of 17 November 2008 (S/2008/709) on
Somalia, in which I undertook to revert to the Security Council with further
proposals and alternative options in the event that the multinational force envisaged
in the Council’s presidential statement of 4 September 2008 (S/PRST/2008/33) did
not materialize.
As I advised the Council during its meeting on 16 December 2008, only 14 of
the 50 countries approached have responded to my request for contributions to a
multinational force. One country has offered to provide funding, equipment and
logistical support, while a second has offered funding. Two international
organizations also expressed willingness to facilitate contributions from their
members. However, no Member State has yet pledged troops or offered to assume
the lead nation role.
Although I have yet to receive formal responses from the remaining
36 Member States, it is my assessment that sufficient troop pledges to allow the
deployment of a multinational force are unlikely to materialize. I regret this
disappointing outcome, which stands in such sharp contrast to the exceptional
political will and commitment of military assets which Member States have shown
in respect of the fight against piracy. It remains my advice that the complex security
challenges in Somalia cannot be addressed within the capabilities of a typical United
Nations peacekeeping force and that a multinational force is the right tool for
stabilizing Mogadishu.
While I will continue to approach States that have not yet responded to my
appeal for contributions to a multinational force, and would request your continued
assistance in identifying a possible lead nation, I would like to present to the
Council the attached proposals on alternative options (see annex). These options
could be taken together as a package of steps that would be undertaken immediately
to support implementation of the Djibouti peace process and contribute to enabling
the conditions required for the eventual deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

08-66553 (E) 231208

*0866553*

S/2008/804

Annex
Somalia: next steps for the military/peacekeeping track
Note by the Secretary-General dated 17 December 2008
Background
1.
In its presidential statement of 4 September (PRST/2008/33), the Security
Council requested the Secretary-General to identify and approach States that might
contribute the required financial resources, personnel, equipment and services for a
multinational force for Somalia. To date, the Secretariat has received formal
responses from 14 out of the 50 countries approached. One Member State has
offered to provide airlift services, logistical support, equipment and funding for a
multinational force, while a second has offered to contribute funding. Two
international organizations have expressed willingness to help by mobilizing
funding from their member states. No Member State has offered to play the lead
nation role. It is our assessment that Member States will pledge some resources and
possibly troops, but not enough to allow the deployment of a multinational force.
Nonetheless, efforts are continuing to obtain pledges from the 36 Member States
that have yet to respond to the appeal for capabilities for a multinational force.
2.
Ethiopia has announced that it will withdraw its forces from Somalia at the end
of 2008. A number of Member States, as well as the Chairman of the African Union
Commission, Jean Ping, have expressed their concern about the impact of Ethiopia’s
withdrawal on the situation in Somalia. In a meeting of the International Contact
Group for Somalia on 16 December, Ramtame Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union (AU), noted the political commitment of the latter
to keeping the African Union Mission for Somalia (AMISOM) in place after the
departure of the Ethiopian forces, noting that this would be possible only if the
mission received the international assistance necessary to enable it to reinforce and
sustain its operations.
Next steps and options
3.
In the absence of adequate pledges for a multinational force, there are a
number of options that should be considered in order to put in place the necessary
security arrangements to support the Djibouti peace process. Those options could be
implemented simultaneously and would pave the way for the eventual deployment
of a United Nations peacekeeping operation, subject to progress in the political
process and an improvement in the security situation on the ground, in keeping with
Security Council resolution 1814 (2008).
4.
The steps which should begin immediately would include: (a) to request AU to
maintain AMISOM troops on the ground after the Ethiopian forces withdraw,
coupled with substantial, credible and immediate measures to reinforce the mission;
(b) to provide training, with international partners, for the joint police and military
forces of the Transitional Federal Government/Alliance for the Re-liberation of
Somalia (ARS) established by the Djibouti process and to build the capacity of rule
of law and security institutions in Somalia; (c) to explore the possibility of
establishing a maritime task force, or of adding to the current anti-piracy operations
a quick-reaction component that would have the capability of launching operations
into Somalia for specific tasks, including providing support to the peace-process-

2

08-66553

S/2008/804

related missions or the presence of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
(UNPOS), providing support to AMISOM operations and working with AMISOM
and the joint Somali forces to create conditions that would pave the way for the
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation; and (d) to continue
preparations for the eventual deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation at the appropriate time and under the right conditions.
(a)

Reinforcing AMISOM
5.
AMISOM will be crucial in filling the security vacuum that may be created by
Ethiopia’s withdrawal. Resources must be provided to allow AMISOM to be
reinforced and to achieve its originally intended troop strength (8,000) and to
enhance its capability to protect itself as well as key installations, such as the
airport, seaport and strategic areas that will be vacated by the Ethiopian forces in
Mogadishu. Support to AMISOM should be provided not only by the Secretariat,
but also by Member States. AU also envisages early deployment of police advisers
who could provide training, monitoring and mentoring to Somali police in-country,
where security permits, and has expressed willingness to consider a training role in
respect of the Transitional Federal Government-ARS Transitional Security Forces,
should this be requested. AMISOM does not have the mandate or capabilities to
assume a peace enforcement role.
6.
The Secretariat is working with the African Union to determine the resources
needed to reinforce AMISOM. It is understood that bilateral partners of AU have
already agreed to assist AMISOM troop contributors, Burundi and Uganda, by
providing the necessary contingent-owned equipment for the additional battalions to
be deployed. However AMISOM also requires significant support at the mission
level in the area of logistical, medical and engineering capabilities.
7.
The Secretariat is working with AU to develop a prioritized list of
requirements, covering both immediate and medium-term needs. As a concrete step,
and subject to approval by the relevant legislative bodies, the Secretariat has
developed a proposal for the immediate in-kind enhancement of AMISOM through
the transfer of approximately $7 million worth of assets following the liquidation of
the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea. The transfer would include
assets essential to the ability of AMISOM to support additional troops, including
prefabricated accommodation, electricity generators, air-conditioning units, ablution
units and soft-skin vehicles. This first package should be supplemented by a more
sustainable package of United Nations support to be mandated by the Security
Council. The Secretariat is also exploring, in consultation with Member States and
the Controller, creative ways of mobilizing assured funding for AMISOM.
8.
It is recommended that the United Nations take the following urgent and
specific steps to facilitate continued and reinforced presence of AMISOM in
Somalia:
(a) Request AU to maintain AMISOM troops in Somalia after the departure
of the Ethiopian forces and offer the assistance indicated below in order to support
the reinforcement of the Mission;
(b) Member States that have pledged funding or equipment for a
multinational force should be requested to redirect those contributions to AMISOM;

08-66553

3

S/2008/804

(c) A joint effort between the Secretariat and Member States to support
AMISOM is required. The Security Council could request the Secretariat to develop
and deliver a logistics support package for AMISOM, which would include
equipment and services normally provided to peacekeeping missions under the
heading of United Nations-owned equipment. The package could cover
accommodation, rations, water, fuel, armoured vehicles, helicopters, vehicle
maintenance, communications, some enhancement of key logistics facilities,
medical treatment and evacuation services. It would aim to provide mission support
services to AMISOM with a view to raising basic operational standards;
(d) The Secretariat should continue to support AU planning and deployment
preparations through its Planners team in Addis Ababa, with a view to facilitating
the build-up of AMISOM over a 6 to 12 month period; in this regard, to continue to
provide expertise and guidance to AMISOM to facilitate deployment of its
envisaged police component as security conditions permit. United Nations planners
should work with AMISOM and the Somali parties to develop a programme for the
selection, training, capacity-building and professional development of the Somali
Police Force. The role and activities of AMISOM should be developed in line with
the Djibouti process and in close coordination with the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and bilateral partners to avoid duplication and ensure
coherence.
(b)

Building Somali capacity
9.
The United Nations should build the capacity of the Djibouti signatories to
restore the security sector and the rule of law. One approach would be for the United
Nations to assist the parties in developing and coordinating a coherent package of
training for the joint Transitional Federal Government-ARS forces, as well as for
justice and corrections personnel. Other international partners would also help to
train and equip the Transitional Security Forces (initially 5,000 joint Transitional
Federal Government-ARS forces) as well as the Somali Police Force (10,000
civilian police), justice and corrections personnel, and other key areas identified by
the parties. They would be trained in conjunction with UNDP and Member States.
10. Given the current insecurity in Somalia, some of the necessary training would
be provided outside the country, under arrangements similar to the UNDP-sponsored
programme for the training of Somali police trainers. (For example, it is reported
that some Member States have indicated readiness to provide training for 8,000 to
10,000 Somali police personnel.) To enable the coordination of such assistance, the
Council could decide to expand UNPOS with a significant new advisory unit that
would include expertise in police and military training and planning for future
security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities,
as well as a rule of law and corrections component. Together, those personnel would
provide expert advice and assist in planning short- and long-term international
support to Somalia’s security and rule of law sectors. Capacity-building programmes
should begin at the earliest opportunity, with an early focus on training of trainers
outside the country and, as soon as security conditions permit, delivery of “quick
win” projects in Somalia itself. Programming across the security, police,
corrections, and demining sectors should take a national approach, be coordinated
with wider early recovery goals and focus on strategic issues, particularly the
reintegration of ex-combatants.

4

08-66553

S/2008/804

11. To ensure coherence between out-of-country and in-country training and
mentoring, a partnership should be forged among the Somali parties, the United
Nations (led by UNPOS on the ground), AMISOM and other international partners
who may be involved in the programme. As indicated in paragraph 9 above,
AMISOM intends to deploy police advisers and trainers as part of its reinforcement.
One approach would be to include in the reinforced AMISOM a component
responsible for security sector reform and training, with UNPOS providing
coordination and management of a robust trust fund, UNDP and bilateral actors
providing complementary training and assistance, and Somalia providing the police
and military components (along the model of the DIS in Chad). Across all sectors,
programming should be nationally owned, closely coordinated with existing United
Nations activities and build on the gains of activities previously undertaken by
UNDP and the United Nations Children’s Fund, among others.
12. Beyond the security sector, the international community should also
significantly increase its support to strengthen and build the capacity of government
at the federal, state and local levels with agreed performance indicators and
accountability criteria. A number of United Nations initiatives currently undertaken
through UNDP could be scaled up. The focus should be on institutional
development, human resource development, strengthening of planning, budgeting,
public finance management and public accountability processes and support to
service delivery.
(c)

Maritime task force
13. Concomitantly with the above steps, the Security Council should consider the
possibility of establishing a maritime task force, or requesting Member States who
are currently participating in the anti-piracy operations of the Somali coast to
include in their operations a component that would have the capacity to support
AMISOM operations, UNPOS peace process efforts and the United Nations
presence in Mogadishu and elsewhere in Somalia.
14. Planners in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations are developing a
concept of operations for a small multinational maritime force, which could be
either independent or part of the current anti-piracy operations, and which would be
based off the coast of Somalia within an accessible distance of Mogadishu. The
multinational maritime force could host a quick-reaction force that would support
AMISOM forces at the request of the AU Force Commander and could support
UNPOS peace-process-related missions in Somalia. It could be equipped to launch
operations into Mogadishu and other areas, as well as to provide emergency medical
or other evacuation support to AMISOM.
15. If a separate and independent multinational maritime force is established, its
mandate and tasks would be coordinated with other maritime operations currently
involved in anti-piracy tasks and in escorting WFP shipping. This option would have
the advantage of harnessing Member States’ willingness to commit robust naval
assets to address threats arising on land. It could provide an important signal of the
Council’s commitment to putting in place security arrangements to support the
peace process, a boost to the peace process, and an operational platform for the
launch of an eventual United Nations peacekeeping operation.

08-66553

5

S/2008/804

(d)

Contingency planning for a United Nations peacekeeping operation
16. It is envisaged that the above steps would help create a force on the ground
that could become part of a United Nations peacekeeping operation. The
contingency planning for such a peacekeeping operation is ongoing and will be
continuously updated to take account of the needs and priorities emerging from the
Djibouti peace process and to ensure that a viable concept of operations is in place
at the appropriate time.
17. We believe that taken together, the above steps provide the basis for a strategic
approach to strengthening the forces for peace in Somalia. Such an approach would
complement the measures already taken by the Council to contain the conflict. At
the same time, none of these measures is a substitute for political progress, which
must go hand-in-hand with security measures.

6

08-66553
