United Nations

A/RES/66/246

General Assembly

Distr.: General
29 February 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 134

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 24 December 2011
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/637)]

66/246. Questions relating to the proposed programme budget
for the biennium 2012–2013
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 60/283 of 7 July 2006, 64/243 of 24 December 2009
and 64/260 of 29 March 2010,
Reaffirming its resolutions 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 42/211 of
21 December 1987, 45/248 B, section VI, of 21 December 1990, 55/231 of
23 December 2000, 56/253 of 24 December 2001, 58/269 and 58/270 of
23 December 2003, 59/276, section XI, of 23 December 2004, 61/263 of 4 April
2007, 62/236 of 22 December 2007, 63/262 and 63/266 of 24 December 2008,
64/243, 64/260, and 65/262 of 24 December 2010,
Reaffirming also the respective mandates of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Committee for Programme and
Coordination in the consideration of the proposed programme budget,
Reaffirming further the role of the General Assembly, through the Fifth
Committee, in carrying out a thorough analysis and approval of posts and financial
resources, as well as of human resources policies,
Recognizing that late payments of assessed contributions, bearing in mind the
special situation of certain countries, adversely affect the financial situation of the
Organization,
Having considered the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2012–2013, 1 the report of the Secretary-General on revised estimates relating to the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013 under section 1, Overall
policymaking, direction and coordination, and section 37, Staff assessment, related
to the strengthening of the Office of the Director-General, United Nations Office at
_______________
1
A/66/6 (Introduction), (Sects. 1 and 2), (Sect. 3) and Corr.1, (Sects. 4–7), (Sect. 8) and Corr.1, (Sects. 9–12),
(Sect. 13) and Add.1, (Sects. 14 and 15), (Sect. 16) and Corr.1, (Sects. 17–19), (Sect. 20) and Corr.1,
(Sects. 21–23), (Sect. 24) and Corr.1, (Sect. 25), (Sect. 26) and Corr.1, (Sect. 27), (Sect. 28) and Corr.1,
(Sect. 29), (Sect. 29A) and Corr.1, (Sect. 29B–E), (Sect. 29F) and Corr.1, (Sect. 29G) and (Sects. 30–37),
and (Income sects. 1–3).

11-47358

*1147358*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/246

Nairobi, 2 the report of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee on the proposed
programme budget for the Office of Internal Oversight Services for the biennium
2012–2013, 3 the seventh progress report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of projects financed from the Development Account, 4 the fourth
progress report of the Secretary-General on the adoption of the International Public
Sector Accounting Standards by the United Nations, 5 the report of the Board of
Auditors on the progress in the implementation of the International Public Sector
Accounting Standards, 6 the report of the Secretary-General on enterprise
information and communications technology initiatives for the United Nations
Secretariat, 7 the third progress report of the Secretary-General on the Umoja
enterprise resource planning project, 8 the report of the Secretary-General on limited
budgetary discretion 9 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 10
Having also considered chapter II, section A, of the report of the Committee
for Programme and Coordination on its fifty-first session 11 and the consolidated
report of the Secretary-General on the changes to the biennial programme plan as
reflected in the programme budget for the biennium 2010–2011 and the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013, 12
Having further considered the report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services on the review of the organizational framework of the public information
function of the Secretariat 13 and the report of the Secretary-General on progress on
the implementation of the recommendations of the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on the efficiency of the implementation of the mandate of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, 14
Having considered the reports of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled “Review of
management and administration in the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime”, 15 “Policies and procedures for the administration of trust funds in the
United Nations system organizations” 16 and “Preparedness of United Nations
system organizations for the International Public Sector Accounting Standards” 17
and the notes by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments and those of the
United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination thereon, 18
_______________
2

A/66/393.
A/66/85.
4
A/66/84.
5
A/66/379.
6
See A/66/151.
7
A/66/94.
8
A/66/381.
9
A/66/570.
10
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum
(A/66/7 and Corr.1); A/66/7/Add.1, 7 and 18; and A/66/536.
11
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/66/16).
12
A/66/82.
13
A/66/180.
14
A/66/74.
15
See A/66/315.
16
See A/66/348.
17
See A/66/308.
18
A/66/315/Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1, A/66/348/Add.1 and A/66/308/Add.1.
3

2

A/RES/66/246

1.
Reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of
the General Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and
budgetary matters, and reaffirms the role of the Fifth Committee in carrying out a
thorough analysis and approving human and financial resources and policies, with a
view to ensuring full, effective and efficient implementation of all mandated
programmes and activities and the implementation of policies in this regard;
Also reaffirms the role of the Committee for Programme and
2.
Coordination as the main subsidiary organ of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council for planning, programming and coordination;
3.

Further reaffirms rule 153 of its rules of procedure;

4.
Reaffirms the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning,
the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the
Methods of Evaluation; 19
5.
Also reaffirms the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United
Nations; 20
6.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination as contained in chapter II, section A, of its report;11
7.
Also endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the
reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,10
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
Policy/cross-cutting issues
8.
Reaffirms the established budgetary procedures and methodologies,
based on its resolutions 41/213 and 42/211;
9.
Also reaffirms that no changes to the budget methodology, to established
budgetary procedures and practices or to the financial regulations may be
implemented without prior review and approval by the General Assembly, in
accordance with established budgetary procedures;
10. Reiterates the need for Member States to participate fully in the budget
preparation process, from its early stages and throughout the process;
11. Emphasizes the importance of providing the consistent and timely
information necessary to enable Member States to make well-informed decisions;
12. Stresses that all Member States should fulfil their financial obligations as
set out in the Charter of the United Nations on time, in full and without conditions;
Results-based budgeting
13. Also stresses that results-based budgeting and results-based management
are mutually supportive management tools and that improved implementation of
results-based budgeting enhances both management and accountability in the
Secretariat, and encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts in this
regard;

_______________
19
20

ST/SGB/2000/8.
ST/SGB/2003/7 and Amend.1.

3

A/RES/66/246

14. Reaffirms paragraph 28 of resolution 55/231, and stresses the importance
of adequate training to ensure the full implementation of results-based budgeting;
Human resources, vacancy rates and staffing
15. Regrets the delays in the recruitment of staff for the Umoja enterprise
resource planning project, including of its Project Director, resulting from internal
processes, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to redouble his efforts
to fill all the approved posts, taking into account existing regulations and rules
regarding recruitment in the Secretariat, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its sixty-seventh session;
16. Recalls paragraph 31 of resolution 64/243, and expresses serious concern
about the lack of progress by the Secretary-General in developing a comprehensive
succession plan for the Organization, including, inter alia, for the language services,
and in this regard reiterates its requests for the Secretary-General to formulate a
strategy on succession planning for all departments of the Secretariat and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session;
17. Decides not to approve any of the cuts in posts and non-post resources
proposed by the Secretary-General in parts IV and V of the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2012–2013;
18. Decides that the staffing table for the biennium 2012–2013 shall be as set
out in the annex to the present resolution;
19. Reaffirms that the vacancy rate is a tool for budgetary calculations and
should not be used to achieve budgetary savings;
20. Decides that a vacancy rate of 4.7 per cent for General Service staff shall
be used as a basis for the calculation of the budget for the biennium 2012–2013;
Training
21. Requests the Secretary-General, using the resources allocated for training
in the present resolution, to increase training opportunities for staff throughout the
Secretariat, including for duty stations and regional commissions, and in this
context stresses that equal training opportunities should be available for all staff, in
accordance with their functions and categories;
22. Stresses that the largest possible share of resources provided for training
purposes should be directed towards the preparation and delivery of training and
that ancillary costs, including associated travel, should be minimized;
23. Recalls paragraph 112 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 21 and requests the Secretary-General to
assess how training programmes and objectives contribute to mandate
implementation and organizational goals;
Conference services and publications
24. Emphasizes the importance of ensuring that there is no discriminatory
treatment among the principal organs of the United Nations and the Main

_______________
21

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum
(A/66/7 and Corr.1).

4

A/RES/66/246

Committees and subsidiary bodies and that they are provided with adequate and
quality conference servicing and support;
Non-post resources
25. Decides to reduce non-post resources by 17 million United States dollars,
excluding parts IV and V of the proposed budget for the biennium
2012–2013;
Consultants and contractual services
26. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that, in future
programme budget proposals, requests for consultants and experts are clearly and
separately identified in the programme narratives;
Recosting
27. Decides to defer consideration of post-related recosting for inflation and
exchange rate projections to the first performance report on the budget for the
biennium 2012–2013, in order to ensure appropriation of post-related costs in line
with actual expenditure experience;
Extrabudgetary resources
28. Stresses that all extrabudgetary posts must be administered and managed
with the same rigour as regular budget posts;
29. Also stresses that the use of extrabudgetary resources shall be consistent
with the policies, aims and activities of the Organization, and reiterates its request to
the Secretary-General to provide information on the financial and human resource
implications of the use of extrabudgetary resources in the Organization in his next
proposed programme budget;
Part I
Overall policymaking, direction and coordination
Section 1
Overall policymaking, direction and coordination
30. Stresses the importance of strengthened accountability in the
Organization and of ensuring greater accountability of the Secretary-General to
Member States, inter alia, for the effective and efficient implementation of
legislative mandates and the use of human and financial resources;
31. Recalls paragraph I.6 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,21 and decides to establish one post at the
D-1 level to head the Rule of Law Unit and to retain the P-5 post;
Office of the President of the General Assembly
32. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, in the context of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015, proposals to review the budget
allocation to the Office of the President of the General Assembly in accordance with
existing procedures;

5

A/RES/66/246

Office of the Director-General, United Nations Office at Nairobi
33. Takes note of paragraphs 8 and 9 of the report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 22 and decides to establish one P-4 and
two Local level posts in the Office of the Director-General, United Nations Office at
Nairobi;
Section 2
General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs
and conference management
34. Decides to decrease the non-post resources allocated to the Department
for General Assembly and Conference Management by 10 million dollars;
35. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to improve the on-time
submission of documents and to institute measures to hold author departments
accountable for the late submission of documents;
36. Recalls paragraph I.58 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,21 decides not to implement the proposals
of the Secretary-General on summary records, and also decides to allocate
10 million dollars for the purpose of summary records;
37. Also recalls paragraph I.72 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and requests the Secretary-General to take
all the necessary measures to maximize the use of workload-sharing among duty
stations, in respect of translation services, without compromising the quality of the
services;
38. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all duty stations are given
equal treatment in respect of the application of modern technologies;
39. Emphasizes the paramount importance of ensuring the equality of the six
official languages of the United Nations;
Part II
Political affairs
Section 3
Political affairs
40. Takes note of paragraph II.7 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,21 and decides not to abolish one P-4 post
and one General Service (Other level) post, under subprogramme 4
(Decolonization);
Peacebuilding Support Office
41. Recalls paragraph II.30 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and decides to establish two P-4 posts for
the Peacebuilding Support Office;

_______________
22

6

A/66/7/Add.7.

A/RES/66/246

Office of the Register of Damage Caused by the Construction of the Wall
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory
42. Takes note of paragraph II.36 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and decides to increase by 306,000 dollars
the level of non-post resources of the Office of the Register of Damage Caused by
the Construction of the Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory;
Section 4
Disarmament
43. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the United Nations
regional centres for peace and disarmament with the necessary resources to
discharge their mandates;
Section 5
Peacekeeping operations
44. Also requests the Secretary-General to make further concrete efforts to
ensure proper representation of troop-contributing countries in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support, taking into account
their contribution to United Nations peacekeeping;
Section 6
Peaceful uses of outer space
45. Notes the review of the organizational structure of the Office for Outer
Space Affairs and the United Nations Platform for Space-based Information for
Disaster Management and Emergency Response (UN-SPIDER) programme, and
requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the consolidation of the organizational
structure will enhance effectiveness and efficiency without undermining the
implementation by the Office of its mandate;
Part III
International justice and law
Section 7
International Court of Justice
46. Emphasizes the importance of proceeding expeditiously with the
renovation of the Great Hall of Justice in the Peace Palace at The Hague;
Section 8
Legal affairs
47. Recalls paragraph III.25 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,21 notes that publications are a means for
the Organization to implement its mandates, and in this regard encourages the
Secretary-General to enhance the use of appropriate technology, to focus on areas of
interest to Member States and to explore options for cost recovery as appropriate;
48. Decides to increase non-post resources by 274,200 dollars in order to
provide sufficient funding for servicing the work of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law for fourteen weeks and to retain the rotation scheme
between Vienna and New York;

7

A/RES/66/246

49. Takes note of paragraph III.23 of the report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and decides to approve 2,451,800
dollars for travel and related costs for representatives and staff of the International
Law Commission;
Part IV
International cooperation for development
50. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts to mobilize
adequate resources from all sources to support the mandates related to
sections 10 and 11 of the programme budget during the biennium 2012–2013;
51. Reaffirms its resolutions 57/7 of 4 November 2002 and 57/300 of
20 December 2002, by which it established the Office of the Special Adviser on
Africa, and its resolution 56/227 of 24 December 2001, by which it established the
Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked
Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States;
52. Recalls paragraph IV.29 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,21 strongly reaffirms the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 62/236, 63/260 of 24 December 2008, 64/243, and 66/8
of 11 November 2011 in this regard, and requests the Secretary-General to
implement the provisions pertaining to the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa
and the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States in those
resolutions accordingly, in full and without delay;
Section 11
United Nations support for the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
53. Also recalls that the development of Africa is an established priority of
the United Nations, and reaffirms its commitment to address the special needs of
Africa;
54. Further recalls its resolution 57/300 and other resolutions calling for the
strengthening of mechanisms to support the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development; 23
Section 12
Trade and development
55. Encourages the Secretary-General to broaden the efforts of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development in supporting the strengthening of
regional economic integration in Africa by providing, within the allocation to the
Conference, technical assistance and capacity-building in the areas of trade, customs
and infrastructure, including the strengthening of statistical capacity;
Section 16
International drug control, crime and terrorism prevention and criminal justice
56. Recalls paragraph 83 of resolution 64/243, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to strengthen the provision of technical assistance to the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime through the West Africa Coast Initiative in order to
_______________
23

8

A/57/304, annex.

A/RES/66/246

support the implementation of a regional action plan to address the growing problem
of illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and drug abuse in West Africa;
57. Also recalls paragraph 84 of resolution 64/243, profoundly regrets the
delays experienced by the Secretary-General in opening a programme office of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Barbados to collaborate with the
Caribbean Community in such areas as corruption, drug trafficking, international
judicial cooperation and the promotion of firearms control, and requests the
Secretary-General to urgently open the office;
Part V
Regional cooperation for development
58. Emphasizes the important contribution that regional commissions are
making towards the implementation of the development agenda and other mandates
given to them arising from the outcome of the Millennium Summit, the Conference
on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development and
other major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and
related fields;
59. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the resource requirements
of the commissions are allocated in such a way as to enable them to fully implement
their mandates and contribute to the implementation of development priorities and
mandates of the Organization;
Section 18
Economic and social development in Africa
60. Decides to increase the grant to the African Institute for Economic
Development and Planning to 2.6 million dollars per biennium;
Section 22
Economic and social development in Western Asia
61. Takes note of paragraphs V.84 and V.85 of the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,21 and decides to establish
one post at the D-1 level for the Chief of the Division for Women, under
subprogramme 6; one post at the D-1 level for the Chief of the Emerging Trends and
Conflict-related Issues Division, under subprogramme 7; and one P-5 post for the
Chief of the Governance, Instability and Development Section, under
subprogramme 7;
Part VI
Human rights and humanitarian affairs
Section 24
Human rights
62. Decides to reclassify one P-5 post to the D-1 level, under subprogramme 4,
and requests the Secretary-General to designate capacity to support the universal
periodic review and to report thereon in the context of the performance report;
63. Stresses the importance of having detailed and comprehensive
information on the utilization of extrabudgetary resources for the activities of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;

9

A/RES/66/246

Section 25
International protection, durable solutions and assistance to refugees
64. Recalls paragraph VI.32 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,21 and in this regard stresses the
importance of sharing lessons learned and best practices with other parts of the
Organization;
Section 26
Palestine refugees
65. Reaffirms its resolution 3331B (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, stating that
expenses for salaries of international staff in the service of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which would
otherwise be a charge on voluntary contributions, should be financed by the regular
budget of the United Nations for the duration of the Agency’s mandate;
66. Notes with appreciation the valuable work done by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and expresses
concern about the significant reduction in the total resources for the Agency over
the past ten years while its overall workload and responsibilities have continued to
increase;
Part VII
Public information
Section 28
Public information
67. Stresses the importance of publishing United Nations information
materials and translating important documents into languages other than United
Nations official languages, with a view to reaching the widest possible spectrum of
audiences and extending the United Nations message to all the corners of the world
in order to strengthen international support for the activities of the Organization;
68. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to expand the scope of press
releases in addition to the existing languages in order to widen the United Nations
message, assuring their comprehensiveness and up-to-date nature and ensuring their
accuracy;
69. Recalls paragraph VII.16 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,21 commends the Secretary-General on his
outreach efforts to the general public, particularly youth, through enhanced use of
new media technologies, and stresses that more traditional means of
communication, such as radio and print media, remain an important part of the
efforts to ensure that the message of the Organization is effectively promoted,
particularly in developing countries;
70. Requests the Secretary-General to promote public awareness of and to
mobilize support for the work of the United Nations at the local level through all
possible means of communications, including publications, the broadcasting of news
and the network of United Nations information centres, bearing in mind that
information in local languages has the strongest impact on local populations;
71. Recognizes the vital role of the United Nations information centres in
promoting awareness about the United Nations, and requests the Secretary-General

10

A/RES/66/246

to continue to make efforts to mobilize resources for the effective functioning of
United Nations information centres in developing countries;
72. Welcomes the initiatives to modernize the Dag Hammarskjöld Library,
including through the acquisition of technical solutions for upgrading and
customizing current information management systems and digitizing United Nations
parliamentary documents dating from 1946, as measures that serve to enhance and
modernize the storage and retrieval of United Nations documents and to preserve
the institutional memory of the Organization;
73. Decides to convert the general temporary assistance position in the
Russian News Centre to an established post at the P-3 level, with a view to ensuring
the same level of support in this language as in the other official languages of the
United Nations;
74. Also decides to reclassify one P-2 post to the P-3 level in the Chinese
Unit and one P-3 post to P-4 level as head of the Kiswahili Unit of United Nations
Radio;
75. Further decides to establish two P-3 posts, two P-2 posts and one
General Service (Other level) post in the Kiswahili Unit of United Nations Radio
and one P-3 post and two P-2 posts in the Portuguese Unit of United Nations Radio;
76. Stresses the importance of an open, transparent and all-inclusive United
Nations, decides to approve the live webcasting, and subsequent web storage, of all
the formal meetings of its six Main Committees, and in this regard approves
835,500 dollars to cover all related costs;
77. Requests the Secretary-General to clearly identify the level of resources
related to public information activities for special conferences in future budget
presentations under this section;
Part VIII
Common support services
Section 29A
Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management
Umoja enterprise resource planning project
78. Expresses serious concern about the potential escalation of costs of the
Umoja enterprise resource planning project, and requests the Secretary-General to
ensure its implementation without further delay;
79. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure by all means that the project
costs are brought back within the approved budget;
80. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make every effort to
avoid budget increases through sound project management practices and to ensure
that the Umoja project is completed within the budget as approved in its resolution
64/243;
81. Underlines that the overall qualitative and quantitative benefits related to
the Umoja project, which were identified in the first and second progress reports, 24

_______________
24

A/64/380 and A/65/389.

11

A/RES/66/246

remain valid, regrets the delay in the realization of those benefits, and requests the
Secretary-General to make all efforts to maximize them;
82. Stresses the centrality of the leadership and oversight of the SecretaryGeneral and of senior management, as well as of the commitment of all departments
to completing the Umoja project, in order to avoid a recurrence of the mistakes and
delays in its implementation to date and thereby their negative implications for the
Organization;
83. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure full accountability for the
delays, the lack of responsiveness of management to the needs of the Umoja project
and other factors that have contributed to delays in its implementation and the
projected budget overrun, and to include this information in his fourth annual
progress report;
84. Expresses serious concern about the governance crisis in the Umoja
project, and reaffirms its decision to designate the Under-Secretary-General for
Management as the Chair of the Steering Committee for the project;
85. Stresses the need for a simple and operationally effective information and
communications technology governance structure with clear lines of authority and
accountability;
86. Emphasizes that the Umoja enterprise resource planning project should
be viewed primarily as a business project driven by business process demands;
87. Decides that the Umoja Project Director will report solely and directly to
the Under-Secretary-General for Management and that the Umoja project team and
administration of the project budget will be placed within the Department of
Management;
88. Reiterates that successful implementation of the Umoja project requires
the full support and commitment of senior management, as well as close and
continuous engagement with key stakeholders, and calls upon the Secretary-General
to ensure this through his performance management and accountability mechanism;
89. Stresses the supportive role of the Office of Information and
Communications Technology, and requests in this regard that the Chief Information
Technology Officer provide full cooperation and support to the Project Director;
90. Expresses its concern that no specific information has been shared with
Member States concerning the related costs and activities of the Umoja project, and
requests the Secretary-General to include such information in his next progress
report and to make every effort to fully implement such activities within the
approved budget level of each department;
91. Approves commitment authority for the Umoja project for one year at
maintenance level, and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General
Assembly at the main part of its sixty-seventh session a revised comprehensive
proposal for funding the project during the biennium 2012–2013;
92. Requests the Secretary-General to update Member States through regular
informal briefings to the Fifth Committee at the first and second parts of the
resumed sessions of the General Assembly, as well as by submitting annual progress
reports, on all aspects of the implementation of the Umoja project, including its
current status, significant activities carried out since the previous report and risk
analysis information outlining any risks identified, actions to be taken, status and

12

A/RES/66/246

trends, and to update the relevant information on the Umoja project website on a
regular basis;
93. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions to request the Board of Auditors to conduct a comprehensive audit of the
implementation of the Umoja project and to report annually to the General
Assembly starting at the main part of its sixty-seventh session;
Section 29B
Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts
94. Recalls paragraph VIII.33 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,21 notes the measures undertaken by the
Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts to improve the efficiency of
its services, and urges the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts and to report
thereon in the context of his next budget submission;
95. Takes note of the observations and endorses the recommendations
contained in the reports of the Board of Auditors6 and the Joint Inspection Unit17 on
progress in the implementation of the International Public Sector Accounting
Standards and on preparedness of United Nations system organizations for the
International Public Sector Accounting Standards, respectively;
96. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the implementation of the
International Public Sector Accounting Standards at the United Nations is completed
no later than 2014, and reaffirms that the enterprise resource planning system will
serve as the backbone for implementation by the United Nations of the Standards;
97. Stresses the importance of benefiting from the experience and guidance
of the early implementers and of ensuring that the United Nations is adequately
prepared for its transition to the International Public Sector Accounting Standards;
98. Requests the Secretary-General to exercise strict oversight over the
implementation of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards project to
ensure prudent stewardship of project resources and to establish clear lines of
reporting and effective mechanisms for the rapid resolution of issues on a day-today basis;
99. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that the
General Assembly is kept informed, on an annual basis, of the progress in
implementing the International Public Sector Accounting Standards by 2014,
including milestones and deliverables, outstanding activities and utilization of
resources, as well as to ensure full realization of the benefits associated with the
implementation of the Standards;
Section 29C
Office of Human Resources Management
100. Takes note of paragraph VIII.40 of the report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,21 and decides to increase by 50 per cent
the non-post resources available for outreach, under component 2, strategic planning
and staffing;

13

A/RES/66/246

Section 29H
Office of Information and Communications Technology
101. Underlines the importance of information and communications
technology in meeting the growing demands of the Organization as it becomes
increasingly reliant on its information and communications technology
infrastructure;
102. Also underlines the importance of information and communications
technology in strengthening oversight and accountability and in increasing the
availability of accurate and timely information to support decision-making;
103. Stresses the need for strengthened accountability and clearer lines of
authority to ensure a more efficient and effective Office of Information and
Communications Technology;
104. Takes note of paragraph 122 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,21 decides in this regard to place the Office
of Information and Communications Technology under the Department of
Management, also decides that the Chief Information Technology Officer will report
accordingly to the Head of the Department of Management, and further decides to
place the budget of the Office within the budget of the Department of Management;
105. Also takes note of paragraphs 89, 99, 107, 117 and 118 of the report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 25 requests the
Secretary-General to implement initiative 1, Improve enterprise information and
communications technology management, and initiative 4, Create a resilient
information and communications technology infrastructure, decides not to approve
additional funding for the implementation of these initiatives, and also decides not
to approve initiative 2, Leverage knowledge through information and
communications technology, and initiative 3, Enhance information and
communications technology service delivery;
106. Requests the Secretary-General to submit any future funding proposals
for major information and communications technology projects for consideration by
the General Assembly only after the full implementation of the Umoja enterprise
resource planning project;
107. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions to request the Board of Auditors to audit and evaluate the handling of
information and communications technology affairs in the Secretariat, including the
Office of Information and Communications Technology, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at the main part of its sixty-seventh session;
Part IX
Internal oversight
Section 31
Internal oversight
108. Takes note of paragraph IX.6 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,21 and decides to establish the post of
Assistant Secretary-General in the Office of Internal Oversight Services;

_______________
25

14

A/66/7/Add.1.

A/RES/66/246

109. Reaffirms paragraph 130 of its resolution 64/243, and takes note of
paragraph IX.12 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions;
Part X
Jointly financed administrative activities and special expenses
Section 32
Jointly financed administrative activities
Joint Inspection Unit
110. Recalls paragraph X.16 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,21 and authorizes an amount of
100,000 dollars for the Joint Inspection Unit for requirements related to consultants,
while urging the Unit to make greater use of its secretariat and the available
expertise within the United Nations common system in providing such specialized
advice and technical services to the inspectors;
United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, including
the International Public Sector Accounting Standards project
111. Also recalls paragraph X.24 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and requests the Secretary-General, in his
capacity as the Chair of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, to consult all the participating organizations on consolidating the
secretariat of the Board at United Nations Headquarters in New York and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session;
Part XI
Capital expenditures
Section 34
Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance
112. Decides to reduce the overall requirements for construction, alteration,
improvement and major maintenance by 6.9 million dollars, and requests the
Secretary-General to prioritize between the projects proposed in order to ensure the
security of staff, delegates and other personnel at all duty stations;
Part XII
Safety and security
Section 35
Safety and security
113. Requests the Secretary-General to review the appropriateness of the use
of private security personnel, particularly in situations in which they are the only
option available to provide safety and security for staff, and also requests the
Secretary-General to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh
session;

15

A/RES/66/246

Part XIII
Development Account
Section 36
Development Account
114. Decides to appropriate an
Development Account;

additional 6 million dollars

for the

Limited budgetary discretion
115. Recalls section III of resolution 60/283, and decides to extend its
provisions until 30 April 2012, pending a decision at the first part of the resumed
sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly.
93rd plenary meeting
24 December 2011

16

A/RES/66/246

Annex
Staffing table for the biennium 2012–2013
Number
of posts

Category

Professional and above
Deputy Secretary-General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Under-Secretary-General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

33

Assistant Secretary-General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

29

D-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

105

D-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

287

P-5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

845

P-4/3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2 787

P-2/1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

543

Subtotal

4 630

Principal level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

281

Other level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2 733

Subtotal

3 014

General Service

Other
Security Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

320

Local level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2 024

Field Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

129

National Officer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

79

Trades and Crafts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

140

Subtotal

2 692

Total

10 336

17
