United Nations

A/RES/57/189

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 February 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 105

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/57/552)]

57/189. The girl child
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 56/139 of 19 December 2001 and all relevant
resolutions, including the agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of
Women, in particular those relevant to the girl child,
Reaffirming the equal rights of women and men as enshrined, inter alia, in the
Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women 1 and the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, 2
Welcoming the entry into force of the Optional Protocols to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict and on the
sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, 3
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration adopted on 8 September
2000, 4
Welcoming the adoption by the General Assembly at its special session on
children, on 10 May 2002, of the outcome document entitled “A world fit for
children”, 5
Reaffirming the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS adopted by the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth special session, 6
Recalling all other relevant United Nations conferences, the Beijing
Declaration 7 and Platform for Action 8 adopted at the Fourth World Conference on
_______________
1

Resolution 34/180, annex.
Resolution 44/25, annex.
3
Resolution 54/263, annexes I and II.
4
See resolution 55/2.
5
Resolution S-27/2, annex.
6
Resolution S-26/2, annex.
7
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
8
Ibid., annex II.
2

02 55076

A/RES/57/189

Women, the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly
entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first
century”, 9 and the outcome documents of the recent five-year reviews of the
implementation of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on
Population and Development 10 and the Programme of Action of the World Summit
for Social Development, 11
Reaffirming the Dakar Framework for Action adopted at the World Education
Forum, 12
Recalling the Declaration and Agenda for Action adopted at the World
Congress against Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children, held at Stockholm
from 27 to 31 August 1996,13 and welcoming the Yokohama Global Commitment
2001 adopted at the Second World Congress against Commercial Sexual
Exploitation of Children, held at Yokohama, Japan, from 17 to 20 December 2001, 14
Recalling also the International Conference on War-Affected Children, held at
Winnipeg, Canada, from 10 to 17 September 2000, and affirming the ongoing
importance of the Winnipeg Agenda for War-Affected Children15 for all children
affected by armed conflict,
Recognizing the need to achieve gender equality to ensure a just and equitable
world for girls,
Deeply concerned about discrimination against the girl child and the violation
of the rights of the girl child, which often result in less access for girls to education,
nutrition and physical and mental health care and in girls enjoying fewer of the
rights, opportunities and benefits of childhood and adolescence than boys and often
being subjected to various forms of cultural, social, sexual and economic
exploitation and to violence and harmful practices, such as female infanticide,
incest, early marriage, prenatal sex selection and female genital mutilation,
Deeply concerned also that, in situations of poverty, war and armed conflict,
girl children are among those most affected and that their potential for full
development is thus limited,
Concerned that the girl child has furthermore become the victim of sexually
transmitted diseases and increasingly of the human immunodeficiency virus, which
have a serious impact on the quality of her life and leave her open to further
discrimination,
Convinced that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance reveal themselves in a differentiated manner for women and girls and
can be among the factors leading to a deterioration in their living conditions,
poverty, violence, multiple forms of discrimination and limitation or denial of their
human rights,

_______________
9

Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
Resolution S-21/2, annex.
11
Resolution S-24/2, annex.
12
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World
Education Forum, Dakar, Senegal, 26–28 April 2000 (Paris, 2000).
13
A/51/385, annex.
14
See A/S-27/12, annex.
15
A/55/467-S/2000/973, annex.
10

2

A/RES/57/189

1.
Stresses the need for full and urgent implementation of the rights of the
girl child as guaranteed to her under all human rights instruments, including the
Convention on the Rights of the Child 2 and the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 1 as well as the need for universal
ratification of those instruments;
2.
Urges States to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women 16 and the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child;3
3.
Urges all States to take all necessary measures and to institute legal
reforms to ensure the full and equal enjoyment by the girl child of all human rights
and fundamental freedoms, to take effective action against violations of those rights
and freedoms and to base programmes and policies for the girl child on the rights of
the child;
4.
Urges all Governments and the United Nations system to strengthen
efforts bilaterally and with international organizations and private sector donors in
order to achieve the goals of the World Education Forum, 12 in particular that of
eliminating gender disparities in primary and secondary education by 2005, and to
implement the United Nations Girls’ Education Initiative as a means of reaching this
goal, and reaffirms the commitment contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration 4 in this regard;
5.
Calls upon all States to take measures to address the obstacles that
continue to affect the achievement of the goals set forth in the Beijing Platform for
Action,8 as contained in paragraph 33 of the further actions and initiatives to
implement the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, 17 where appropriate,
including the strengthening of national mechanisms to implement policies and
programmes for the girl child and, in some cases, to enhance coordination among
responsible institutions for the realization of the human rights of girls, as indicated
in the further actions and initiatives;
6.
Urges States to enact and strictly enforce laws to ensure that marriage is
entered into only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses, to enact
and strictly enforce laws concerning the minimum legal age of consent and the
minimum age for marriage and to raise the minimum age for marriage where
necessary;
7.
Also urges States to fulfil their obligations under the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, as well as the commitment to implement the Beijing
Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace
for the twenty-first century”;9
8.
Urges all States to enact and enforce legislation to protect girls from all
forms of violence and exploitation, including female infanticide and prenatal sex
selection, female genital mutilation, rape, domestic violence, incest, sexual abuse,
sexual exploitation, child prostitution and child pornography, trafficking and forced
labour, and to develop age-appropriate safe and confidential programmes and
_______________
16
17

Resolution 54/4, annex.
Resolution S-23/3, annex.

3

A/RES/57/189

medical, social and psychological support services to assist girls who are subjected
to violence;
9.
Urges States to formulate comprehensive, multidisciplinary and
coordinated national plans, programmes or strategies to eliminate all forms of
violence against women and girls, which should be widely disseminated and should
provide targets and timetables for implementation, as well as effective domestic
enforcement procedures through the establishment of monitoring mechanisms
involving all parties concerned, including consultations with women’s
organizations, giving attention to the recommendations relating to the girl child of
the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on violence against
women, its causes and consequences;
10. Calls upon all States and international and non-governmental
organizations, individually and collectively, to implement further the Beijing
Platform for Action, in particular the strategic objectives relating to the girl child,
and the further actions and initiatives to implement the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action;
11. Urges States to take special measures for the protection of war-affected
girls and in particular to protect them from sexually transmitted diseases, such as the
human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS),
gender-based violence, including rape and sexual abuse, and sexual exploitation,
torture, abduction and forced labour, paying special attention to refugee and
displaced girls, and to take into account the special needs of the war-affected girl
child in the delivery of humanitarian assistance and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes;
12. Urges all States and the international community to respect, protect and
promote the rights of the child, taking into account the particular vulnerabilities of
the girl child in pre-conflict, conflict and post-conflict situations, and calls for
special initiatives designed to address all of the rights and needs of war-affected
girls;
13. Calls upon Governments, civil society, including the media, and nongovernmental organizations to promote human rights education and the full respect
for and enjoyment of the human rights of the girl child, inter alia, through the
translation, production and dissemination of age-appropriate information material
on those rights to all sectors of society, in particular to children;
14. Calls upon States and international and non-governmental organizations
to mobilize all necessary resources, support and efforts to realize the goals, strategic
objectives and actions set out in the Beijing Platform for Action and the further
actions and initiatives to implement the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action;
15. Requests the Secretary-General, as Chairman of the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to ensure that all organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system, individually and collectively, in particular
the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Population
Fund, the United Nations Development Fund for Women, the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Development Programme, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Labour
Organization, take into account the rights and the particular needs of the girl child in

4

A/RES/57/189

the country programme of cooperation in accordance with the national priorities,
including through the United Nations Development Assistance Framework; 18
16. Requests all human rights treaty bodies, special procedures and other
human rights mechanisms of the Commission on Human Rights and its
Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights to adopt
regularly and systematically a gender perspective in the implementation of their
mandates and to include in their reports information on the qualitative analysis of
violations of the human rights of women and girls, and encourages the strengthening
of cooperation and coordination in that regard;
17. Stresses the importance of a substantive assessment of the
implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action with a life-cycle perspective so as
to identify gaps and obstacles in the implementation process and to develop further
actions for the achievement of the goals of the Platform for Action;
18. Requests Member States to ensure that, in preventing and addressing
HIV/AIDS, particular attention is paid to the girl child infected and affected by
HIV/AIDS and to provide the Secretary-General with information in this regard to
help in the preparation of his report to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth
session, as requested in the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS. 6
77th plenary meeting
18 December 2002

_______________
18

See A/53/226, paras. 72–77, and A/53/226/Add.1, paras. 88–98.

5
