20

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

ance on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis, in
the ;trengthening of the economies of those Territories;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue
to seek suitable means for the immediate and full
implementation of General Assembly resolution 1_514
(XV) in all Territories which have not yet attamed
independence and, in particular:
(a) To formulate specific proposals for the eli!llination of the remaining manifestations of coloniahsm
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session;
( b) To make concrete suggestions which could
assist the Security Council in considering appropriate
measures under the Charter with regard to developments in colonial Territories that are likely to threaten
international peace and security;
( c) To continue to examine the compliance of
Member States with the Declaration and with other
relevant resolutions on decolonization, particularly
those relating to Namibia and Southern Rhodesia;
(d) To continue to pay particular attention to the
small Territories, including the sending of visiting missions thereto, as appropriate, and to recommend to
the General Assembly the most suitable steps to be
taken to enable the populations of those Territories
to exercise their right to self-determination, freedom
and independence;
( e) To take all necessary steps to enlist worldwide support among Governments, as well as national
and international organizations having a special interest
in the field of decolonization, in the achievement of
the objectives of the Declaration and in the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, particularly as concerns the oppressed peoples of Namibia and Zimbabwe;
13. Calls upon the administering Powers to continue to co-operate with the Special Committee in the
discharge of its mandate and, in particular, to permit
the access of visiting missions to the Territories in
order to secure first-hand information and ascertain
the wishes and aspirations of their inhabitants;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the facilities and services
required for the implementation of the present resolution, as well as of the various resolutions and decisions on decolonization adopted by the General
Assembly and the Special Committee.
82nd plenary meetinf?
13 Decemher 1978
33/45.

Dissemination
colonization

of

information

on

(le-

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the question of publicity for the work of
the United Nations in the field of decolonization, 26
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
26 Ibid.,

chap. II.

of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and all other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations concerning the dissemination of information
on decolonization, including in particular General
Assembly resolution 32/ 43 of 7 December 1977,
Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrument for furthering the aims and purposes of the
Declaration and mindful of the continuing pressing
need for taking all possible steps to acquaint world
public opinion with all aspects of the problems of
decolonization with a view to assisting effectively the
peoples of the colonial Territories to achieve selfdetermination, freedom and independence,
A ware of the increasingly important role being
played in the widespread dissemination of relevant
information by a number of non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of
decolonization,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the question of publicity for the work of
the United Nations in the field of decolonization;
2. Reaffirms the importance of effecting the widest
possible dissemination of information on the evils
and dangers of colonialism, on the determined efforts
of the colonial peoples to achieve self-determination,
freedom and independence and on the assistance being
provided by the international community towards the
elimination of the remaining vestiges of colonialism in
all its forms;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard
to the suggestions of the Special Committee and of
the International Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia, held at Maputo from
16 to 21 May 1977, 27 to continue to take concrete
measures through all the media at his disposal, including publications, radio and television, to give
widespread and continuous publicity to the work of
the United Nations in the field of decolonization and,
inter alia:
(a) To continue, in consultation with the Special
Committee, to collect, prepare and disseminate basic
material, studies and articles relating to the problems
of decolonization and, in particular, to continue to
publish the periodical Objective: Justice and other
publications, special articles and studies and to select
from among them appropriate material for wider dissemination by means of reprints in various languages;
( h) To seek the full co-operation of the administering Powers concerned in the discharge of the
tasks referred to above;
( c) To intensify the activities of all information
centres, particularly those located in Western Europe;
( d) To maintain a close working relationship with
the Organization of African Unity by holding periodic
consultations and by systematically exchanging relevant
information with that organization;
( e)
To enlist the support of non-governmental
organizations having a special interest in the field of
decolonization in the dissemination of the relevant
information;
2 7 See A/32/109/Rev.1-S/12344/Rev.l. For the printed text,
see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second
Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1977.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(f) To report to the Special Committee on the
measures taken in the implementation of the present
resolution;
4. Invites all States, the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations having a special
interest in the field of decolonization to undertake or
intensify, in co-operation with the Secretary-General
and within their respective spheres of competence,
the large-scale dissemination of the information referred to in paragraph 2 above;
5. Requests the Special Committee to follow the
implementation of the present resolution and report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session.
82nd plenary meeting
13 December 1978

the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session,
through the Economic and Social Council, which could
then be made available to Governments of Member
States for their assistance in setting up national institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the participation of Member States in seminars organized at a world-wide level is based on the principle of equitable geographical representation;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to transmit
the present resolution to all Member States, drawing
their attention to paragraphs 2 and 3 above.
83rd plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/107.

33 / 46.

National institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/123 of 16 December
1977 on the observance of the thirtieth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in
which it suggested that a special seminar within the
programme of advisory services should be organized
in 1978 at Geneva, at a world-wide level, on the
subject of national and local institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution
23 (XXXIV) of 8 March 1978, 28 in which the Commission decided that the seminar on national and
local institutions for the promotion and protection
of human rights, to be held in September 1978, should,
as a part of its task, suggest certain possible guidelines for the structure and functioning of national
institutions, based on the provisions of that resolution
and the annex thereto,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report on
the Seminar on National and Local Institutions for
the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, 29
which took place at Geneva from 18 to 29 September 1978;
2. Requests Member States to comment on the
guidelines for the structure and functioning of national institutions, as suggested by the Seminar and
circulated by the Secretary-General in accordance
with Commission on Human Rights resolution 23
(XXXIV);
3. Invites Member States to communicate their
comments to the Secretary-General, together with all
relevant information relating to their own experience
in the functioning of national and local institutions in
the field of human rights, before the thirty-fifth session
of the Commission on Human Rights;
4. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
consider the guidelines suggested by the Seminar in
its report for the structure and functioning of national
institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights;
5. Further requests the Commission on Human
Rights to send its recommendations in this regard to
2 8 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
29 ST/HR/SER.A/2 and Add.I.

21

Admission of the Commonwealth of
Dominica to membership in the United
Nations

The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 6 December 1978 that the Commonwealth
of Dominica should be admitted to membership in the
United Nations, 30
Having considered the application for membership
of the Commonwealth of Dominica, 81
Decides to admit the Commonwealth of Dominica
to membership in the United Nations.
87th plenary meeting
18 December 1978
33/182.

Question of Namibia:12

A
SITUATION IN NAMIBIA RESULTING FROM THE ILLEGAL
OCCUPATION OF THE TERRITORY BY SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia 38 and the relevant chapters of
the report of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, 34
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 2145 (XXI)
of 27 October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967
and subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council relating to the question of
Namibia, as well as the advisory opinion of the Inter3o Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Annexes, agenda item 25, document A/33/442.
3t A/33/404-S/12942. For the printed text, see Official
Records of the Security Council, Thirty-third Year, Supplement
for October, November and December 1978.
32 See also sect. I, foot-note 3, and sect. X.B.6, decision
33/407.
33 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/33/24).
B4 /bid.,
Supplement No. 23 (A/33/23/Rev.l ), vol. I,
chaps. I, II, IV and V, and vol. II, chap. VIII.
