S/PV.7466

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7466th meeting

Thursday, 18 June 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Dato Sri Aman/Mrs. Adnin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Malaysia)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ibañez
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Letter dated 1 June 2015 from the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/402)
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2015/409)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-18380 (E)
*1518380*

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict
Letter dated 1 June 2015 from the
Permanent Representative of Malaysia
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2015/402)
Report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2015/409)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other representatives
present in the Security Council Chamber. Their
participation is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Algeria, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Botswana,
Brazil, Cambodia, Canada, Colombia, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar,
the Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, the
Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay, Viet Nam and
Zimbabwe to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict; Ms. Yoka
Brandt, Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF; and
Ms. Eunice Apio, Director of Facilitation for Peace and
Development.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
persons to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations; and His

2/96

18/06/2015

Excellency Mr. Ahmed Fathalla, Permanent Observer
of the League of Arab States.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/409, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2015/402, which contains the
text of a letter dated 1 June 2015 from the Permanent
Representatives of Malaysia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Malaysia, His Excellency Dato Sri
Anifah Aman, for arranging this critical debate on
children and armed conflict.
The past year was one of the worst in recent memory
for children in countries affected by conflict. My report
(S/2015/409) before the Council outlines the enormous
challenges we face in upholding the fundamental rights
of tens of millions of children. We have seen crises
multiply and intensify, making protection more and
more difficult. Grave violations against children have
been an affront to our common humanity in the Central
African Republic, Iraq, Nigeria, South Sudan and the
Syrian Arab Republic.
I am also deeply alarmed at the suffering of so many
children as a result of the Israeli military operations
in Gaza last year. I urge Israel to take concrete and
immediate steps, including by reviewing existing
policies and practices, to protect and prevent the killing

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

and maiming of children and to respect the special
protections afforded to schools and hospitals.
Around the world, many thousands of children
have experienced acts that no child should suffer.
They have been killed, maimed, forcibly recruited,
tortured and sexually abused. Their schools have been
destroyed. And in a worrying trend, abductions have
increased rapidly. Groups such as the Lord’s Resistance
Army have been kidnapping children for many years,
but the scale and nature of that grave violation is
changing. Abduction is now being used as a tactic to
terrorize or target particular ethnic groups or religious
communities, and children have been a particular focus.
The large number of abductions by Daesh and Boko
Haram has shocked us repeatedly in recent months. But
we should also recognize that the practice is prevalent
in many other situations covered by the report and is
perpetrated by a great range of other non-State armed
groups. I am pleased that at the last open debate on
children and armed conflict, in March (see S/PV.7414),
there was broad support from Member States to address
the challenge and increase the tools available to deal
with it.
Next month, we will mark the tenth anniversary
of the Council’s resolution 1612 (2005), which
established the monitoring and reporting mechanism
on the recruitment and use of child soldiers. My Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and
her predecessors have made great strides in protecting
children from recruitment. The “Children, Not Soldiers”
campaign is based on many years of work to change
attitudes. This year has witnessed further progress.
We are moving ever closer towards a world in which
no child wears a Government uniform and engages in
combat. I encourage those concerned Governments
represented in the Chamber today to redouble their
efforts to implement the goals of the campaign and to
work with my Special Representative. However, there
is still much to do in addressing the challenge of ending
grave violations against children by non-State armed
groups.
The report before the Council highlights some
progress made in that regard. For example, the release
of 1,757 children from the Cobra Faction is a bright
spot in an otherwise bleak picture in South Sudan. My
Special Representative will continue to work with such
groups to ensure that we are doing our utmost to protect
children in these most difficult environments.

S/PV.7466

Grave violations against children are of great
concern both in countries of origin and in countries
to which children flee. Children may cross the border
to flee conflict, but that does not mean that they are
safe from its effects. They require urgent and sustained
protection interventions.
I regret that the contents of my annual report this
year on children and armed conflict have been the
subject of more controversy and discussions than usual,
to the extent of threatening its integrity. The mechanism
has withstood scrutiny, and the content of my report
should speak for itself. It represents a strong overview
of egregious violations suffered by children in conflict
in 2014. It increases global awareness, highlights the
need for accountability and calls for action. It is a
stark reminder that the protection of children in armed
conflict must be our common priority.
A healthy debate in which Member States put
forward their views and provide information is
appropriate. But national interests should not cloud
the objective at stake — protecting children, which is
a moral imperative and a legal obligation. Those who
engage in military action that results in numerous grave
violations against children will, regardless of intent,
find themselves under scrutiny. Member States should
pursue all avenues to protect children affected by armed
conflict. One important way is by ending impunity for
the violations outlined in the report.
I also wish to reassure everyone that I am committed
to ensuring that the United Nations itself does more and
better to prevent any abuse of children in the context
of conflict. Recent allegations concerning abuse in
the Central African Republic make that all the more
essential. I urge Member States, and in particular all
the parties to conflict identified in the report, to work
with my Special Representative to prevent future grave
violations against children. Children have the right to
be protected in their schools, in their homes, in their
communities. Let us keep the rights of children at the
centre of our efforts to build a future of dignity for all.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.
Ms. Zerrougui: I would first like to take this
opportunity to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Malaysia for organizing this debate on children and
armed conflict. Today’s debate builds on the important

15-183803/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

discussion we had on 25 March (see S/PV.7414),
presided over by France, dedicated to child victims of
non-State armed groups.
As the Secretary-General has just stated, 2014 was
a devastating year for children living in conflict areas.
A number of conflicts intensified in 2015, imposing
terrible short- and long-term consequences on many
children caught up in the violence.
An estimated 230 million children now live in
countries and areas affected by conflict. More than
5 million refugee children have also been forced to
flee from countries where the monitoring and reporting
mechanism is in place. Appalling impacts on the welfare
of children were felt especially in Afghanistan, Iraq,
South Sudan, the State of Palestine, Syria and Yemen.
The report before the Council (S/2015/409) documents
sharp increases in the numbers of children killed
in 2014, and an equally shocking number of injured.
That should not just shock us, it is a call to action to
all of us. I will use the opportunity today to outline
the challenges as I see them and ways in which we can
address obstacles and assist these children.
First, violent extremist groups and their horrific
crimes captured much of the world’s attention in 2014.
We saw children forced to become suicide bombers
and human shields, and we saw the public execution
of many others. Others were required to witness and
actively participate in public acts of brutality. We note
that responses to the threat posed by extreme violence,
by both militia groups and in some cases Government
forces, have also raised child protection concerns. I am
gratified to see that the Council routinely calls on States
to ensure that measures taken to counter these group
comply with all their obligations under international
law, in particular international human rights law and
refugee and humanitarian law.
As the Secretary-General mentions in his report,
the abduction of children in large numbers was a
growing and prevalent feature of conflict in 2014. The
response to abductions needs to be scaled up to address
this increasing trend, including through early-warning
mechanisms. I echo the Secretary-General’s call in
his report to expand the tools available to address
this important issue, including adding abduction as a
trigger violation for listing a party in the annexes of the
Secretary-General’s annual report. We must also tailor
integration programmes for those who undergo the
traumatizing experience of abduction and associated

4/96

18/06/2015

violence and ensure that international support is there
to fund these programmes.
As discussed extensively at the open debate in
March (see S/PV.7414), engagement with non-State
armed groups is another vital area of focus to improve
the situation of children in conflict. The majority of
the parties in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s
report are non-State armed groups, and I have been
working to engage a wide range of these groups to
secure commitments to stop violations and protect
children. As the Secretary-General’s report notes, in
the Central African Republic I supported efforts of
the United Nations mediation team to include child
protection provisions in the Brazzaville ceasefire
agreement, signed in July of last year. This progress
was further consolidated in the context of the Bangui
Forum in May of this year. Following a commitment
signed by 10 armed groups on the margins of the
Forum, more than 300 children have been released
from the anti-Balaka and the ex-Séléka, and thousands
more are expected to be released in the coming months.
This is another reminder of the significant resources
needed to appropriately receive and reintegrate such a
large number of children.
More recently, at the invitation of the Government
of Colombia, I met in Cuba in May with a delegation
of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia — Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP). They
were open to discussing international standards and
ways in which they could make progress to ensure the
protection of children. In that connection, I welcome
the announcement made earlier this week regarding
the release of children under the age of 15, and I
look forward to seeing further progress to ensure the
separation of all children.
Later in May, I met with the leaders of three armed
groups from Darfur to stress the importance of child
protection. I am pleased to report that following this
meeting, they issued a joint statement on the situation
of children in Darfur, pledging to reinforce efforts to
prevent grave violations against children.
This concerted engagement also requires the
support of Member States to help facilitate contact
with these groups and allow independent access so
that discussions can be held. It is in the interests of all
involved that these groups be brought into a process
that will expedite the end of violations against children
and prevent future ones.

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

As Council members know, last year we launched
the “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign. I am pleased
to report that we continue to make progress towards
ending and preventing the recruitment and use of
children by national security forces by 2016. We saw
important steps taken in 2014 in Afghanistan, Myanmar,
Somalia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
One can see in the Secretary-General’s report that just
one case of recruitment by Government forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was documented in
2014, and we have not received any reports so far in
2015. That represents tangible progress as compared to
the situation just a few years ago. I will soon travel to
Myanmar to support the Government and the United
Nations country team in their efforts to intensify and
implement priorities in their joint action plan.
While progress is indeed being made with several
Ccmpaign countries, sadly, the crises in South Sudan
and Yemen have severely hampered our efforts in those
countries. Solid progress had been made, but has now
been largely lost.
From South Sudan, I am receiving testimony that
children — some as young as four months old — are
being targeted in Unity state based on their ethnicity.
Eyewitnesses and survivors said that boys were killed
and civilians thrown into burning houses. In one
instance, young boys who did not manage to escape an
attack on their village were reportedly tied together with
one rope and their throats were slit. Girls are also being
subjected to rape by both individuals and groups. Those
alarming reports were just received, and those acts
have occurred within the last six weeks. Such heinous
crimes fly in the face of the numerous commitments
by all parties in South Sudan to stop violations against
children. As the Council knows, the Council’s Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict adopted strong
conclusions on South Sudan in May. Unfortunately,
these actions seem to have little or no impact on
stopping ongoing violations. More must be done, and
I call on the international community, especially the
African Union and Security Council members, to take
concerted action to protect these children, who have
grown up surrounded by violence and insecurity.
Yemen is also in our thoughts daily, as we watch
the violence in the media and receive reports of
children being killed in aerial bombings, and of many
others being recruited. Since late March, as UNICEF
reported a few weeks ago, at least 135 children have
been killed and 260 injured. The fighting has destroyed

S/PV.7466

schools and hospitals. Cases of recruitment of children
and their use in conflict have also risen dramatically,
with all parties to the conflict on the ground recruiting
children in large numbers.
Another issue that has recently been a focus in the
field, as the Secretary-General mentioned a moment
ago, is the sexual abuse and exploitation of children by
peacekeepers or foreign troops. Sexual abuse committed
by those entrusted with protecting a population is
particularly egregious. It is our collective responsibility
to do our utmost to prevent such behaviour and to
ensure that the perpetrators are held accountable in all
contexts.
The issue of deprivation of liberty is another
concern, with security forces detaining children for
their actual or alleged association with armed groups.
It is equally worrying that children are being treated
primarily as security threats rather than as victims. My
Office has been working with its partners to ensure
that protocols are in place to ensure that detained
children are handed over to child protection actors as
soon as possible, and these efforts have borne fruit. In
2014, agreements for the handover of children to child
protection actors were reached with the Governments
of Chad and Somalia. Child-protection provisions
were also included in the concept of operations of the
Multinational Joint Task Force established to fight Boko
Haram. Despite such progress, however, we continue to
receive disturbing reports of large numbers of children
being detained, particularly in the context of counterterrorism operations.
The rise in the number and gravity of recent crises
has tested both our resolve and our ability to respond.
The most important element of our response will be to
redouble our efforts and address new challenges with
new tools. I would remind the Governments concerned
that they continue to bear the primary responsibility for
the protection of the children within their borders and
that they must actively address the violations outlined
in the Secretary-General’s report. The fight against
impunity remains one of the key aspects of our efforts
not only to react to, but also to prevent grave violations
against children. Without credible accountability, the
violations will not stop. I call on all States to comply
with their international legal obligations and to review
their policies and practices to ensure that children are
protected and their rights respected.
Lastly, we must all answer this call to action. The
stakes are high. An entire generation of children is

15-183805/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

depending on us to be their voice, to tell their story
and, most of all, to take action. My Office stands ready
to engage with any party to conflict that appears in the
Secretary-General’s report.
The President: I thank Ms. Zerrougui for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Brandt.
Ms. Brandt: Let me, at the outset, thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia for organizing
this debate, the Secretary-General for his leadership and
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, for
her tireless commitment to keeping children in conflict
safe.
In January this year, in Borno state, Nigeria,
villages were attacked by armed groups. Houses and
schools were burned. Fatima, a young mother, fled with
her baby and two young sons. Stopped by gunmen, she
was forced to answer questions about her husband and
her religious beliefs. Eventually, the gunmen let her go,
but ordered her to leave behind her sons, aged three and
seven. She walked for weeks with her daughter until
she reached a camp for internally displaced persons
(IDPs). She has no idea of what has happened to her
sons, or whether she will ever see them again. This is
frightening, devastating and increasingly common.
The past year, as the Secretary General’s
report (S/2015/409) documents and as his Special
Representative mentioned earlier, was one of the worst
ever for children affected by armed conflict, not least
because of the alarming rise in abductions, especially
mass abductions, of children and adults in Iraq, Nigeria,
South Sudan and Syria.
We have seen mass abductions before, and the
Secretary-General has just mentioned the Lord’s
Resistance Army, which abducted children by night,
prompting thousands to make the dangerous nightly
journey to areas beyond its reach. In fact, we will have
the honour to hear more on this from Ms. Eunice Apio
later. The scale and nature of abductions is changing,
however, and the Secretary-General’s report gives
several examples of this.
Used to instil fear and terror in populations,
abduction is often only the first in a series of grave
violations. Sexual assault and rape, indoctrination,
recruitment as child soldiers and murder often follow.
Each of these offences blights the child concerned, robs

6/96

18/06/2015

her of her childhood and threatens her ability to live a full
and productive life. Each offence violates international
law. It both shames us for not doing more to prevent
atrocities and spurs us to act to prevent all violations
of child rights and call for increased accountability.
Left unaddressed, each offence can contribute to the
recurring cycles of violence and conflict that shatter
lives and communities and perpetuate conflict in
future generations. We therefore welcome the Security
Council’s particular attention this morning to abduction
as a new trigger for the listing of parties to conflict in
the annexes of the Secretary-General’s report.
Let us also acknowledge the progress we have
made together to release and reintegrate children
affected by conflict. The Secretary-General and his
Special Representative mentioned the “Children, Not
Soldiers” campaign, which has been central to that
shared progress. Combined efforts also led to the
release earlier this year of more than 2,000 children
by non-State armed groups, including in the Central
African Republic and South Sudan. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank France for organizing
a debate specifically focused on child victims of such
groups earlier this year (see S/PV.7414).
We cannot, and must not, stop at the release of
children, however. We must also think about what
happens after children are released. How can they
resume normal life when they are inevitably burdened
by physical wounds and psychological scars? Think of
Fatima’s young sons. How will they cope when they
return to their mother? Think of the trauma endured
by the young women and girls who have escaped from
Boko Haram. Think of the more than 140 Kurdish boys
abducted by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
last year. These children are victims and must be
treated as such. When they are released, the best option
is to transfer them quickly to child protection services,
to trained professionals who can support them as they
recover, rebuild and reintegrate, and who can address
the needs of girls and children with special needs,
including those with disabilities.
We must commit to providing that critical support,
because without it children will not get the opportunity
to heal, and the risk of re-recruitment is real. While
we acknowledge that progress has been made in some
areas, we must remain vigilant, because where conflict
has re-emerged or escalated, the risks of backsliding
are real. The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral just spoke about South Sudan and Yemen,

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7466

where the use of children has not only continued but
has increased in recent bouts of conflict.

let her courage inspire us to work even harder. Fatima’s
children, and thousands of others, depend on us.

Urgently and collectively, we must turn our
attention to prevention. The best way to do that, of
course, is to step up efforts to end conflict and to
pursue accountability, not just as a means of addressing
past wrongs but also of deterring future ones. But
we must also engage those who are most affected by,
for example, strengthening community protection
measures by engaging local leaders and exploring the
benefits of unarmed civilian protection, as well as by
supporting the methods that families use to protect
their children — including, in some cases, seeking
safety and protection as refugees or IDPs.

The President: I thank Ms. Brandt for her briefing.

Even as we tackle such challenges, new threats
emerge. Children are at risk for new forms of violence
promoted via social media. Aggressive forms of
recruitment for extreme violence, such as participation
in executions and suicide bombings, are real and reach
well beyond conflict zones. And even in places where
children should be safe, they are not. Think of the
attack on a school in Peshawar, Pakistan, that killed
145 children and teachers. Or Gaza last year, where
more than 260 schools were damaged or destroyed.
Or the countries where Governments and non-State
armed groups use schools to store weapons, detain
prisoners and house soldiers. Or the continued use of
explosive weapons and indiscriminate weapons, such
as landmines and cluster bombs, in populated areas.
UNICEF therefore appreciates all the more
Norway’s leadership on the Safe Schools Declaration,
which advocates for schools to be safe and protected
spaces and outlines actions to end the military use
of schools. We need more such initiatives, including
negotiations to release children held by armed groups,
and community-based reintegration programmes to help
children not only recover and reintegrate but also learn
new skills to build for the future. Such efforts show
children and their families that we care, that we are
committed to their protection and well-being and that
we cannot and will not tolerate grave violations against
children in armed conflict by anyone, anywhere.
We have failed Fatima. We can only imagine the
heartbreak that she and her children endure daily. And
we do not know if they will ever be reunited. We hope
so, of course. Fatima told out staff in the IDP camp that
she has not given up hope. And neither can we. We must

I now give the floor to Ms. Apio.
Ms. Apio: On behalf of my organization, Facilitation
for Peace and Development, in collaboration with the
Centre for Family and Human Rights, I would like to
thank the Malaysian presidency for the invitation to
address the Security Council in today’s open debate.
Ours is a typical grassroots organization, and our work
contributes to improving respect for people’s rights and
promoting sustainable livelihoods. Our participation
here today is an illustration of how even-handed the
Council can be in fulfilling its mandate.
In my statement I will focus particularly on the
challenges that continue to face individuals, and their
families and communities, affected by abduction and
other activities perpetrated by the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) in northern Uganda. I do this in the hope
that the information may inform further interventions
in northern Uganda, but also, and more important,
that it may influence efforts to achieve disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) in zones of
war and armed conflict where children still remain
extremely vulnerable to abduction and recruitment by
insurgent groups.
Between 1986 and 2008, Ugandans, in particular
children in northern Uganda, had experiences very
comparable to what other children are now experiencing
in war and conflict zones, and their impact is still
visible today. Of the more than 65,000 civilians who
were abducted by the LRA, at least 53 per cent were
children, some as young as nine years old. They
became forced labourers in the LRA. In addition to
soldiering, girls were subjected to systematic rape and
sexual violence, which among other things resulted
in exposure to sexually transmitted diseases and the
birth of thousands of children. Many of those abducted
children were killed or maimed during the course of the
war, and many still remain unaccounted for. Those who
returned were shadows of themselves, broken in body
and spirit, just like the families and communities they
had left behind, most of whom lived for many years in
camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs) and in
deplorable living conditions. But others came back to
no family at all.

15-183807/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

For years, those communities lost their entire
livelihoods, and those who could be reached later had to
survive on food and non-food items distributed mostly
by the World Food Programme and its partners, for which
we remain grateful. As happens during most wars, all
of the region’s infrastructure, including schools, health
centres and roads, broke down and ceased to function.
All of those things became priorities that competed
with the need for direct support to the psycho-social
well-being of the children and their families. Their
lives have never been the same again.
We should not downplay the fact that the DDR
efforts were often fragmented, uncoordinated,
experimental and even incomplete — understandably,
since we had very little to learn from. While they
met many children’s emergency and short-term
needs — keeping them alive and relatively safe from
often enraged and desperate civilians and from looming
rejection by their families — those efforts were not a
foolproof solution to the long-term effects of war on the
children and their families and communities. What was
done in the name of reintegration consisted mainly of
transferring individuals from point A to point B. Most
children moved directly from the LRA to squalid IDP
camps. Some, but not all, received basic counselling at
reception centres in between.
Years after the war, the northern region has the
highest rate of mental-health-related illnesses in the
country, with soaring rates of suicides and alcohol
and substance abuse. It has even affected some of the
economic and social rehabilitation efforts. Between
July 2012 and June 2013, in Gulu hospital, in the north,
alone 10,736 psychiatric cases with severe symptoms
of post-traumatic stress disorder and depression were
documented, an average of 75 cases a day.
Actors in other war zones can learn from us and
act early to ensure that individuals and families, along
with returning children, receive adequate psychological
support. In our context, post-traumatic stress disorder
and depression, among other afflictions, are widespread
and speak to the need to integrate mental health into
primary health care. To cite a recent illustrative case,
in 1991, at the age of just nine years, a boy I will call
Omona was forced to burn down his house while his
parents and two brothers were trapped inside. Shortly
after that, as they made their way into the bushes, the
group leader ordered him to kill his own brothers for
trying to escape. He defected from the LRA in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2012, and returned

8/96

18/06/2015

to his home with his partner, who was also a former
child soldier, and their three children. Sometimes he
and his wife have subjected their children to severe
beatings and chased them away to live on the streets in
Gulu. The entire family has been diagnosed with severe
post-traumatic stress disorder and depression.
The reintegration of such children has been made
more difficult because the receiving communities also
suffered the effects of war and trauma. For example, in
November 2013, a 58 year-old woman, whom I will call
Akelo, was referred to us by a mental-health clinic in
Gulu hospital to help her sort out a land-dispute case.
I am recounting her story because it is typical of the
general population into which ex-combatant children
return. In 1996, the LRA raided her compound and cut
off her husband’s head, ordering her to laugh as she
carried it around. At the same time, they killed her son
and his family and ordered her to bury the bodies. Now
a widow and without a son, her brothers-in-law have
ordered her to leave their land under threat of death.
They then razed her house to the ground. It was then
that she began fearing the setting of the sun, because,
she explained, her nights were haunted by thoughts of
having had to carry the head of her husband and watch
her son and his family killed all over again.
The point here is that, although attention has been
accorded to the psychological wounds that children
have faced, however short-term, we have largely not
addressed those of people like Akelo, who may not have
been abducted but still bear the brunt of the war. Yet
we have expected people like Akelo, who made up the
majority in the communities, to embrace and support
the reintegration of formerly abducted children like
Omona.
The region is also experiencing extremely high
incidences of land conflicts, often leading to violent
behaviour and the victimization of children and women,
and triggering severe symptoms of mental-health
illnesses. As a matter of concern, we have also not
extended adequate support for demobilizing and
reintegrating IDPs, so that they could come to terms
with their experiences and make a more organized
resettlement, while protecting the most vulnerable like
Akelo. In the process, war orphans, especially those
who had been born in IDP camps, found it difficult to
identify or even claim their parents’ old land. I would
like also to draw the attention of the Council to the fact
that female ex-combatants who had children found it
extremely difficult to re-integrate if their children born

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

of war could not integrate, mainly owing to stigma and
discrimination.
We also note with concern that, besides recruiting
children from mainstream society, groups like the LRA
are now increasingly filling positions in their leadership
hierarchy with children who were born in the group.
As long as they remain in the LRA, those children are
also susceptible to being perpetrators of the abduction
of other children from mainstream society. They also
remain likely to perpetuate sexual violence on other
recruits, including on girls born in the group, thereby
defeating the very purpose of our attempts to end the
use of child soldiers and prevent sexualized violence
in war.
We commend the Council for the strong statements
and actions that, over the course of the years, have
encouraged the fighters in the LRA to defect and
embrace DDR. In order not to leave a segment of such
groups behind, we suggest that the Council consider
other innovative ways that might also appeal to children
who are born in and are growing up in the system.
While international covenants talk about the protection
of all children affected by war, children conceived after
sexual violence fall through the cracks in the protection
framework. Those children, born of war, especially
when older or left parentless in the group, may have no
idea how to disassociate from the group.
I am also compelled to state here that I and other
scholars within the International Network for Children
Born of War — which has its hub at the University of
Birmingham in the United Kingdom — are undertaking
a series of studies to better understand the phenomenon
of being born as a result of sexualized violence in
war zones and how that might inform prospects for
integration and reintegration across time and space.
The contribution of civil society organizations like
mine can be made more effective when Governments
take the lead in DDR. The effects of armed conflict
stay with children for a lifetime. We urge Governments
to integrate DDR into long-term national development
priorities.
The President: I thank Ms. Appio for her briefing.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2015/445, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Albania, Angola, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chad, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,

S/PV.7466

Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Monaco, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2225 (2015).
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia.
Let me start by thanking Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his special remarks. I also wish to express
my sincere appreciation to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
Leila Zerrougui and to Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF, for their briefings and
valuable insights. Malaysia fully acknowledges and
commends the vital and indispensable work of the United
Nations in advocating for and providing assistance to
children affected by armed conflict around the world.
I furthermore wish to thank Ms. Eunice Apio of the
Facilitation for Peace and Development of Uganda for
her testimony on the consequences of child abduction,
the effects of which are far-reaching and are felt long
after conflict has ended.
Graça Machel, in her seminal 1996 report on
the impact of armed conflict on children (A/51/306),
advocated forcefully that the protection of children
in armed conflict is the joint responsibility of all
actors — Member States, international and regional
organizations, civil society and even the lone
individual, each playing their respective roles. It is that
sense of shared responsibility that Malaysia appeals to

15-183809/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

when calling for concerted action to end and alleviate
the suffering of children harmed by warfare. This is
especially so if we are to address challenges that require
sustained attention and close collaboration.
The challenges are manifold. In Yemen, Iraq and
Palestine, children are losing their lives as the result
of air strikes and the use of explosive weapons in
densely populated settings. Children in South Sudan
and Somalia continue to be recruited in large numbers
by armed groups and militias. Children abducted by
violent extremist groups, such as Boko Haram and
Daesh, are forced into sexual slavery and are coerced or
brainwashed to inflict bloodshed, including as suicide
bombers, combatants and executioners.
Those continued violations against children shock
our collective consciousness and demand a concerted,
collective response. The increasing incidence of
abductions perpetrated primarily by non-State
armed groups is grave and disturbing. Children who
are abducted can be subjected to myriad further
violations — they can be harmed multiple times. The
use of abductions by violent extremist groups as a terror
tactic against local communities and minorities is an
acute concern that cannot be easily addressed using
the available tools and mechanisms. That is why, in our
view, the unanimous adoption of resolution 2225 (2015)
today is important, as it underscores our unified stance
in denouncing the abduction of children. Strengthening
the monitoring and reporting on abductions, as well
as identifying perpetrators, will further contribute to
ensuring accountability. At the same time, we must also
ensure that security forces and peacekeeping missions
are trained and equipped to proactively respond to
situations where children are at risk of abduction and
other grave violations.
Ms. Apio illustrated in poignant detail the long-term
consequences experienced by children, particularly girls,
and communities impacted by abduction, underscoring
the importance of ensuring that mechanisms and
programmes are in place to facilitate the reintegration
and rehabilitation of children victimized by armed
groups back into their communities. We must also
recognize that reintegration is a long-term effort that
requires the collective responsibility of all stakeholders,
including the international community. In that regard,
community-based reintegration programmes that foster
a spirit of unity and reconciliation among communities
ravaged by war deserve to be fully supported.

10/96

18/06/2015

We are equally alarmed by the increasing instances
of attacks on schools and hospitals, as well as the
military use of schools by both State and non-State
armed groups, thereby depriving thousands of children
of access to education and health care. Building on the
Security Council’s call, in resolutions 1998 (2011) and
2143 (2014), for the protection of schools from attack
and military use, I am pleased to announce Malaysia’s
endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration, adopted
on 29 May in Oslo. We encourage all member States to
consider endorsing that declaration, which aims, inter
alia, to raise awareness on good practices that would
deter the military use of educational facilities in armed
conflict and preserve schools as mainstays of learning,
not bloodshed.
The question of accountability cannot go unaddressed
and is a vital component of a comprehensive approach to
child protection. We urge for actions to be taken under
national or international justice mechanisms, where
appropriate, against parties that commit violations and
abuses against children. We reaffirm the importance of
the Security Council framework for children and armed
conflict and the various tools that have been developed
to ensure the accountability and compliance of parties
to conflict, including through the listing mechanism of
the annual report of the Secretary-General. We believe
that facts should be the determining factor that guides
our actions under this framework.
We are also dismayed that the credibility and
integrity of the mechanism was questioned this year.
During last year’s 50-day war in Gaza, over 500
Palestinian children were killed and over 1,000 children
suffered serious injuries causing permanent disabilities
as a direct result of the Israeli attacks. Despite the fact
that the number of Palestinian children killed was the
third highest in the world, and the number of schools
damaged or destroyed was the highest in the world in
2014, we have failed to ensure that the perpetrators are
brought to account.
Impunity will only further embolden the
perpetrators. When we start applying different
standards to perpetrators and when we discriminate
against those who deserve justice and accountability,
we are in fact perpetuating grave violations, not only
of children’s rights but those of humankind in general.
On behalf of my delegation, I wish to express
our heartfelt appreciation to all Council members
and Member States that supported the resolution just
adopted, including by sponsoring the text. We fervently
15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

hope that the adoption of this resolution will serve to
further strengthen our collective resolve to continue
developing effective strategies and responses for the
protection of children in armed conflict, even in the
face of unprecedented challenges. The future of our
nations and of the world rests upon the shoulders of the
children that we secure, protect and nurture today.
As a non-permanent member of the Council
and Chair of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, as well as a responsible member of
the international community, Malaysia reaffirms its
commitment to ensuring that children affected by
armed conflict are given the attention and consideration
that they truly deserve.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.
Mr. Ignacio Ybáñez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to commend you, Sir, for organizing this
open debate and for the adoption of an important new
resolution on children and armed conflict (resolution
2225 (2015)), of which Spain was a sponsor. The
resolution is the tangible result of Malaysia’s excellent
work as head of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, which we applaud. I would also
like to express our gratitude for the briefings by the
Secretary-General and by Ms. Lelia Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF, and Ms. Eunice Apio,
Director of the Ugandan non-governmental organization
Facilitation for Peace and Development.
I am joined today by a delegation of Spanish
parliamentarians led by the President of the Senate.
Their presence underscores the interest and importance
that Spain accords the work of the Security Council in
promoting peace, security and the rights of children,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Spain considers it a national priority to contribute to a
world that will be more just, safer and more prosperous
as a legacy for today’s youth and future generations. In
that spirit, we accept the responsibility conferred on us
by the mandate of the Council and with that attitude we
actively participate in negotiating texts and in debates
such as the one that brings us together here today at the
initiative of the Council presidency.

S/PV.7466

The issue of children and armed conflict has
continued to expand since it was first placed on the
Council’s agenda, 10 years ago, at the initiative of
France. The emergence of new conflicts and global
threats made 2014 an especially tragic year — the most
horrifying — for millions of girls and boys. Despite
some progress, reports such as the one before us today
(S/2015/409) highlight the need for the Council to
continue its firm pursuit of that agenda. Along with
the numerous and execrable acts of violence committed
against girls and boys in armed conflict — beginning
with the recruitment of child soldiers — the abduction
of minors has become a routine occurrence in many
conflict zones. Mass abductions are a new tactic
employed in particular by non-State armed groups to
terrorize civilian populations. Abduction is only the
beginning of a far greater horror that generally ends
in forced recruitment, sexual abuse, child trafficking,
slavery, mutilation and murder. In that context,
girls are especially vulnerable to being abducted for
sexual purposes. Boko Haram in Nigeria, the Lord’s
Resistance Army in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Uganda, South Sudan and the Central African
Republic, and the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria/
Daesh embody those cruel and evil practices aimed at
overwhelming all possible resistance through the use
of terror.
The primary goal of the resolution just adopted
is, in fact, to incorporate the abduction of children as
grounds for inclusion on the Secretary-General’s list
of grave crimes against children in armed conflict by
countries or armed groups that fail to comply with the
measures of prevention and protection it provides. We
welcome this substantive and far-reaching advance.
With the aim of furthering that agenda, I would like
now to focus on five key areas: respect for international
humanitarian law; the role of peacekeeping operations;
peace agreements and the reintegration of children into
civilian life; accountability; and the mobilization of
public opinion.
We will not cease to insist on the absolute
importance of respect for the most basic tenets of
international humanitarian law. Schools and hospitals
must be respected and safeguarded. On 29 May, in
Oslo, Spain signed the Safe Schools Declaration along
with 37 other countries, We trust that, with the support
of a growing number of Member States, progress
will be made in protecting schools from military use.
Unfortunately, well into the twenty-first century, it

15-1838011/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

is still necessary to point out that the use of certain
explosive devices, such as anti-personnnel mines or
cluster bombs is utterly reprehensible, as they affect the
whole civilian population, inflict inhuman damage and
martyr a high number of children. In that regard, I want
to speak out on behalf of Spain against the use of barrel
bombs in Syria, which constitutes a flagrant war crime
that must not go unpunished.
The latest report of the Secretary-General refers
extensively to the shelling in densely populated areas.
Those actions are difficult to justify in the light of
international law and result in a number of child
victims so high that they can only lead to outrage. The
rocket attack in Aleppo on Monday, which resulted in
dozens of deaths, including many children, is another
example of indiscriminate attacks, which we strongly
regret and condemn. War is an ideal breeding ground
for the commission of mass crimes; hence the need to
put an end to the hostilities and aggression in order to
be able to work on the difficult task of building and
consolidating peace.
I would also like to address the role of
peacekeeping operations. They contribute significantly
to international peace and security by helping countries
in post-conflict situations to create the conditions that
make sustainable peace possible, one in which the
protection of children is a key element. Therefore,
I would like to reiterate the opinion expressed by
Spain in March (see S/PV.7414) on the importance of
strengthening the mandates of peacekeeping missions
with regard to child protection. We also believe that
the countries listed by the Secretary-General that have
not adopted an action plan to put an end to possible
violations and abuses against children committed by
members of their contingents should not contribute
troops to those types of operations.
It is crucial to ensure the presence of child
protection advisers in peacekeeping missions and to
ensure adequate training for contingents on childprotection issues. All that is essential in order to be able
to contribute to moving forward, in an increasingly
decisive and effective way, on protecting children on
the ground, which is a basic responsibility of States.
Spain recalls the importance of continuing to fully
apply the zero-tolerance policy of the SecretaryGeneral on sexual violence and abuse and the need to
ensure accountability for those involved in such acts.
I would also stress the importance of prominently
incorporating the needs of children into peace
12/96

18/06/2015

agreements. Spain would like to see mechanisms
that address those needs in the same way that we
have encouraged the participation of women in the
negotiation and implementation of peace agreements.
In that respect, peace agreements cannot omit
three important factors: the protection, rehabilitation
and reintegration of child victims of armed conflicts.
Affected States should ensure the existence of
mechanisms that satisfactorily address those three
issues. A good reintegration mechanism is provided
by education and training programmes established to
promote the interests of children and respect their status
as victims. I recall, as an example of good practices,
the figures provided by Colombia at the open debate
of 25 March (see S/PV.7414): through the establishment
of an intergovernmental commission that included
23 Government agencies, more than 4,000 minors
recruited by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional have
been reintegrated in the past 10 years.
In terms of accountability, we will continue to
advocate for strengthening national judicial systems,
and the cooperation of the Security Council with the
International Criminal Court. The fight against impunity
not only restores the dignity of the victims, but acts
as a deterrent. However, we must distinguish between
perpetrators and victims, as it would be a paradox to put
in detention children who are soldiers but who are, first
and above all, victims of armed conflict. Therefore,
in line with the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral, we are in favour of studying alternatives to
criminal proceedings aimed at rehabilitation and social
reintegration, always in the interest of the child. That
does not mean that we cannot attribute responsibility to
those responsible for their recruitment.
Finally, with regard to the mobilization of public
opinion, Governments, international organizations and
civil society must continue to work side by side to raise
awareness among all stakeholders — from armed groups
to the victims’ families — of the large-scale challenge
posed by all that remains to be done. The Office of
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict and UNICEF have done an excellent job with
the “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign in collaboration
with countries such as Chad and Afghanistan. Together
we can help promote that agenda so that the words
“child” and “soldier” are antithetical in every corner of
the planet. The “No Lost Generation” campaign lead by
UNICEF directed at Syrian refugees, with the support

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

of the European Union and Turkey, is yielding good
results. On 19 May, during the holding of the second
open debate of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union on children and armed conflict, there
were notable examples of good practices, even in very
difficult situations, such as in the Central African
Republic.
I would like to conclude by thanking you,
Mr. President, once again for convening this important
and timely debate, which has allowed us to adopt a
resolution that strengthens the fight against the cruelty
that affects the youngest and most innocent members
of the human race. We cannot remain indifferent to
the manipulation of lives that are just starting and
have the right to develop without being forever marked
by violence and hatred. Debates and resolutions like
today’s are morally and politically imperative. When
it comes to the protection of children, no effort is too
great, given the size of the challenge. The international
community and the Council can count on Spain to
relentlessly address this challenge.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Malaysian presidency and you, Mr. Minister,
for organizing this crucial debate, which comes at a
particularly busy time, both politically and emotionally,
in terms of the United Nations agenda. The challenges
identified by the Secretary-General in terms of the
protection of children in armed conflict, the abduction
of children by extremist groups and the recent
allegations of sexual abuse all call on us to solemnly
reaffirm today our commitment to the protection of
children.
I also wish to thank and commend the relentless
commitment of UNICEF, represented here by Ms. Yoka
Brandt, and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, whose mandate is essential to improving
the situation of children in armed conflict. We must
all support her work and even strengthen it. Finally,
I would like to convey my gratitude to Ms. Eunice
Apio, from the Facilitation for Peace and Development
non-governmental organization, for her enlightening
and moving testimony on the abductions carried out by
the Lord’s Resistance Army in Uganda. That testimony,
which is only a reflection of a tiny part of the reality
endured by the nearly 24,500 children abducted
since 2002, shows the added value of this debate and
especially the importance of resolution 2225 (2015),
which we have just adopted. It was high time to update

S/PV.7466

the United Nations child-protection mechanisms so as
to turn abductions into a criterion for inclusion in the
Secretary-General’s black list. I wish to congratulate
Malaysia for its outstanding work on this issue.
The comprehensive United Nations mechanism for
the protection of children deserves our attention today.
Established in 2005 under the leadership of France,
that mechanism now consists of the Security Council’s
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, the
annual report of the Secretary-General, with its black
list, the mandate of his Special Representative and,
especially, a reporting and monitoring mechanism. It is
essential that the mechanism, which identifies violations
committed by the parties on the ground and provides
information for the Secretary-General’s reports and
decisions, remain impartial and confidential. It is
important that the United Nations continue to ensure
the methodological effectiveness of the mechanism,
which cannot, of course, account for all the violations
committed in countries in conflict, but remains the
most effective tool to date for informing us about the six
grave violations of children’s rights. We must therefore
defend the mechanism and, if necessary, reinforce and
improve it.
Indeed, the mechanism today covers violations
committed by both Government forces and non-State
armed groups in what are still too many situations. Most
child recruitment and almost 96 per cent of abductions
are committed by non-State armed groups, which are
often difficult to access by the United Nations and
monitoring teams. States must therefore facilitate
the access of the United Nations in their territory in
order to engage non-State armed groups on children’s
rights. That was the purpose of the open debate (see
S/PV.7414) organized under the French presidency
on 25 March. It was also one of the main thrusts of
the non-paper that we developed on the basis of the
operational proposals of Member States. It is also the
thrust of the Paris Commitments and Paris Principles
on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups, which we call on all States to sign.
Among the non-State armed groups, violent
extremist and terrorist groups pose a special challenge
for the United Nations and the international community.
Unmoved by the black list and indifferent to sanctions,
groups such as Daesh in Iraq and Syria and Boko Haram
in West Africa continue to carry out mass crimes with
complete impunity. In that context, the fight against
terrorism is a necessary, albeit insufficient, response.

15-1838013/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

18/06/2015

There is another even more powerful weapon
to fight violent extremism, namely, education. It is
in schools and within families that the fight against
radicalization must be taught so as to prevent children
from joining voluntarily, or by force, non-State armed
groups. That is why France firmly condemns attacks
against schools.

diligence with respect to foreign troops and the zerotolerance policy in cases of sexual abuse involving the
United Nations. I reiterate that France considers the
implementation of those policies a top political priority.
More than ever before, we owe that not only to the
victims, but to all of those that are fighting every day
on behalf of the protection of children.

France was especially committed to the inclusion
of such criteria as part of the path to blacklisting,
back in 2011. Pursuant to resolutions 1998 (2011) and
resolution 2143 (2014), France remains convinced that
the military occupation of schools should be avoided.
France has taken note of the Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict, but regrets that they do not fully
reflect existing international humanitarian law, which
still represents the best protection for civilians and
children during conflict. The scale of the violations
of international humanitarian law today demonstrates
that it is that body of law that must be implemented and
respected by States in all circumstances.

Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Malaysian presidency and Minister Dato Sri Anifah
Aman for convening this open debate and commend
Malaysia’s excellent leadership of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
We value the Secretary-General’s leadership in that
area and the work of his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Leila Zerrougui, as well
as UNICEF and other United Nations bodies, regional
organizations and civil society.

I would like to end my statement with a case that
has struck at France’s very heart and affected the
people of Central Africa and the United Nations as
a whole, namely, the allegations of sexual violence
committed against minors by foreign troops, including
French soldiers. France of course takes very seriously
those serious accusations. The French authorities have
reacted firmly and, as soon as they were informed of
the allegations, in late July 2014, immediately sought
justice. A judicial inquiry is under way. The French
authorities are determined to shed full light on the case,
in cooperation with the United Nations and the Central
African Republic. As the President of the Republic,
Mr. François Hollande, most vigorously underscored,
if the allegations are proved, his determination will
be unforgiving, with exemplary disciplinary action
imposed on those responsible, in addition to the
criminal response, which is under the authority of the
courts.
In that context, we hope that the SecretaryGeneral’s decision to set up an independent external
review of the process by which the United Nations
deals with the allegations of sexual violence by foreign
troops in the Central African Republic will strengthen
the early-warning and response systems of the United
Nations in that regard.
Finally, in the name of truth and the fight against
impunity, my country fully backs the policy of due
14/96

We carefully followed Eunice Apio’s valuable
testimony, which calls upon us to act decisively to assist
children who have been abducted in conflict situations
from their homes, schools and refugee camps, mostly
by non-State armed groups in the framework of their
systematic campaigns of intimidation and reprisals
against civilians.
Resolution 2225 (2015), which was adopted today,
and the report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/409)
are very much in accord with my country’s concerns;
we will therefore focus on certain aspects that, in the
context of the concept note (S/2015/402, annex), deserve
special attention.
Despite the progress achieved in the SecretaryGeneral’s “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign, which is
focused on States, initiatives to achieve commitments
by non-State actors and accountability must be
strengthened. In that regard, the recommendations of
the Secretary-General’s recent report provide important
guidance to States and the international community as
a whole.
Furthermore, States must respond to threats to
peace and security in accordance with international
law, while ensuring mitigation measures to protect the
children affected. Children must be treated primarily
as victims, with their rehabilitation and reintegration
forming the core of the efforts undertaken.
The detention of children on the grounds of their
association with armed groups during conflict must
be monitored through the reports of the SecretaryGeneral. Judicial actions against demobilized children
15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

must fall within the jurisdiction of special courts, based
on international standards of juvenile justice. Detention
should be a measure of last resort and should take place
only in special centres for minors, and children should
never be placed among adult prisoners.
We vigorously condemn the abduction of children
by any and all parties to conflict, as it is not only illegal
under international law but a serious violation of the
Geneva Conventions and possibly a crime against
humanity.
The abduction of children in conflict is a longstanding issue and one of the six grave violations
against children in armed conflict established by the
Council. However, since 2014 that crime’s visibility has
increased in the wake of recent cases requiring solutions
to that scourge, which can lead to other violations such
as forced labour, sexual slavery, recruitment and crossborder trafficking in children. That is why we support
the listing in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s
reports of parties to conflict that are kidnapping
children, so that they can be pressured to release their
hostages and be brought to justice. Along the same lines,
the Council’s sanctions committees should include
grave violations of the rights of children as an eligible
criterion for the imposition of sanctions. Only joint,
coordinated and complementary efforts will ensure the
protection of fundamental rights and proper protection
of the most vulnerable populations.
We also stress the importance of child protection
advisers in political and peacekeeping missions with
training in children’s rights, and the six grave violations
against children that were established by the Council,
as well as prevention measures. Likewise, ceasefire
agreements, peace processes and post-conflict agendas
must address the issue of kidnapped children and their
rehabilitation and reintegration.
The impact of armed conflict on education poses
challenges in terms of major humanitarian emergencies
and social and development challenges. The Council
notes daily, throughout the world, bombings and
burned schools, with children and their teachers as the
ongoing victims of killings, mutilations, abductions
and arbitrary detention. Schools are continually used
by parties to armed conflict as bases, barracks or
detention centres. We therefore urge parties to armed
conflict to implement resolution 2143 (2014) and to
refrain from actions that impede children’s access to
education during conflict. We encourage Member

S/PV.7466

States to consider concrete steps to discourage the use
of schools by armed forces and non-State armed groups,
as such use violates existing international standards.
We believe that the implementation of the
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict, known as
the Lucens Guidelines, supported by Chile through the
Safe Schools Declaration of last May, will contribute to
improved conduct and best practices leading to greater
protection for schools and universities in times of
armed conflict and reducing their use during military
operations, with a view to protecting children in any
and all circumstances.
Lastly, Chile would like to reiterate its firm
commitment to contributing actively to the prevention
and elimination of all forms of violence affecting boys
and girls around the world and to continuing to work
towards eradicating the six grave violations committed
against children in situations of armed conflict.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Mr. President, I want to
welcome you to the Security Council and to thank you
in particular for having convened this seminal debate.
The protection of children is undoubtedly a moral
duty and a legal obligation for all States. We thank
the Secretary-General for his abiding commitment to
the cause of the protection of children. We wish also
to thank the briefers for their insightful statements,
which have not only underlined the salient dimensions
of their achievements in the field but also highlighted
the challenges that we all face in our collective effort to
protect the world’s children.
It is encouraging to note that since the adoption
of resolution 1998 (2011), efforts to protect students,
teachers and schools in situations of armed conflict
have gained considerable momentum. The monitoring
and reporting of attacks on schools and on the military
use of schools have also registered some improvement,
facilitating more concrete and effective responses to
heinous attacks on institutions of learning.
Our abiding concern derives from our consternation
at the events of the night of 14 April 2014, when 276
girls in the prime of their lives were viciously abducted
from the sanctuary of their dormitories in Chibok, in
the north-eastern part of Nigeria. Their dreams and
aspirations were rudely interrupted by the infamous
extremist group Boko Haram. It appears that we all
have reached our limits of tolerance for this kind of

15-1838015/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

impunity. Today we are encouraged that the proposals
designed to stem the spate of abductions of children
have received due attention universally.
A fundamental and enduring step forward is to make
deliberate and incremental efforts to institutionalize
these policies at both the regional and national levels
and, where possible, institute peer-review mechanisms
for effective monitoring. The African Charter on the
Rights and Welfare of the Child was instituted as a
tool for advancing children’s rights. While it builds
on the same basic principles as the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the African
Union (AU) Children’s Charter highlights issues of
special importance in the African context.
The fact that all States members of the AU have
acceded to the Children’s Charter and all except seven
have ratified it underscores the critical importance of the
rights of children. This year, as Africa commemorates
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the
Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child,
represents an opportunity for States parties to make a
renewed commitment to children’s rights.
As a demonstration of our national commitment to
the well-being of children, Nigeria was among the first
group of States to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration
in Oslo, Norway, on 29 May. The Declaration
complements and strengthens our existing national safe
schools initiative, established in 2014 as part of the
policy response of the federal Government to promote
safe zones for learning. The guidelines for protecting
schools and universities from military use during armed
conflict will serve as a compass to guide and reinforce
efforts towards the achievement of this objective. We
are committed to the dissemination of these guidelines
and to promoting their implementation. We are indeed
persuaded that this initiative will promote and protect
the right to education and prevent the discontinuities in
education inherent in situations of armed conflict.
We commend the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict and acknowledge the importance
of the monitoring and reporting mechanism for grave
violations against children in armed conflict. We
emphasize the critical importance of resolutions 1998
(2011) and 2143 (2014), which in particular urge all
parties to armed conflict to refrain from actions that
impede children’s access to education.
In advancing the cause of the protection of children
in armed conflict, the Council today is delivering a

16/96

18/06/2015

message of hope and a signal of the strength of our
collective will. The adoption of resolution 2225 (2015)
today reinforces both our collective will and our shared
responsibility, for it is certainly within the Council’s
capacity to protect the vulnerable from the ravages
of conflict and other blatant breaches of peace and
security.
Nigeria reiterates its commitment to working
assiduously with all people of goodwill to safeguard the
future of humankind: our children.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Foreign
Minister Aman, we are honoured to have you presiding
over the Council and guiding us today.
New Zealand welcomes Malaysia’s initiative in
bringing this item before the Council. It builds usefully
on the open debate held under France’s presidency in
March (see S/PV.7414), when we provided an overview
of our approach to this subject.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/409) shows
that 2014 was a particularly devastating year for children
in countries affected by armed conflict. Thousands
of children died unnecessarily. The report highlights
several trends relevant to this enormous loss. Even with
the good work of the Children, Not Soldiers campaign,
major problems persist, especially with rehabilitation
and reintegration, particularly among girls following
sexual violence and among children with disabilities,
thereby exacerbating the impact of conflict.
We have to face the reality that for many, including
members of this Organization, targeting schools and
hospitals is considered acceptable despite the fact
that such action is a blatant violation of international
humanitarian law. New Zealand urges all countries to
put in place safeguards such as those outlined in the
Safe Schools Declaration adopted in Oslo last month
to protect schools and hospitals from military use in
armed conflict. We owe it to our children and their
futures to do all we can to protect them.
In 2014 increasing numbers of children were
abducted, in particular by extremist groups, and used as
tools designed to punish communities in the cruellest of
ways. From the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, in
Iraq and in Syria, to Boko Haram in Nigeria, children
have been taken into captivity, tortured and abused,
indoctrinated or sold into sexual slavery.
Resolution 2225 (2015), adopted today and
which New Zealand was pleased to co-sponsor, is an

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

important response to this trend. Adding abductions as
a trigger violation for listing in the Secretary-General’s
report demonstrates our commitment to calling out the
perpetrators of such crimes before the international
community. This can have an important deterrent effect
on those who may be considering such actions and
those who command them. It will also help to ensure
that the right information is being documented in order
to support long-term accountability. We congratulate
Malaysia for its leadership in this important step
forward.
New Zealand has noted with considerable concern
the observations section of this year’s annual report. In
this, the Secretary-General deplores the fact that the
way in which the case was made by some parties about
the targeting of children in conflict has threatened the
integrity of the Council’s listing mechanism. We share
the Secretary-General’s concern at efforts to interfere
in the independent discharge of the Secretary-General’s
office and the implicit presumption that some forces
are exempt from criticism, whatever the objective
evidence may suggest. The Secretary-General has
a clear mandate to report on what he considers to be
grave violations committed against children in armed
conflict. When he does, he is acting at the behest of the
Council — and, indeed, of the wider membership of
the Organization. We all have a responsibility to protect
those who cannot speak for themselves.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Malaysia’s initiative to convene this open
debate of the Security Council on children and armed
conflict. We welcome to New York His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs Sri Anifah Aman, who is
presiding over our discussion today. I thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Zerrougui, and the Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF, Ms. Brandt, for their briefings.
China also listened attentively to the statement by the
non-governmental organization representative.
Children are the future and the hope of the world.
They are also the most vulnerable to violations and
abuses. Children are bearing the brunt of armed
conflict in many parts of the world. Barbaric acts
against children are still occurring from time to time. In
particular, the phenomenon of child abduction in armed
conflicts has become increasingly acute and should
command the serious attention of the international
community. Parties to conflicts are responsible for the

S/PV.7466

full protection of children in armed conflict. China
supports the unrelenting efforts of the international
community to protect children in armed conflicts. I
would like to emphasize the following points.
First, we need to tackle the issue at its roots by
providing a sound environment for the growth of
children. The best way to protect children in conflict
is to prevent, reduce and resolve conflicts at their
roots. That is far more meaningful than remedial
measures after the eruption of conflict. The Council
bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. It should therefore
strengthen preventive diplomacy and make more use
of the measures provided for in Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations, such as mediation, good
offices, dialogue and negotiation. It should support and
encourage parties to resolve their differences peacefully
and to eliminate the root causes of the problem of
children caught up in armed conflicts.
Secondly, we must respect the principle of national
ownership by the country concerned and create a solid
foundation for the protection of children. Governments
bear the primary responsibility for the protection of
children in conflicts in their own countries. The key
to the implementation of Council resolutions and the
enforcement of various programmes and plans aimed at
protecting children lies in the cooperation and efforts of
the countries concerned. The international community
should give full play to the leadership role of the
Governments concerned and respect the sovereignty
of those countries, while providing assistance and
support, and should concretely strengthen their
capacity-building in that field.
Thirdly, the international community should
adopt a comprehensive strategy and form international
synergy for the protection of children. In post-conflict
rebuilding efforts, comprehensive measures must be
taken to ensure that child victims of armed conflicts
are smoothly reintegrated into society and to provide
a favourable, secure and social environment for the
health and growth of children. UNICEF, UNESCO, the
World Bank and other relevant agencies should draw
on their respective advantages, strengthen coordination
and cooperation, and support the countries involved
in conflicts in their efforts to eliminate poverty,
provide universal education and promote sustainable
development.

15-1838017/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

Fourthly, we must give priority to resolving the
issue of child abductions in armed conflicts. China
supports the addition of child abduction in armed
conflicts as a criterion for being listed in the annex to the
Secretary-General’s annual report. That would help to
strengthen the international community’s fight against
that heinous behaviour. The international community
should fully utilize the resources and means available
now, adopt comprehensive measures and policies and
work on multiple fronts to step up the fight against the
phenomenon of child abduction so as to effectively halt
those acts. Measures should include, first, strengthening
the sharing of information and intelligence while
trying to rescue those abducted children; secondly,
strengthening international cooperation to ensure
that those responsible for child abduction will be
brought to justice; and, thirdly, improving the rescue
and resettlement of abducted children to ensure their
smooth reintegration and rehabilitation.
China stands ready to work with the wider
international community to fully safeguard international
peace and security, to jointly improve the situation of
children in armed conflict and to prevent them from
suffering in wars and conflicts, as well as to foster a
harmonious and secure environment for their health
and growth.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. I welcome
the leadership that Malaysia has shown on this important
issue, and I am pleased at the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2225 (2015). I also thank the SecretaryGeneral, his Special Representative Ms. Zerrougui and
UNICEF Deputy Executive Director Brandt for their
briefings. I welcome the powerful words of Ms. Eunice
Apio. Her insights into the consequences of abduction
require us all to reflect deeply. She has underscored the
importance of the Security Council hearing from those
working directly on these issues.
Last week, a 17-year-old British boy, a child, died
in an attack by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) on an oil refinery in Iraq. His name was Talha
Asmal. To those who knew him, he was an ordinary
Yorkshire lad. He was friendly, kind; he worked hard
at school. He should have been looking forward to
university. Instead, he died a long way from home.
Amid the tragedy that left 11 people dead, a sad truth
emerged: Talha was not an innocent bystander caught
up in the attack, he was a suicide bomber. Talha was
a perpetrator, but also a victim. He was a victim of

18/96

18/06/2015

ISIL and its sickening propaganda. He was a victim
of violent extremists too cowardly to act themselves.
He was a victim of an increasingly violent world that
does not distinguish between children and adults in
conflicts. I do not seek to excuse Talha’s actions. What
he did was barbaric and un-Islamic. But in highlighting
this example from my own country, I hope to illustrate
that we all face challenges to do with children and
armed conflict. It is truly a global issue, and it requires
a global response.
Through today’s resolution, we have taken a
step forward. The expansion of the listing criteria to
include abductions will enhance our ability to hold
perpetrators to account. The need is great. In February,
at least 89 boys were kidnapped in the Upper Nile state
in South Sudan. These are in addition to the hundreds
of children abducted by ISIL — and by Boko Haram,
as our Nigerian colleague so eloquently described in
2014 (see S/PV.7259), making that arguably the worst
year for children in recent memory. Those sick groups
abduct children to use them forcibly as child soldiers.
They bind them into sexual slavery and turn them into
weapons of war to terrorize families and communities.
The trigger in a new resolution is a clear declaration
from the Security Council that we will not tolerate the
abduction of children in any form or for any purpose.
But listing is just the first step towards ending
impunity. We want to see more progress on ensuring
accountability. States must exercise their national
jurisdiction to bring those listed to account, and if they
fail to do so, the International Criminal Court (ICC) has
an important role to play. As the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2015/409) notes, the transfer to the ICC of
Dominic Ongwen, who himself was abducted as a child
in 1989, shows that we must take a long-term approach.
We have seen some progress this year, including the
conviction and sentencing of Thomas Lubanga, and
we welcome the fact that Bosco Ntaganda’s trial will
commence s1hortly.
More needs to be done. In the case of Syria we
cannot afford to become numb to the recruitment,
detention, torture, killing and maiming in that children
in that country — whether by the regime, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant or others. There is a
clear call for action by the international community.
The Secretary-General’s report sets out the case: 889
schools attacked, 413 medical facilities damaged, 368
children killed and 771 injured. All of these events took
place in 2014. The Secretary-General’s report shows

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

that the vast majority of those acts were committed
by Syrian Government forces. Thus such, the United
Kingdom believes adamantly that situation in Syria
must be referred to the ICC.
There are ways out. In Syria we maintain that this
must be through a political solution; there can be no
military solution. We support the efforts of Special
Envoy de Mistura to take forward the implementation
of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and
ultimately enable the Syrian people to decide their own
future.
Across the world, there is a way out. The roles that
they play are listed in the Secretary-General’s report.
Whether Government or non-State armed groups,
they can adopt concrete, time-bound action plans to
halt violations and abuses. Eventually, that can lead to
delisting. Action plans work. We congratulate Chad for
the successful delisting of the Chadian national army
last year, following the full implementation of their
action plan. I call on all listed parties — Governments
and non-State armed groups — to follow their example.
I would like to conclude with this final point.
How a society treats its most vulnerable — be they
children, the infirm or elderly — is always a measure
of its humanity, and even more so during instability
and conflict. When a society begins to disregard the
vulnerable and their rights, instability and conflict will
only grow. The litany of violations and abuses against
children in the Secretary-General’s report is evidence
of that spread. It has spread so far that children across
the world, whether from Syria or Yorkshire, are now
caught up as both victims and tools of conflict. Through
today’s resolution we have taken one step forward to
ending that, but many more steps will be needed if we
are to eradicate this problem. We cannot waver in our
resolve.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Mr. Minister,
as President of the Security Council and would like
to thank you for having organized today’s meeting.
We are also grateful to the invited briefers for their
comprehensive statements. We would like to single
out the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Zerrougui, to protect children affected by armed
conflict in various parts of the world.
We have very carefully reviewed the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2015/409) prepared for today’s

S/PV.7466

meeting. We share its concerns regarding the dire
situation of millions of children affected by armed
conflict throughout the world. Of particular concern is
the new trend of violence against children carried out
by terrorist organizations and other groups that espouse
ideologies of extremist violence. The cynicism of Boko
Haram is horrendous, characterized by its abduction of
a large group of girls, an event that shocked the entire
world.
The weakening of State institutions in countries
in the Middle East and North Africa has created a
breeding ground for the growth of violent extremism
and terrorist activity. Before the eyes of the world,
the so-called Islamic State has seized large swathes of
territory, declaring them a caliphate and establishing
its order there. Children are among the first victims
of such groups. Terrorist groups use the Internet and
various social media not only to recruit children and
young adults as fighters, but also as suicide bombers.
The number of instances of killing children and
of sexual violence and mass abduction of children
continues to grow. Increasingly, these crimes have
become hallmarks of today’s armed conflicts.
We decisively condemn violations of the norms
of international law, international humanitarian law
and international law relating to human rights and the
rights of refugees with regard to children, regardless
of who commits them. Both premeditated attacks
and the indiscriminate or excessive use of force are
unacceptable. Justifying civilian deaths — including
those of children — by the unavoidability of so-called
collateral damage is equally unacceptable. In this vein,
and of particular concern, the deteriorating situation
in Yemen and the tragic situation of children in Syria
present yet another argument for the rapid resolution
of these conflicts. Concerns for the safety of children
should be a constant priority in any peacekeeping
operation or counter-terrorism activity.
Unfortunately, children continue to die because
of armed conflicts throughout the world. We continue
to be concerned by the plight of children in southeastern Ukraine. As a result of an armed conflict that,
as defined by the International Committee of the Red
Cross, is not international in character, that country has
seen mass violations of children’s rights to life, security,
safety, health, education and medical treatment. Since
May of this year, in the conflict zone, over 68 children
were killed and 176 wounded. Artillery and mortar
attacks from Ukrainian forces destroyed kindergartens,

15-1838019/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

schools, clinics, hospitals, maternal wards and
orphanages. As a result of Kyiv’s de facto economic
blockade of territories not under its control, children
in the conflict zone are deprived of food, drinking
water, drugs and medical assistance. Large-scale
humanitarian assistance provided by Russia to residents
of the Donbas region is meant to help children as well.
Since the beginning of the conflict, over 100 children
have received expert medical treatment in Russia. Only
a few days ago, group of sick children and their parents
from Donbas reached Moscow by plane. There were
14 children in that group. They all suffer from various
problems. Some have been injured by shelling and
others are extremely ill.
Clearly, large-scale violations against children, in
various armed conflicts require that special attention
be given to their rehabilitation — providing them
with psychological, medical and legal assistance.
The protection of children is the responsibility of
Governments, and most States affected by armed
conflicts are striving to improve the situation of
children in their countries. They have a right to expect
help in their efforts from the United Nations system as
well as civil society organizations. We are encouraged
that in today’s resolution 2225 (2015) significant
attention is given to issues of national responsibility for
the protection of children, their rehabilitation and their
reintegration. Furthermore, we welcome the decision to
consider the abduction of children as another criterion
for inclusion of parties to an armed conflict in the
annex to the annual report of the Secretary-General on
this topic.
We hope that the new Security Council resolution
will reinforce the reporting and monitoring mechanism
and the activities led by Malaysia’s thematic Working
Group. Since its inception pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1612 (2005), the Working Group
has achieved a great deal in improving the situation of
children in a number of countries affected by armed
conflict. To ensure maximum efficiency in this work,
it is important — and in this regard we fully support
our Malaysian colleagues — to expand constructive
cooperation with the Governments concerned.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): Allow me
to welcome you, Mr. President, and congratulate you
on organizing this open debate under the Malaysian
presidency of the Security Council, as well as on the
initiative of moving forward resolution 2225 (2015),
which incorporates the issue of the abduction of children

20/96

18/06/2015

in armed conflicts. I would also like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, his Special Representative
Leila Zerrougui, Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF, and Ms. Eunice Apio, from the
non-governmental organization Facilitation for Peace
and Development.
As we adopt this resolution in the month of June,
hundreds if not thousands of children are being abducted
to be used for various purposes in armed conflicts, in
particular to fight against their will in the forces of parties
to conflict or to be used as bargaining chips, in flagrant
violation of international law. The vast majority of such
acts are committed by such armed or terrorist groups as
Boko Haram and Daesh. The members of the Security
Council deplore and condemn such abductions and the
extreme barbarity with which the perpetrators treat
the children concerned. Unfortunately, the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report for 2014 (S/2015/409) states
that there has been an unprecedented rise in violence
against children and that their abduction has become
the defining characteristic of conflicts all over the
world. That constitutes a significant challenge to their
protection, bearing in mind that 230 million of them are
currently in the affected areas.
Resolution 2225 (2015), which we have just adopted,
is crucial because it establishes the abduction of children
as one of the trigger violations for the listing of parties
to conflicts in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s
annual report. Such listing reflects the will of the
entire international community and will undoubtedly
encourage international, regional and subregional
cooperation and effectively contribute to achieving the
objectives of the “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign.
In that connection, we support the recommendation
in the Secretary-General’s report that grave violations
against children be included as a criterion for sanctions
in Security Council committees so that child abduction
can be more effectively combated.
We think that States can also use such measures
to improve their national legislation on eliminating
violations against children, including abduction. To
mitigate and prevent such abduction, however, States
must also facilitate contact between United Nations
bodies and non-State armed groups. It was in fact
because of dialogue with such armed groups that
questions of child protection were incorporated into
the peace agreements in the Central African Republic,
making it possible to free several hundred children from
the clutches of armed groups at the end of the Bangui

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

Forum in May. The same goes for South Sudan, where
1,757 children have already been freed from the grasp
of the Cobra Faction, although that figure remains
lower than the 33,000 expected.
Impunity in relation to violence against children,
however, remains a major concern in most cases. In that
connection, we would emphasize the importance of the
recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report and
call upon the Member States to hold the perpetrators of
such violence accountable.
Schools, universities and hospitals continue to be
subject to violent attacks and occupation for military
purposes. We reiterate our call to the parties to armed
conflicts to respect the vital, civilian character of such
institutions. We also believe that the measures set out in
the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict, endorsed
through the Safe Schools Declaration, adopted in Oslo
on 29 May, will effectively ensure the protection of
such institutions.
We must also not overlook illegal transfers of
small arms and light weapons, the stockpiling of which
undermines the efforts of the United Nations and
adversely affects children in areas affected by armed
conflict.
We believe that the withdrawal of children from
the forces of parties to conflict is essential to their
reintegration, but given their lack of financial resources
and future prospects, they are often vulnerable to being
recruited again. We encourage States and financial
partners to further intensify their efforts so as to
consolidate the reintegration measures already taken
and to prevent further recruitment. An overarching
strategy for the protection of children and school
facilities needs to be defined more urgently now than
ever before, but that cannot be done without tackling
the causes of violence and eradicating terrorism.
We welcome the progress made in the “Children,
Not Soldiers” campaign in 2014 and the efforts of
the international community, particularly the United
Nations, through the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui. We encourage them to continue
their work to achieve the campaign’s objectives by 2016.
We reiterate our support for regional and subregional
organizations’ leadership in and contribution to efforts
to protect children, and we urge such organizations to
intensify their efforts in that area.

S/PV.7466

Chad has maintained its partnership with the
United Nations and is developing sustained cooperation
at the regional and subregional levels, in particular with
neighbouring States. In 2015, we have demobilized
and reintegrated children who had been forced to join
ex-Séléka fighters in the Central African Republic and
had crossed the border into Chad. In April we also
returned to their countries approximately 30 children
snatched by the Chadian National Army from the
clutches of Boko Haram. Chadian children in the same
situation have been entrusted to the Ministry of Social
Action for reintegration, with the help of UNICEF, for
whose valuable support we would like to reiterate our
appreciation.
Lastly, the inclusion of parties to conflict in the
Secretary-General’s annual report on children and
armed conflict is an important tool for combating
violations of children’s rights and could dissuade
many parties tempted to commit such violations. If
that measure is to have the desired effects, however,
it must apply indiscriminately to all those who are
committing such violations today. We dare to hope that
the Secretary-General’s next report on children and
armed conflict will reflect that concern.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic):I would
like first of all to welcome you, Mr. President, to
the Security Council, and to thank you for giving us
this opportunity to discuss the important issue of the
protection of children in armed conflict. We also thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon; his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui; the Deputy Executive Director
of UNICEF, Ms. Yoka Brandt; and the representative
of Facilitation for Peace and Development, Ms. Eunice
Apio, for their very informative briefings.
There has been an unprecedented increase in the
number of crimes and violations committed against
children in armed conflicts, particularly in the Middle
East and Africa. Among those inhuman violations
we would highlight the crime of child abduction. The
number of children abducted in armed conflicts since
2002 has exceeded 25,000, and 95 per cent of them were
abducted by non-State armed groups in an organized,
structured manner so that they could be recruited or
terrorized, or for the purposes of extortion.
The deficiencies in the protection of civilians at all
levels, particularly children in armed conflicts, result
from a failure to address the threat posed by armed

15-1838021/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

groups and the early-warning signs of armed conflicts
as soon as they appear, or to impose the necessary legal
limits. Those are the most important reasons for the
increase in the number of attacks on children in armed
conflicts, their abduction by armed groups and their
forced participation in criminal and terrorist acts.
We must make every effort to work together
to end the abduction of children and prevent it from
spreading or being used in a systematic way in many
armed conflicts. That will require efforts, first, at the
national level, because the protection of civilians, and
particularly children, is above all the responsibility
of the State; secondly, at the regional level, through
cooperation among States and common strategies
to combat cross-border armed groups with a view to
weakening them, containing them and limiting their
spread; and, thirdly, at the international level, through
the Security Council and the international legal bodies
that address the abduction of children in armed conflicts
in a broader context. In that regard, I would like to
highlight the steps it is essential to take if the problem
is to be solved or limited, and which should continue to
be improved in both the medium and long term.
At the national level, we should raise awareness
about the protection of children in armed conflict
through education and social networks, which can play
an important role in educating people from different
social groups in countering the media publicity
exploited by terrorist groups such as Daesh and Boko
Haram in order to attract young people and children
through their mistaken beliefs. The media constitute a
weapon every bit as dangerous as the arms that such
groups use, whether for terrorizing or killing civilians.
States should also institute the necessary judicial
and legislative reforms, including by enacting and
strengthening laws aimed at criminalizing any kind
of attack on children. We should strengthen policies
designed to deal with violations against children,
ensure access to the medical and psychiatric services
they will need and provide programmes for victims’
rehabilitation and social reintegration.
Mrs. Adnin took the Chair.
At the regional level, we emphasize the importance
of States exchanging security and military intelligence,
as well as the necessity for inter-State coordination.
We are currently witnessing an increase in the flow
of foreign fighters across national borders, as if the
world had become an open space for them to carry
out their terrorist acts in. Reconciliation accords and
22/96

18/06/2015

instruments agreed on regionally or among regional or
national parties can sometimes work to the detriment of
other essential components, particularly those relating
to accountability and criminal prosecution. In that
regard, we would like to underscore the importance
of a comprehensive political process that addresses all
types of threats and security situations. It is crucial that
the United Nations and the Security Council follow
up such agreements to ensure that they do not fail to
punish those responsible for crimes against civilians,
particularly children, and that such criminals are not
permitted impunity.
The international community must take measures
aimed at working, with States’ cooperation, to halt this
phenomenon and at providing technical, logistical and
material assistance, particularly for fragile States that
do not have the capacity for protection and deterrence.
Measures for deterring the perpetrators of these
crimes include ensuring accountability and combating
impunity, especially for crimes against children,
whether through sexual violence or abduction, that are
prohibited and punishable as war crimes and crimes
against humanity under international law. Crimes
and abuses of children, including abduction, should
be included in the mandates of sanctions committees,
with the criminals’ names added to the sanctions list
and included in the annex to the Secretary-General’s
reports on children in armed conflict and those
published by the relevant international organizations.
Along with that, work must be done to document such
crimes and violations in cooperation with national
Governments and through the creation of investigative
and fact-finding commissions on crimes committed
against children from the beginning of each and every
armed conflict.
In order to ensure that these measures are
implemented as well as possible, it is vital that we
promote cooperation between the Security Council
and the Secretariat. We can ensure the protection
of children, the most fragile members of society,
by establishing links between the tasks involved in
peacekeeping, increasing the numbers of specialized
experts and making sure that they have the resources
they need to ensure the best possible deployment of
their capacities and skills in that field.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/409)
paints a very grim picture of the violations committed
against children in armed conflict at the international
level. In our view, there is a great deal of work to be done

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

if we are to ensure that those children have protection
and support. While the report mentionw the violations
committed by Israel against Palestinian children during
the most recent aggression against Gaza, we were
shocked to see that Israel’s violations are not included in
the list contained in the annex to the report, despite the
fact that the report cites many other situations, entities
and countries. That runs contrary to the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. Legal protection
should be guaranteed at the same level to all, regardless
of what side they are on. It is essential to be seen to be
objective and transparent when it comes to including
States and entities that commit crimes against children,
and to have a clear mechanism, based on criteria that
guarantee the protection of children in every region of
the world and ensure legal accountability for all those
who commit such crimes, without exception.
Jordan is working to offer Syrian refugee children
a second chance at a better future and to ensure that
they are protected and served as well as possible in the
wake of all that they have endured in Syria and after
the violations of their rights that they have suffered at
the hands of the regime and the terrorist armed groups.
In coordination with the specialized agencies of the
United Nations and non-government organizations,
Jordan has established a reception centre for the
children of refugees and a centre designed to promote
an educational and preventive environment for children,
along with the provision, with the help of UNICEF, of
psychological and social assistance. We have opened
the doors of our schools, public and private, to the
children of Syrian refugees, because education is the
best possible thing we can offer them so that they can
build a better future.
Finally, I would like to reiterate that Jordan supports
the protection of children in armed conflict, the item on
today’s agenda. We also support the efforts of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougi, and
we encourage all the parties to conflicts whose names
are mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report to
sign and implement action plans designed to deal with
the issue of flagrant violations against children and to
promote international peace and security.
Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): I would like to thank
Malaysia for holding this open debate. I also thank the
briefers for their presentations.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

S/PV.7466

Armed conflicts continue to have a horrific impact
on children and, as we heard today from both the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, last
year was one of the worst in recent memory. Recruited
as child soldiers, stunted by malnourishment and
starvation, forced to witness the death of their parents
and siblings, abducted and turned into suicide bombers,
sold in slave markets like cattle, children in conflict
zones are denied the most basic of human rights.
Granted, in recent years there have been some
positive steps in the protection of children in armed
conflicts, and we would like to express our appreciation
for the dedicated and passionate work of Special
Representative Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui
to that effect. The incorporation of child protection
provisions into peacekeeping mandates, the inclusion
of crimes against children among sanctions designation
criteria, the campaign “Children Not Soldiers”, child
protection advisers, national action plans — these have
all been important developments. And yet countless
children across the Middle East, in Africa and even in
the middle of Europe continue to suffer from conflictrelated violence.
In eastern Ukraine foreign aggression and the reign
of lawlessness imposed by illegal militants have caused
massive displacement, primarily impacting the elderly
and children. The latter account for more than 161,000,
or some 18 per cent, among registered internally
displaced persons, while the total number of children
affected by this conflict amounts to 1.7 million. The
restricted access to medical services and education,
life in temporary shelters and basements of damaged
buildings and continued psychological trauma are the
daily reality for those children in eastern Ukraine. Child
soldiers have been recently spotted by the monitors
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe among the ranks of the illegal militants.
In Syria, the worst humanitarian crisis of our time,
7.5 million children are in need of humanitarian aid,
2.6 million are deprived of education opportunities and
close to 2 million are living as refugees in neighbouring
countries. Across Yemen, 9.5 million children require
humanitarian assistance, 3,600 schools, or 76 per cent
of the country’s total, have closed due to insecurity
and 1.83 million children lost over two months of
school. More and more young boys are seen manning
checkpoints and involved in armed groups.
Those are but a few cases where conflicts are
taking a heavy toll of children’s lives. The list of

15-1838023/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

18/06/2015

such cases, however, is devastatingly long. If we
remember yesterday’s statement by the Executive
Director of UNICEF on atrocities in Unity state, South
Sudan — boys castrated and left to bleed, girls as
young as eight gang-raped and murdered, some 13,000
children forced to participate in a conflict not of their
own making — it reminds us once again of the darkest
depths of inhumanity that we humans can reach.

for the time they were wielding the gun as child soldiers,
missing the false sense of empowerment it provided
over the lives of others. Today such worrying signals
are beginning to emerge from the Central African
Republic where the lack of options and opportunities
to reintegrate into civilian life may be pushing some of
the released former child soldiers back into the hands
of armed groups.

Abductions of children are being increasingly used
by armed groups and terrorists as a tactic of war, to
impose their murderous rule and to target particular
ethnic or religious groups. The Chibok girls abducted
by Boko Haram in Nigeria and the abduction of
Kurdish boys and Yezidi children by Daesh are among
the best known recent atrocities and crimes against
humanity. The Lord’s Resistance Group (LRA), which
the Council discussed only last week, is known to have
abducted some 30,000 children, boys and girls, some as
young as six, over two decades. Abducted children are
forced to commit rape and torture and a re forced into
regular combat to kill, often blurring the lines between
the victim and the perpetrator. Daesh, known for its
exceptional wanton brutality, has been widely reported
to turn abducted girls, some as young as 10, into sex
slaves, sold and resold on slave markets, some as many
as 20 times.

While the release of children is of the utmost
importance, it is no less important to acknowledge
that release must be accompanied by comprehensive,
creative programmes aimed at addressing the profound
damage inflicted upon the children, combining
measures of reintegration, training, livelihood
opportunities, psycho-social assistance and community
education. The role of civil society, non-governmental
organizations and community leaders, including
on tackling the stigma carried by such children, is
extremely important.

It is hard to find the right words to describe the
psychological trauma and the impact on children’s
minds in such situations. Over time, some of those
children turn from victims into victimizers themselves,
as was the case of Dominic Ongwen, who was abducted
at the age of 14 on his way to school and later became
a notorious LRA commander. Former abductees face
tremendous challenges of reintegrating into normal
life. They are often shunned and rejected by their
own families and communities, especially former girl
soldiers and repeated rape victims.
A recent article by photojournalist Marc Ellison
provides a telling story of several former LRA girl
child soldiers, including one called Mary, who was
abducted before she was 10 and forced to become a
rebel “wife” at the age of 12. No longer a child soldier,
she is rejected by her own community. “If she comes
back to live, people have said they will burn her alive in
our own hut”, says that girl’s mother.
No doubt it is a story common to many former
abductees and child soldiers, who suffer ostracism and
exclusion because of their past. Some of them even wish

24/96

We must remember to treat children as victims
first, not as perpetrators. In that regard, we welcome the
steps taken by the Government of Chad in signing the
protocol agreement with the United Nations regarding
the handover of children associated with armed forces
or groups to child protection actors. Such protocols
could be a valuable tool for child rehabilitation.
As mentioned in the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/409), accountability for violence
against children remains far too rare, even in countries
that have criminalized the recruitment of children.
Protecting children from serious crimes and preventing
such crimes from being committed go hand in hand with
tackling impunity and ensuring that the perpetrators
are held to account.We welcome the transfer of Dominic
Ongwen to the International Criminal Court (ICC) for
crimes against humanity and war crimes. Yet, as some
colleagues said earlier today, more needs to be done
to combat impunity. While the perpetrators are many,
the cases and judgments against them remain few and
far between. The preventive, deterrent effects of such
judgments on would-be perpetrators has yet to be felt.
As some cases remain pending, we look forward to the
continued work of the ICC to this effect, but also to
greater national efforts to pursue accountability.
Child recruitment, killings, maimings and attacks
against schools are listed as sanctions triggers. In that
context, we welcome the adoption of today’s resolution
2225 (2015), which draws attention to abductions as a

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

disturbingly prevalent feature of modern armed conflict
and includes abductions as an additional listing trigger.
In conclusion, we have a wide range of instruments
to tackle impunity for conflict-related crimes against
children. We must close the gap between the existing
legislation and their application, in order to put an
end to violence against children and restore them the
biggest gift they can have: a safe and secure childhood
and the right to be who they are — children.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, we would like to thank
the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Malaysia, Mr. Anifah
Aman, for his presence here and for convening this
open debate on children in armed conflict, a topic to
which my country attaches great importance due to
its impact on the weakest and most vulnerable part of
the population. We would also like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and
the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Yoka
Brandt, for their briefings. We would also like to thank
Ms. Eunice Apio for her testimony and participation
today.
Venezuela reiterates its firm rejection of the abuses
and violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law against boys and girls
in armed conflict, and urges all parties to comply with
their obligations under applicable international law.
The report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2015/409) that we are discussing
today points out that in 2014 we saw unprecedented
difficulties in protecting tens of millions of children
who live in conflict situations. That is discouraging
because it undermines the future of children who
today are experiencing the atrocities of war and who
are condemned to grow up with a culture of hate
and violence. That must draw the attention of the
international community to make children a priority
and to decisively tackle grave violations of children’s
rights.
In many cases, socioeconomic vulnerability,
abuses, ethnic and religious intolerance, discrimination,
exclusion and violence, which these children face as
a consequence of war, facilitate their participation in
the hostilities and worsens the harmful repercussions
that armed conflict can have on them. The report of
the Secretary-General and the deplorable and tragic

S/PV.7466

situation of children in armed conflict should serve
to mobilize all of the moral forces of the international
community to stop the military escalation of conflict
and to protect girls and boys with all available resources,
children who on a daily basis are traumatized daily,
kidnapped, abused and killed.
The Secretary-General’s report stresses that the
majority of violations of the rights of children are
committed by non-State actors and that extremist
violence has intensified to unprecedented levels. We
reiterate that the Council should take the necessary
measures to guarantee a genuine commitment to stop
encouraging armed groups and other non-State actors
with financial or military capabilities, whose goal is to
destabilize Governments and perpetuate the spiral of
violence.
With regard to the references to Syria, Iraq and
Yemen contained in the report, we are deeply concerned
about the situation of children in those conflicts.
We wonder how many more children will have to
lose their lives and become martyrs to terrorism and
violent extremism before the actors with influence on
the parties to the conflict understand the urgency of
working decisively to find a political solution to that
tragedy — a solution that should include all parties.
The Secretary-General‘s report states that 557
Palestinian children were killed in 2014, the third
highest figure in the world for that year, and that at
least 4,249 boys and girls were wounded. At least 543
schools were damaged or destroyed in the State of
Palestine in 2014, which is the highest number recorded
in all situations of armed conflict during that calendar
year. We can therefore see that the occupying Power
in Palestine repeatedly violated at least three of the
six criteria used to designate grave violations against
children in situations of armed conflict. However, we
note with concern that the military forces responsible
for those acts were not included on the annexes in the
Secretary-General’s report this year. We ask what scale
the grave violations committed by the occupying Power
in Palestine against civilians, especially children,
would need to reach in order to consider including the
perpetrators of those violations in the annexes to the
report.
We emphasize that failure to act in accordance
with the Council’s resolutions on this issue — making
selective use of the criteria for listing the parties in the
annexes to the Secretary-General’s report — saps the

15-1838025/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

spirit and intent of those resolutions. That weakens and
calls into question the transparency and objectivity of
the mechanism that the United Nations and its Member
States should employ in that respect. We support
accountability for violations committed against children
in armed conflicts, as the report recommends. No one
should be exempt. States have the primary responsibilty
to put an end to impunity and to try and punish the
perpetrators of heinous crimes against children.
We congratulate Malaysia for taking the initiative
to bring to the floor resolution 2225 (2015), which was
unanimously adopted today and which our country
resolutey sponsored. The inclusion of kidnapping
among the criteria for inclusion in the annexes to the
Secretary-General’s reports had been a pending issue.
We welcome the consensus achieved today among the
members of the Security Council and hope that the
resolution will be effectively implemented.
Venezuela condemns the abduction of boys and
girls in armed conflict such as those currently taking
place in Africa and the Middle East. We believe
such abductions should be included in the category
of crimes considered by the International Criminal
Court. At the same time, we repudiate and condemn the
indiscriminate bombing in densely populated areas and
the use of weapons prohibited under international law.
We urge all parties to conflict to refrain from using
schools for military purposes and goals. The use of such
facilities for military purposes undermines the human
rights of children in terms of their right to education
and constitutes an act of intolerance and barbarism.
Finally, in our own region, we would like to
highlight the consolidation of the progress being made
by Colombia, within the framework of the ongoing
peace process, with respect to the protection and
reintegration of children affected by the long conflict
in that brotherly country.
To conclude, we would like to state that Venezuela
will continue to offer its firm support to the efforts of
the international community, including the Security
Council, to protect and assist the most vulnerable
groups in areas of conflict, especially girls, boys and
women, in order to ensure their rehabilitation, including
their physical and psychological recovery and their
reintegration into society.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to begin by thanking Foreign Minister Aman

26/96

18/06/2015

for presiding over this meeting and for Malaysia’s
leadership of the Security Council Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Zerrougui and UNICEF Deputy
Executive Director Brandt for their briefings and their
important work on this issue, as well as, in particular,
our guest briefer, Eunice Apio, for her powerful
words today and for the tremendous work that she and
Facilitation for Peace and Development are doing to
help women and children recover from armed conflict.
Let me say first that we share the outrage of Special
Representative Zerrougui at recent reports of children
being unlawfully targeted and killed and sexually
assaulted in Unity state, South Sudan, apparently by
Government forces or Government-backed militias.
According to UNICEF, as many as 129 children from
Unity state were killed during only three weeks last
month. Survivors reported that boys were castrated
and left to bleed to death, girls raped and children tied
together, their throats slit. Those heinous crimes must
not go unanswered, and it is for each of us to make clear
to the perpetrators that their actions against their fellows
citizens will have a cost. The United States will work
with other Member States in the Council and through
other forums to respond to the call to action that those
barbaric crimes demand to protect the children of South
Sudan and to ensure that the perpetrators of those acts
are held accountable.
The Secretary-General‘s annual report on children
and armed conflict should be a valuable and trusted
resource for advancing accountability against the
world’s most serious abusers of children. This year
alone we have seen the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) publicly execute and stone children.
We have seen kids manipulated to literally explode
themselves in the service of Boko Haram terrorists, and
the continued unlawful recruitment and use of children
in South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Sudan.
The Secretary-General’s annual report should
contribute to our common cause to protect children
by using standards that are applied uniformly when
documenting the actions of all parties in conflict, so that
it is perceived as credible, objective and non-political.
But if that report is politicized, if it becomes more of a
political tool to advance political agendas rather than a
clear application of facts to objective standards, it will
be seriously compromised.

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

Let us be clear. The idea that the Government of
Israel would be listed on the same page as ISIL, Boko
Haram or Syria, as some have suggested in this debate,
is factually and fundamentally wrong. The comparisons
of casualty numbers that we have heard from some
today are totally misleading. Multiple United Nations
agencies and this year’s report on children and armed
conflict (S/2015/409) have explicitly stated that the
casualty numbers in Syria cannot be verified and are
almost certainly underreported. Comparing those
underreported numbers to documented deaths meets no
standard of credibility and seems like a blatant attempt
to vilify rather than illuminate.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2225
(2015) and the addition of abductions as a trigger for
being listed in the Secretary-General’s annex. Mass
abductions, especially of young women and children,
are becoming part of the extremists’ playbook for
terrorizing communities, and the United States supports
fully the attention that this violation will now receive.
Today I want to highlight what we can do better to help
children victimized by armed conflict.
First and foremost, it is obviously the responsibility
of States and armed groups to stop taking children from
their homes to engage in hostilities. We have made some
progress in places such as the Central African Republic,
where armed groups recently agreed to stop recruiting
child soldiers and committed to releasing the 6,000
to 10,000 child soldiers currently in their ranks. But
promising to release children is just the beginning — in
fact, releasing those children from armed forces and
armed groups is itself also just the beginning. The work
of reintegrating them — meaningfully, compassionately,
respectfully — is critical and all too often overlooked.
It is a long path to recovery, and our collective attention
span to the challenge needs to be expanded.
After Boko Haram militants attacked and burned
down the village of a 16-year-old girl in Nigeria last
year, they made her watch as her captors brutally killed
her neighbours. Her captors beat her when she tried to
escape. When she finally managed to escape in June, she
was met with rejection and suspicion by her neighbours
who had survived the massacre. They stigmatized her
and other girls escaping from Boko Haram, taunting
them and calling them “Boko Haram wives”, leaving
the escaped girls isolated and alone. And that young
girl, pregnant with the child of her captor, continues to
struggle — like so many liberated children — through
psychological and physical trauma.

S/PV.7466

On top of all of that, for those who have escaped
or have been released or rescued, many have missed
whatever educational and other opportunities that may
have existed. Suffering physically and psychologically
and lacking opportunity, these children are not only in
pain, they are caught in a terrible bind. That is why
initiatives like the one launched by the United States
last March, a public-private partnership that has
created spaces to provide support, has deployed mobile
clinics and outreach workers in Iraq and has supported
Yezidi women and girls who escaped captivity, are so
important.
Of course, the best way to give children the
bright future that we want them to have is to protect
them from harm in the first place. That is why tools
like the Child Soldier Prevention Act of 2008 in the
United States are critical. We urge other Governments
to adopt similar legislation to help end the practice of
the unlawful recruitment and use of child soldiers by
holding accountable Governments that violate those
basic principles. Under that United States law, foreign
Governments that unlawfully recruit or use child
soldiers, or that support armed groups that do so, are
subject to restrictions on certain United States security
assistance and the commercial licensing of military
equipment, as they should be.
We also lead by example when engaged in military
operations. United States forces receive training in
civilian protection throughout their careers; it is woven
throughout military doctrine. The imperative to avoid
harming civilians, including children, has become even
more explicit in recent tactical directives from our
commanders to their forces, directives that go beyond
what is required under international law and often
result in forces having to assume additional operational
and other risks in order to minimize the possibility of
harming children. It is the right thing to do, and other
militaries should follow that example.
When those engaged in or supporting peacekeeping
efforts are accused of abusing the very children whom
they are sent to protect, there must be zero tolerance.
There is no room in United Nations peacekeeping or in
any regional or national missions for those who prey on
the vulnerable.
As the Secretary-General’s report shows, too many
States and armed groups are not living up to their
minimum obligations under international law. That is
why we have convened here today, and that is why we call
on all of our colleagues to commit ourselves once again

15-1838027/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

to documenting violations and abuses against children,
to take seriously the need for rigorous standards and
methodology in monitoring and reporting across all
trigger events — now including abductions — and to do
all we can to help children who have been through such
horrendous experiences in armed conflict to recover.
Children who have been touched by armed conflict
deserve to live meaningful lives that are free from
violence and the painful effects of their experiences.
They deserve to experience life beyond war, and it is
our responsibility to ensure that they will.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): Angola thanks the Malaysian
presidency of the Security Council for convening
this open debate on an issue of critical importance,
namely, the fate of children caught in the middle of
armed conflicts and the suffering that they endure. The
international community pledged to find solutions to
this problem of extreme gravity. The adoption today of
resolution 2225 (2015) is a further step in that direction.
Children are supposed to lead their lives as children,
surrounded by love and care, and not have their childhood
stolen by war, abduction and abuse. We welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia in presiding
over this debate. We also welcome the remarks by the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui. We
also thank the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF,
Ms. Yoka Brandt, and the Director of the Facilitation
for Peace and Development, Ms. Eunice Apio. We
were deeply touched by Ms. Apio’s testimony on the
despicable actions of the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) and its consequences.
We face daunting challenges in protecting millions
of children in countries affected by armed conflict,
including, just to mention the most notorious cases, the
Central African Republic, Iraq, Syria, South Sudan,
Yemen, Libya, Myanmar, Nigeria, Palestine, Gaza,
Afghanistan, Somalia and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Children are exposed to the most egregious
violations of their fundamental rights, among which is
the denial of the most basic one — the right to life.
Extreme violence has risen to unprecedented levels. Too
often it targets children, prompting worldwide outrage.
The latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/409)
gives a tragic account of that reality worldwide.
Preventing the outbreak of conflicts is still the
best way to protect children, but unfortunately the
international community still lacks the appropriate

28/96

18/06/2015

tools for effective preventive action. Meanwhile, the
protection of children in armed conflict is best achieved
through a comprehensive strategy of protection and
humanitarian response.
The increasing trend in the mass abductions of
children is a matter of the utmost concern. Abduction
is a precursor to other forms of violations of children’s
rights. Abducted children are used as messengers
and porters, as spies, as human shields and suicide
bombers. They are held as sexual slaves for ransom,
retaliation and indoctrination by extremist groups for
the commission of horrendous crimes.
Developing ways to prevent the abduction of
children by armed groups would be the most effective
strategy for reducing the number of child combatants
under the yoke of terrorists. However, success in
preventing such trends has been disappointing. In Iraq
and Syria, over 1,000 girls and boys were abducted by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. In Nigeria,
Boko Haram abducted hundreds of women and girls in
major attacks in Chibok and across the country’s northeast. The case of the LRA is the most notorious and
abhorrent. Violence and hatred against children seems
to be the only motivation of LRA actions. We condemn
in the strongest terms the mass abduction of children
by armed terrorist groups and call on affected Member
States and the entire international community to do
everything in their power to pursue the perpetrators
and hold them accountable for such horrific crimes.
We urge the immediate release of all abducted children
and the provision of adequate support to permit them
to rebuild their shattered lives and fulfil their potential.
Appropriate measures to rehabilitate and reintegrate
those children should be put in place by concerned
States and by international community actors as a
matter of priority. Angola is particularly committed to
this issue. We have been affected by the phenomenon in
the past but have been able to find acceptable solutions
for the reintegration of former child soldiers.
We welcome the expansion of the listing criteria
in resolution 1612 (2005) to include abduction as
an additional reason for listing in the annexes of the
reports of the Secretary-General and for the United
Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave
violations against children in situations of armed
conflict. That will ensure that those responsible for
abductions are identified and held accountable, without
using double standards, as the President rightly pointed
out in his statement.

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

In that regard, resolution 2225 (2015), which
was adopted today and which my delegation was
honoured to sponsor, expanded the listing criteria,
thereby strengthening the Council’s response to grave
violations of the rights of children, taking note of the
fact that abduction is a serious violation of international
humanitarian law and may amount to a war crime or a
crime against humanity.
The report of the Secretary-General highlights the
problem caused by the deprivation of liberty imposed
on children as a result of their alleged association with
extremist groups without due review to the legality of
such detention. The situation of the children should be
carefully considered, since many of them are in fact
victims and should be treated as such. Additionally,
Member States must ensure that trial procedures are
consistent with international juvenile-justice standards
and the principle of preserving the best interest of the
child and their specific needs and vulnerabilities.
Currently we are witnessing an increasing trend of
attacks against schools and hospitals. Military forces
and non-State armed groups have turned schools into
shelters, detention facilities, barracks and military bases.
As a tactic of war and given their basic obscurantism
and fundamentalist hostility to the idea of granting
universal education to children, extremist groups target
schools. That constitutes an egregious social abuse, as
it deprives children of their basic right to education and
endangers the safety and lives of students and teachers.
Member States and the international community must
do more to protect or help protect schools, students and
teachers in situations of armed conflict and ensure that
schools remain a safe place, while also respecting their
civil-society character.
We recognize that United Nations peace operations
play a vital role in the protection of children, the
fulfilment of which requires adequate training, and
we welcome the engagement and progress made by the
“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign in its first year of
existence.
We further encourage the Member States that have
not yet done so to sign and ratify the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on
the involvement of children in armed conflict and to
adopt and implement legal measures to prohibit and
criminalize the recruitment and use of child soldiers.
We conclude by praising the Malaysian delegation
for its commitment as Chair of the Security Council

S/PV.7466

Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
its efforts to advance the protection of children caught
up in the midst of war. We furthermore commend
Malaysia for its efforts to advance the fight against the
criminal scourge groups that abduct children and abuse
and use them in committing the most abominable of
crimes.
Once again, we thank the Malaysian presidency
for providing this opportunity to discuss these very
important and critical issues.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber. I would also like to appeal to speakers
to deliver their statements at a normal speed so that
interpretation may be provided properly. I also wish to
inform all concerned that we will be carrying on this
open debate right through the lunch hour, as we have a
very large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Italy.
Mr. Gentiloni (Italy): I wish to thank the Malaysian
presidency for convening today’s open debate and for
introducing resolution 2225 (2015), which recognizes
abductions in armed conflict as a listing criterion in
the annexes of the Secretary-General’s annual report on
children and armed conflict (S/2015/409).
I also thank the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and the
Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF for their work
in identifying ways that will help us better prevent and
respond to the scourges that continue to afflict children
in armed conflict. I am here to reaffirm Italy’s strong
support for the Council’s endeavours.
Abductions are often a precursor to other grave
violations, from recruitment to mental and physical
abuse and other harmful practices, such as forced
marriage. They can be used in retaliation by non-State
actors such as Daesh, Boko Haram and other terrorist
groups that neglect children’s right to education and
deny their empowerment, especially that of adolescent
girls, and target ethnic and religious communities. We
believe that our common efforts to counter violent

15-1838029/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

extremism should also be aimed at eradicating that
plague.
Resolution 2225 (2015), which we adopted today,
is a very relevant tool for addressing the increasing
use of abduction. But even more relevant will be its
concrete implementation through the work of the
Security Council and its bodies, supported by the entire
international community.
As a non-permanent member of the Security
Council in 2007, Italy strongly supported the inclusion
of specific provisions on the protection of children
in the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The targeted training of United Nations
personnel on children’s rights remains paramount to
ensuring effective peacekeeping on the ground.
Italy is continuously engaged in such efforts through
our training centres. The review of peacekeeping
operations will no doubt be an opportunity to provide
concrete recommendations on how this important
topic may be considered in planning and conducting
peacekeeping operations.
Accountability at the national and international
levels is also key to ensuring that perpetrators are
brought to justice. National authorities have the duty
to enforce the rules and investigate and prosecute
violations and abuses. At the same time, we must
spare no effort in supporting the international criminal
justice system.
Prompt action is vital so as to reduce the exposure
of children to serious risk factors, while promoting and
implementing long-term initiatives for the recovery and
social integration of former child soldiers and victims
of conflicts.
According to UNICEF, approximately 14 million
children have been impacted by conflicts in Syria and
Iraq. Italy pays particular attention to their condition.
Last year, we allocated a total of €2 million for projects
carried out by UNICEF in support of children in
Iraq, Lebanon and Jordan. They included social and
educational activities that involved the creation and
management of child and family protective facilities.
We funded programmes, such as UNICEF’s “No
Lost Generation” initiative, aimed at tackling child
malnutrition and providing psychological assistance
and support for minors and their families. In the
Kurdish Autonomous Region of Iraq, since January
2015 we have financed assistance to young Christian
and Yazidi girls who are victims of violence.
30/96

18/06/2015

Our own lessons learned from those and other
programmes have been that, in the short term, success
lies in the ability to rapidly re-establish family, social
and institutional protection networks and set up direct
relief initiatives. Short-term success, however, is not
enough. Medium- and long-term actions are crucial to
safeguarding the security and development of children
in situations of crisis and conflict. This requires the
adoption of a multidimensional approach that is able
to address the root causes of poverty, lack of education
and basic services, and the militarization of societies.
Mr. Aman took the Chair.
Lastly, at this juncture, as we approach the
adoption of the post-2015 agenda, allow me to reaffirm
that the needs and rights of children and adolescents,
particularly adolescent girls and those living in poverty
or otherwise excluded, must be a cross-cutting priority
in our development efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala.
Mr. Morales (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Malaysia and his delegation for having organized
this open debate and for his concept note (S/2015/402,
annex), which contains valuable guidance to focus our
discussions today on those who are most vulnerable, that
is, children. We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, the Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF and the representative
of civil society for their very powerful briefings.
In the past year we have seen a disproportionate
increase in suffering, mass abduction, violent attacks,
the use of children as human shields and in suicide
attacks. Such abuses are not only a violation of
international humanitarian law, refugee law and human
rights law, but also represent an affront to our humanity,
deprive our children of the hope of a better world and
have devastating consequences for victims and their
families, as well as the communities where they live.
There is room for improvement in the Security
Council’s comprehensive strategy for protection,
prevention and response vis-à-vis children, who are
at greater risk in armed conflict because they are the
objects of abduction and recruitment by armed groups
and are victims of abuse, rape and sexual exploitation.
We must ensure their rehabilitation and reintegration
through educational and training programmes, in
15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7466

keeping with the principle of the best interests of the
child and respecting the overriding status of the child
as a victim.

addition of child abduction as one of the violations that
could trigger listing within the annexes to the SecretaryGeneral’s report on children and armed conflict.

With respect to the release of child soldiers by
armed groups, this is only the first step in the process
of reintegration. We must also address the resulting
trauma so as to prevent any repetition of the cycle of
conflict. In this respect, we urge Governments and
the international community as a whole to ensure
that disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes receive the resources necessary to be able
to function effectively.

While Guatemala believes that in these reports the
emphasis should be placed on the victims rather than
on the countries involved, we deem regrettable the
inconsistencies contained in the most recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2015/409), because the serious
human rights violations perpetrated against children in
Gaza, the West Bank and Israel are not mentioned in
the annex to that document. We must be the voice of
the voiceless and ensure for them the protection and
justice that they deserve. In some cases, such as that of
Colombia, we have seen tangible progress in the quest
for peace that will benefit the most vulnerable and that
our region welcomes.

We welcome the fact that through the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign, eight Governments have committed
to putting an end to and preventing the recruitment
and use of children in national security forces by the
end of 2016. Accountability is crucial to preventing
such serious violations and must be at the very core of
national and international responses. We must ensure
that the necessary political and financial support is
made available so as to ensure the institutionalization
and sustainability of the progress made to date. We
urge those that have not yet done so to sign and endorse
a United Nations action plan.
We must put an end to the military use of schools by
armed groups. Initiatives such as the Lucens Guidelines
can help to prevent the military use of schools and
universities, as they call on both State and non-State
actors to immediately cease their attacks and threats
against schools and to refrain from actions that hinder
children’s access to education. Along these lines, we
welcome the adoption of the Safe Schools Declaration,
on 29 May, in Oslo, Norway.
We firmly condemn the use of explosive weapons
in densely populated urban areas, because this increases
the vulnerability of children, resulting in an increased
number of deaths and incidents of mutilation, as well
as prolonged suffering, destruction and chaos. We
must incorporate provisions concerning the protection
of children in ceasefire negotiations as well as peace
agreements.
We also unreservedly condemn the appalling acts
committed by extremist groups such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and Boko Haram, as well
as the mass abductions of children carried out in recent
months in Nigeria, Syria and Iraq. We reiterate our call
for the immediate release of the boys and girls who are
still being held captive. In that context, we support the

I wish to highlight the importance of Member
States improving their cooperation at every level
through the sharing of intelligence and information so
as to develop best practices to prevent, document and
address violations against children in armed conflict.
The fight against impunity must remain a pivotal
aspect of our efforts, not only in the context of
reacting to grave violations against children but also in
preventing them.
We must take advantage of and improve the tools
available to the Council and use them consistently so as
to ensure that those responsible are brought to justice,
by including them in sanctions regimes, redoubling our
efforts to enhance national capacities in the judicial
sector and strengthening the international justice
framework by, inter alia, referring perpetrators to the
International Criminal Court.
The sentencing of Thomas Lubanga Dyilo and the
referral to the Court of the Bosco Ntaganda case are
clear messages concerning the penal consequences of
child recruitment, which is considered a war crime. We
are in favour of strengthening our dialogue with the
Court and its mandate in this area.
We call on the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to ensure that the armed groups listed
in the annexes to his annual report are informed of such
listings and ensure that action plans are implemented
that are aimed at putting an end to such violations. We
also call upon all Member States that have not yet done
so to sign and ratify the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its three optional Protocols.

15-1838031/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mrs. Zerkal (Ukraine): First of all, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for Malaysia’s initiative
to hold this important debate. Let me also express my
gratitude to today’s briefers, in particular to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict for her hard work.
The delegation of Ukraine aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union
and would also like to make a number of points in its
national capacity.
Ukraine welcomes the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict (S/2015/409).
We consider this document to be an extremely important
tool in preventing children from engaging in conflict.
Unfortunately, as stated in the report, there were
unprecedented challenges in 2014 with regard to the
protection of the tens of millions of children growing
up in situations affected by conflict. It also notes that
mass abductions of civilians, including children, have
become an increasingly prevalent feature of conflict in
many situations. We regret to say that our country has
been suffering from such outrageous acts for more than
a year as a result of Russia’s ongoing aggression.
Despite the fact that the current report of the
Secretary-General’s does not cover the situation in
Ukraine, I would like to draw the Council’s attention
to some striking statistics previously unimaginable in
my country. As a result of the Russian Federation’s
aggression against Ukraine, the number of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) is constantly growing. As
of June, Ukrainian authorities have reported more
than 1,325,000 IDPs, 150,481 of them children. As of
31 March 2015, 1,086 children had lost their parents.
At least 68 children have been killed and 176 wounded
in eastern Ukraine since the beginning of the Russian
Federation’s aggression. The human rights mission in
Ukraine and the World Health Organization believe that
the actual number of fatalities is considerably higher.
Seven children’s hospitals and three schools have
been destroyed in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions as
a result of shelling, and 47 medical facilities and 177
educational institutions have been heavily damaged.
The whole world is witnessing, and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special
Monitoring Mission has confirmed, that it is Russian-

32/96

18/06/2015

backed terrorists who stand behind the murders of
Ukrainian children. There have also been abductions
and illegal transfers of children to Russia. For example,
61 orphans were abducted on 26 July 2014 from an
orphanage in Luhansk and illegally transferred to
Russia. A group of 16 children was allegedly abducted
and transferred to Russian Federation territory on
12 June 2014 by armed groups and returned to Ukraine
on 13 June 2014.
Rising concerns about abductions were expressed
during an open debate of the Security Council in March
2015 (see S/PV.7400). Yet Ukrainian authorities, along
with the OSCE monitors, have continued to report
numerous incidents of child abductions by Russianbacked terrorists. According to current data, 126
occupants of the Krasnodon regional orphanage, of
whom 80 are children, are still being held in the zone
controlled by militants. Most of those in the institution
are seriously ill and are not able to move on their own.
The 195 people in the Rovenky regional orphanage, of
which 27 are children, have also not been evacuated.
In addition, two children’s tuberculosis facilities in
the city of Alchevsk cannot be evacuated from the
zone affected by the conflict. Horrific facts have
confirmed the cynical and manipulative attitude of the
militants towards children. Decree No. 17 of the socalled Council of Ministers of the Donetsk People’s
Republic, dated 25 June 2014, forbids moving children
outside the Donetsk region, although the same decree
allows children to be moved exclusively to the Russian
Federation.
Furthermore, Russian-backed terrorists are
reportedly recruiting child soldiers to fight against
the Ukrainian army and Ukrainian people. Many such
facts have been registered by the OSCE monitoring
mission. Among those manning the checkpoint at the
north-eastern entrance to Shyrokyne in the so-called
Donetsk People’s Republic, the monitoring mission
reported seeing young female and male armed persons.
Some of the male individuals appeared to be minors. At
a checkpoint on the outskirts of the so-called Donetsk
People’s Republic-controlled city of Makiivka, 10
kilometres east of Donetsk, OSCE monitors observed
a child, approximately 12 to 14 years old, wearing a
camouflage uniform and holding an AK-47 rifle.
Against such a tragic background, I would like to take
this opportunity to urge, as we have time and again, the
Russian Federation to stop providing weapons, military
equipment, financial resources and mercenaries to the

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

illegal armed groups in eastern Ukraine. I would like
to stress that the outrageous accusation made today by
the representative of the Russian delegation that the
Ukrainian army was allegedly killing children in the
eastern region of Ukraine is indeed a brutal attempt
to lay the blame at someone else’s door. The United
Nations and other international actors should be granted
full access to the conflict zone in order to monitor the
situation. That is the only way to prevent the further
suffering of our children in the territories in the Donbas
currently under the control of the terrorists.
At the same time, my country reiterates its
commitment to the promotion and protection of the
rights of the child and will work as hard as possible
to support the efforts being exerted to that end within
the framework of the United Nations system, regional
organizations and civil society in support of the
“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign. In that regard, we
are ready to provide the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
with all available data on the situation with respect to
children in Ukraine and the violations of their rights
as a result of foreign aggression, so that they can be
properly reflected in the next thematic report.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Let me express
the appreciation of the Brazilian delegation to you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this meeting and for
convening this very important debate. I am also grateful
to the Secretary-General, to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui, to UNICEF
Deputy Executive Director Yoka Brandt and to
Ms. Eunice Apio for their briefings.
While the Security Council framework for the
protection of children affected by armed conflict
has been decisively reinforced since the turn of the
twenty-first century, more needs to be done in terms
of implementation and accountability. Every year,
thousands of vulnerable and innocent girls and boys
still bear the brunt of wars fought by adults. Brazil
resolutely condemns all acts of violence against
children in situations of armed conflict and expects all
violators to be brought to justice. We are particularly
concerned by the alarming reports that certain parties
that have committed serious violations against girls and
boys in the context of war may have been omitted from
the lists in the annex to the Secretary-General’s report

S/PV.7466

(S/2015/409) as a consequence of what many would
consider undue political pressure. It is of paramount
importance that the Office of the Special Representative
on Children and Armed Conflict be allowed to exercise
its responsibilities with independence and objectivity,
free from politicization and within the mandate
established by the General Assembly and the Security
Council.
The abduction of innocent children during armed
conflicts is often linked to some of the worst humanrights abuses, including sexual slavery, enslavement,
hostage-taking, enforced disappearances, forcible
population transfers and child recruitment. Those
violations may constitute war crimes or crimes against
humanity under the Rome Statue of the International
Criminal Court. They are also tragically frequent. Let
me recall that over 24,000 child abductions during
conflicts have been reported since 2002. While
the crime of abduction is already proscribed under
international humanitarian and human-rights law
and has been included among the six grave violations
against children established by the Council, we believe
there is still room for strengthening our legal and
political framework to tackle serious violations.
Mrs. Adnin took the Chair.
Brazil therefore supports the inclusion of child
abduction among the listing criteria for the annexes to
the Secretary-General’s annual report on children and
armed conflict. That would send a strong signal to all
would-be perpetrators that abducting girls and boys
is unacceptable conduct under any circumstance. We
expect this issue to be addressed in all future action
plans aimed at preventing violence against children to
be signed by the parties in a conflict situation.
An area in which we are achieving progress,
notwithstanding recent tragic and alarming cases, is
the imperative to prevent attacks against educational
facilities, as well as their use for military purposes.
Brazil was pleased to endorse the Safe Schools
Declaration, signed in Oslo last month, in which
38 countries agreed to abide by the Guidelines for
Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use
during Armed Conflict.
As we discuss practical ways to further develop our
legal tools to protect children from the impact of war,
allow me to recall the essential distinction between
armed conflicts, on the one hand, and situations of
domestic law enforcement, on the other. While both

15-1838033/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

categories are considered in detail in the annual report,
they should not be amalgamated in any way, because
they pertain to different domains. Armed conflicts
and situations that represent a threat to international
peace and security, as established by the Council, are
subject to the norms of international humanitarian
law, such as the obligation on all parties to protect
civilians, including girls and boys. Issues of internal
law enforcement, however, fall clearly outside the
purview of the Security Council and should be tackled
by Governments through national legislation and
international cooperation, with international humanrights law — including the Convention on the Rights of
the Child — as the paradigm to be followed.
Like others who spoke before me, including the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict herself in her statement
today, I would like to mention Colombia, the only
Latin American country to be referred to in the annual
report. We believe that Colombia’s efforts to develop
policies to protect children in armed conflict while at
the same time conducting peace negotiations should
be acknowledged by the United Nations and, perhaps,
better reflected in future reports.
The five most deadly conflicts for children in
2014, according to the annual report, were those of
Afghanistan, Iraq, Palestine, Syria and Darfur. There is
an underlying pattern in that dismal list. Most of those
hostilities could have been avoided through inclusive
dialogue, peaceful negotiations, good offices and other
diplomatic measures. Conflict prevention remains the
most ethical and effective approach to shielding all
civilians, including children, from the plight of war.
Conversely, inconsistent strategies that prioritize the
use of force tend to aggravate the suffering of those
whom we ought to protect. That reasoning is also
relevant to our joint efforts against terrorism and violent
extremism conducive to terrorism. We believe that the
international community should focus its efforts on
addressing the root causes that lead to the emergence of
such extremist groups.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s assessment
that:
“Recognizing and addressing social deprivation
and alienation of communities, strengthening
efforts to grant access to education and other key
social services will contribute to isolating the
leaders of extremist groups through delegitimizing

34/96

18/06/2015

their discourse and reducing the numbers who
willingly enlist.” (S/2015/409, para. 16)
The Peacebuilding Commission can play a key
role in promoting policies in countries emerging from
conflict so as to foster social cohesion and thereby
render children and youth less vulnerable to recruitment
and abuse, including by terrorist groups.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate my country’s
enduring commitment to the advancement of the
children and armed conflict agenda in the Security
Council and also to the wider debate, in various forums,
on the protection of all girls and boys who suffer from
violence and abuse. This crosscutting concern must
be at the heart of all activities and endeavours of the
United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mrs. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Madam President, and your
country for holding this important debate. I would
also like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the representative of UNICEF, and
Ms. Eunice Apio for her testimony.
In March, we met here in the Council to discuss
the serious human-rights violations affecting children
(see S/PV.7414), and the enormous concern over the
worsening situation in many parts of the world was
palpable. Today, four months later, despite the efforts
and involvement of the international community, we see
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/409) that the
situation in that regard is referred to as unprecedented.
That shows us how great the present challenge is. In
this difficult global context, Colombia, which is not on
the Security Council’s list, is, however, mentioned in
the report, as a result of the prolonged internal conflict,
lasting over five decades, which has affected our
development and our civilian population, particularly
the most vulnerable segment of it — our children.
Three years ago, President Juan Manuel Santos
and the entire nation courageously sought a negotiated
end to the conflict, the sole one in the Americas. That
enabled the Government to implement pioneering
legislation at the international level, reflected in the
Law on Victims and Land Restitution and the joint
agreement on clearing anti-personnel mines. Moreover,
we have made progress on three out of the five items on
the agenda of the peace talks, and have subsequently

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

improved the living conditions of the civilian population.
As the Special Representative mentioned, the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia announced that
they would remove children younger than 15 years of
age from their ranks. That is why my country is deeply
perplexed by our country’s portrayal in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. It does not reflect the present situation,
nor the progress achieved. The terms used to describe
the situation in Colombia in 2014 cannot be the same as
those that would have applied in 1999. Challenged by
enormous difficulties, we have taken brave steps in the
peace negotiations, because we see that as the best way
to restore the rights of all persons affected by the armed
conflict — especially our children.
Less than a year ago, in August 2014, I was here
at the United Nations for the official presentation of
the Secretary General’s Guidance Note on reparations
for conflict-related sexual violence (see S/2014/181),
in which Colombia was held up as a paradigm for
the efforts that it has implemented. In the Note, the
implementation of our historic law regarding victims
was recognized as an effort without precedent in the
context of armed conflicts elsewhere in the world.
Those developments complement the public policies
implemented by the Colombian Government. I would
like to mention just two examples.
First, Colombia had a great number of displaced
persons, but the country has made every effort to
deal with the problem and its impact on our children.
Furthermore, I would point out that during the period
under review in the report, our country reported a
noteworthy reduction of 47 per cent in the phenomenon
of internally displaced persons. That reduction has not
been referred to in the report.
Secondly, in 2014, the Intersectoral Commission
for the Prevention of Recruitment, which involves 27
State agencies, implemented urgent prevention and
protection measures, given the risk of the recruitment
of girls and boys in more than 200 municipalities in
Colombia. In September 2014, I addressed the Council
on that very issue. I said,
“[m]y task ... is to build up a harmonious and
stable relationship of mutual respect with the
[United Nations] system through which it can be
possible to improve conditions on the ground,
so that Colombia ... is never again included in
the Secretary-General’s report on this issue.”
(S/PV.7259, pp. 31-32)

S/PV.7466

Colombia and my delegation have done everything
possible to achieve that goal. We have opened all
channels of communication: we have promoted meetings
with all relevant authorities; we have approached the
Office of the Special Representative with openness:
and, in that spirit, we would respectfully ask the Special
Representative to take full account of the substantive
considerations of the Colombian State reflected in
the current report, which we hope to see corrected in
the final draft. We have made significant progress in
protecting our children and ensuring their rights. We
will continue working with full determination and
conviction to that end.
Dialogue and cooperation are undoubtedly the best
tools available to the United Nations for working with
States. I therefore reiterate that the Colombian State
is completely prepared to continue to make progress
in this area within a respectful relationship based on
accuracy and objectivity. I would also reiterate to you,
Mr. President, our determination to work for the good
of the children of Colombia and the whole world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): We would like to thank
our briefers in this debate and to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of June. On this day
I would also like to convey our greetings to you at the
start of the month of Ramadan.
As is evident from the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2015/409) on the topic before us, despite the progress
in United Nations peacekeeping initiatives and the
“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign, tens of millions of
children continue to be the worst affected in situations
of armed conflict. Extreme violence against susceptible
children, including shocking cases of abductions in
some parts of the world in 2014, call for greater political
will and constructive dialogue among all the relevant
stakeholders to address the worsening situation. We
believe that constructive and close engagement with
the national Governments concerned is essential and
integral to establishing durable peace, security and
development.
The impunity of non-State armed groups and newly
emerging extremist organizations that violate the rights
of the child can be overcome only through resolute action
by the Governments on whose territory such entities
operate. The international community must extend all

15-1838035/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

possible assistance to such Governments to strengthen
their national capacities to deal effectively with this
threat. We are of the view that sustained capacitybuilding in national institutions and governance should
be a key focus area. It is also our firm belief that credible
and verifiable data for any monitoring and reporting
mechanisms can most effectively be collected by such
national institutions.
On the basis of our extensive experience, acquired
over six decades of United Nations peacekeeping, we
feel that the allocation of more resources to peace
operations and the deployment of the necessary number
of child protection advisers is a prerequisite for the
success of programmes designed to protect, reintegrate
and rehabilitate child victims and survivors. Such
allocation should be facilitated in consultation with
both the national Governments and the peace operations
concerned.
The concept note (S/2015/402, annex) and the
Secretary-General’s report refer to abductions as
trigger violations. India condemns the use of abduction,
which we view as a tactic of terror. While abductions
are to be condemned, however, we must not lose sight
of the fact that the Secretary-General’s report must
not exceed the terms of Article 99 of the Charter of
the United Nations. We are concerned about reported
attempts to exert undue political pressure in the
process of compiling this report. With regard to the
list, the overriding objective should be to have listing
and delisting carried out in a transparent and judicious
manner under the close supervision of Member States.
India, for its part, has engaged constructively in
the ongoing efforts to make the work of the United
Nations more relevant and effective in addressing the
issue of children and armed conflict. We are party to
all the relevant major international instruments, which
demonstrates our commitment in that regard. We are
disappointed that, although the Secretary-General’s
mandate regarding children and armed conflict is
clearly spelled out in paragraph 16 of resolution 1379
(2001), his report continues to include references to
other situations of concern, which cannot be considered
to “threaten the maintenance of international peace
and security” as set out in Article 99 of the Charter.
Any consideration of such references by the Security
Council will, we feel, only distract its attention from
issues that actually fall within its mandate.

36/96

18/06/2015

In conclusion, we would like all States Members
of the United Nations to give explicit priority to the
prevention of destructive and grave violations against
susceptible children as we prepare to adopt an ambitious
and far-reaching post-2015 development agenda in
September.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own
country, Sweden.
At the outset, we would like to warmly thank the
Malaysian presidency, and particularly the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Dato Sri Anifah Aman, for taking the
initiative of holding this open debate and for showing
leadership on this important topic. We would also like
to acknowledge the crucial role played by the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Leila
Zerrougui, and her Office, as well as the important
work of UNICEF and other United Nations agencies,
and non-governmental organizations in the field. We
would like to thank the Secretary-General and the other
keynote speakers for their valuable contributions this
morning.
In 2015 we celebrate the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1612 (2005). The unprecedented challenges
we see today for the protection of children growing up
in countries affected by conflict illustrate the enormous
importance of that resolution. We very much welcome
today’s adoption of resolution 2225 (2015), which we
are all proud to sponsor.
The Secretary-General’s annual report (S/2015/409)
paints a very gloomy picture of the situation around
the world for children in armed conflict. The Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has been listed as
committing all the trigger violations involving violence
against children, a result of their appalling atrocities.
In Syria, the systematic use of indiscriminate aerial
weapons, such as barrel bombs, accounts for the
overwhelming majority of civilian casualties, including
children. This cannot be allowed to continue. In addition,
during the hostilities in Gaza last summer, civilians,
including children, bore the brunt of the suffering. At
least 540 Palestinian children were killed and hospitals
and schools, including United Nations facilities, were
severely damaged or destroyed. The scale of the impact
on children was unprecedented and unacceptable.

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

These facts and all other incidents listed in the
report are profoundly disturbing and raise serious
concerns regarding the observance of the rules of
international humanitarian law, including the principles
of distinction, precaution and proportionality, and
respect for international human rights law, including,
let it be said, in the Security Council.
Given that armed non-State actors account for
the vast majority of violations, further reflection on
forms of engagement is needed. In thata regard, we
thought that interesting proposals were presented at
the open debate presided over by France in March (see
S/PV.7414).
In 2014, the world bore witness to several appalling
cases of mass abduction of children in armed conflict.
We therefore particularly welcome the addition of
abduction as a fifth trigger violation in the report,
which we hope will send a strong signal to all parties to
armed conflict around the world.
I want to highlight three areas of particular concern
to us.
First, the right of children, particularly girls, to
high-quality education in war and disasters is vital
to the protection of children during conflict, because
attendance at school can create a sense of normality
and a vision for a better future in an otherwise chaotic
situation. It is therefore all the more disturbing that
there were attacks on education facilities in at least
70 countries between 2009 and 2013. Since then, the
problem has only escalated in a number of conflicts.
We must intensify our efforts to uphold the right to
education, even in conflict situations. By making
schools safer for children today, we are protecting
the future. The Safe Schools Declaration expresses a
commitment to protecting education from attack. It
merits our full consideration and we hope that it will
be endorsed by as many States as possible. We are
also concerned by the severe impact on children of the
continued use of explosive weapons in populated areas.
Such indiscriminate use of weapons is prohibited under
international humanitarian law and we would support
practical steps to stop it.
Secondly, there is still a lack of accountability
for violations of international law committed against
children in armed conflict. It is crucial to fight
impunity and ensure that victims have access to justice.
Crimes against children must be independently and
impartially investigated and prosecuted to the full

S/PV.7466

extent of the law. Individual responsibility must be
upheld; that means that all perpetrators must be held
accountable and punished accordingly, regardless
of their status or capacity. The Children in Armed
Conflict Accountability Framework is a step in the right
direction and provides a methodology to both redress
past violations and prevent future violations. My own
country, Sweden, will launch this tool in cooperation
with the Democratic Republic of the Congo in Kinshasa
this autumn. The International Criminal Court plays
an important role in ensuring accountability and we
welcome the initiative of the Prosecutor’s Office to
develop a comprehensive policy paper on children.
Thirdly, and lastly, we must have a stronger policy for
protecting children’s rights in peacekeeping operations.
The recent serious allegations in the Central African
Republic bear tragic witness to that. It is essential that
personnel deployed in the field have adequate training
in the rights of the child. Two of the many steps needed
could be the inclusion in all missions of child protection
structures, including child protection focal points, and
making predeployment training of peacekeepers in
child protection mandatory.
Before concluding, we would like to once again
congratulate the Special Representative and UNICEF
on a successful first year of the “Children, Not Soldiers”
campaign. They have our wholehearted support, but, as
today’s debate has shown, we have a lot of work in front
of us.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Arab Group.
The Security Council is holding this very important
open debate a few days after N’Djamena, the capital
of Chad, was stricken by heinous terrorist attacks that
resulted in many dead and wounded, including children.
I would like to express our sincere condolences and
deep sympathy to the families of the victims, and our
solidarity with the Chadian authorities.
I would also like to congratulate Malaysia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and on its organization of today’s debate
on children and armed conflict. I wish to commend the
work of the President in his capacity as Chair of the
Working Group on this very issue. I would like also to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2015/409)

15-1838037/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

on global trends related to the situation of children in
armed conflict. Our special thanks go to Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for her briefing and for her steadfast, faithful
and continued commitment to the cause of children.
The Arab Group would like to emphasize some
principles and elements that we deem extremely
important in dealing with the present issue. Above
all, we cannot support any difference of opinion
when children and their well-being and future are at
stake. Regardless of the situation, location or political
differences between States, or even in situations of
open conflict, children should be protected. That is a
moral and legal obligation.
We now have criteria that can be used to define when
a child is a victim and when violations are committed,
and it is a fundamental principle that we must act on
that — “we” meaning the international community,
and above all the Security Council, with the SecretaryGeneral as a whistleblower. The Secretary-General has
a responsibility to tell, and the Security Council has a
responsibility to act. Children’s playgrounds must be in
their schoolyards and secure homes, not in battlefields.
Regardless of their religion, citizenship, ethnicity
or social position, we should make no distinction.
Children are children, and we should ensure that they
do not become victims, soothe them when required and
reconstruct their future when necessary. Children must
remain off limits with regard to adults’ quagmires.
We continue to witness the increasing recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict, including acts
of sexual violence, killings, attacks on schools and/or
hospitals and recurring attacks or threats of attacks
on protected personnel, in violation of international
legal standards. This year, as we celebrate the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005),
we should note that significant progress has been made
in seeking the cooperation and compliance of national
security forces on this issue, since almost all of them
now have their own action plans for addressing it.
However, we should also note that this did not stop
children from being the primary victims of conflicts
in 2014.
(spoke in Arabic)
As we mark the first anniversary of the “Children,
Not Soldiers” campaign, and despite the significant
efforts of Governments and agencies of the United
Nations to demonstrate the harmful effects of terrorist

38/96

18/06/2015

acts on children, this negative trend continues to grow.
The Arab Group believes the Security Council should
consider the possibility of expanding the criteria for
inscribing names of the perpetrators of such crimes
in the lists annexed to the Secretary-General’s report.
Abduction is one of the criminal actions used by
extremist groups in various countries to intimidate
or influence local ethnic or religious communities.
Girls in particular are victims of sexual slavery and
other indescribable violations. They are deprived of an
education, raped and forced into marriage. The recent
savage attacks on and abductions of girls by Boko
Haram and Daesh and the selling of girls to terrorist
fighters are other challenges we must overcome.
With regard to peacekeeping operations, the Arab
Group calls for the inclusion of child protection advisers
in the mission mandates. They must be on the ground
to ensure that children affected by armed conflict
are protected as they should be in the framework of
peacekeeping operations. We must submit reports on
those efforts.
The issue of the collective abduction of civilians,
including children, is one that we are seeing increasingly
in situations of armed conflict. The abduction of
children leads to other violations, such as murder,
maiming, recruitment and sexual violence. The Arab
Group condemns such violations committed against
children in Syria and Iraq by the terrorist group Daesh,
which murders, rapes and forcibly displaces children,
as well as denying them access to education by closing
schools and using them for combat purposes.
While the Council is looking at the issue of children
and armed conflict around the world, the Arab Group
urges it not to forget the children of Palestine, who
are suffering under acts of aggression and oppression
and grave violations of human rights owing to the
Israeli occupation. That conflict has been going on
for more than 70 years, and Israel, the occupying
Power, has continued to seriously violate international
law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention, the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Charter of
the United Nations and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. That situation systematically exhibits three
of the six criteria for evaluating violations against
children. The war in Gaza last year resulted in the
deaths of more than 500 Palestinian children who
were targeted and killed deliberately as they played on
the beach or sought refuge in United Nations centres.
Around 3,000 children were disabled for life, schools

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

were attacked, 54,000 children left homeless, and
at least 373,000 children in Gaza are now in need of
psychological and social support. None of what was
destroyed has been rebuilt yet.
The Arab Group reiterates its confidence in Special
Representative Zerrougui, which it demonstrated
recently when the League of Arab States and the United
Nations signed an agreement aimed at strengthening
the protection of children affected by armed conflict
in the Arab world. It constitutes an important measure
to ensure the protection of children. The Arab Group
believes it is essential that the mandate of the Office of
the Special Representative be strengthened by providing
the financial and human resources it requires.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I would like to wish a
blessed Ramadam to all. I salute His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia, Mr. Anifah
Aman, and the President of the Security Council for
convening this timely debate on children and armed
conflict. This matter is of highest priority and urgency
for the State of Palestine, whose children’s lives are
gravely endangered by the Israeli occupation. I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict; Ms. Yoka
Brandt, Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF; and
Ms. Eunice Apio, Director of Facilitation for Peace and
Development, for their important briefings.
We come before the Security Council anguished
by the Secretary-General’s decision to exclude Israel
from the list of shame of parties committing grave
violations against children in his annual report on
children and armed conflict (S/2015/409). Israel, the
occupying Power, is without doubt a flagrant violator of
children’s rights. Israel systematically commits crimes
against Palestinian children. Its actions contravene
its obligations under human rights law, including the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and international
humanitarian law, which obligate the occupying Power
to ensure the well-being and safety of the civilian
population under its occupation. Evidence verified
by the United Nations and numerous human rights
organizations affirms that Israel continues to kill and
maim children, attack schools and hospitals and prevent
humanitarian access, with devastating impact on the
rights, lives and well-being of Palestinian children.

S/PV.7466

Those facts are well documented in the current report
and similar past reports.
According to the criteria established by the Security
Council, such actions would trigger a listing among the
grave violators identified in the annexes to the report.
One qualifies to be on the list of shame whether Boko
Haram figures there or not. If one meets the criteria,
then one has to be there. Political considerations should
not be the basis for removal because some abhorrent
terrorist organization is on the list.
Yet Israel was not included in that list, as political
pressures were again blatantly exerted to shield
it from censure and measures of accountability,
notwithstanding the objective recommendation of the
experts in the United Nations system. We salute those
experts for their professional and honest position. They
recommended Israel’s inclusion, but political pressure
led to the deletion of Israel from the list of shame.
This glaring omission and the failure to hold Israel
responsible for its crimes come at a heavy cost to our
innocent children, who are being denied the protection
of the law, their rights violated, their suffering deepened
and their lives, dreams and futures shattered, without
consequences.
Israel’s brutality increased against Palestinian
children in 2014, causing the third-highest number
of child fatalities in armed conflicts worldwide. As
reported, 557 Palestinian children were killed. My
statement, which will be circulated, contains an annex
with a list with the names of all those children and their
ages. The majority are from the Gaza Strip, who were
killed during the Israeli military assaults of July and
August 2014. There are 340 boys and 200 girls, from
one-week-old babies to youth 17 years old. As time
constraints do not allow me to read out the names of
all of those beloved children to properly memorialize
their lives and souls, we are distributing the list of their
names with the copies of our statement today.
The Palestinian people still grieve this massive loss
of human life and innocence. Among them are 19 children
of the Abu Jama’a family, the youngest a 6-monthold girl, Bisan, who were massacred in an Israeli air
strike on their home that killed 25 family members
in total. They suffered the same disaster inflicted on
142 families who lost multiple members — mothers,
fathers, sisters, brothers, grandparents, aunts, uncles,
cousins — in such criminal assaults, with 89 families
totally decimated.

15-1838039/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

The grim reality is that the Israeli occupying forces
killed an average of 10 children per day in Gaza, most
of whom had not yet celebrated their twelfth birthday.
Children were killed on beaches as they played in broad
daylight before the eyes of the world, in the sanctity of
their homes, in their beds as they slept, in schools, in
playgrounds, in the arms of their parents who could not
save them from the Israeli onslaught. And an estimated
3,000 children were injured and maimed by the
deliberate Israeli strikes and bombardments of civilian
areas. One thousand of those children will be disabled
for life. These facts, documented and verified by United
Nations agencies on the ground, cannot be disputed,
distorted or justified by any shameless propaganda.
In addition to these horrific facts, 1,218 Palestinian
children were injured in 2014 by the occupying forces
in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem, more
than half of whom were under 12 years of age. Many
were critically wounded, and 13 were killed. Among
them were Mohammed Abu Khdeir, aged 16, who was
abducted and burned alive by terrorist settlers, and
Nadim Siam Nuwara, aged 17, who was killed as he was
returning home from school during the Day of Nakba in
May 2014. I am honoured to have his father here with us
today as we appeal again to the Security Council to act
to redress the crimes perpetrated against his son and
our people and to bring an end to this 48 years of illegal
occupation and decades of injustice.
Moreover, along with rampant Israeli strikes on
hospitals and homes that have caused death and injury
to children, the report indicates that Israeli attacks
damaged or destroyed 543 schools in Palestine, the
highest recorded number of all time. This includes
schools of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, where many
Palestinian families, the majority of whom were
refugees seeking protection under the United Nations
flag, met a tragic fate at the hands of the occupying
forces, who killed at least 42 people, including 16
children, and injured 230 in strikes on the schools.
Generations of Palestinian children have been
traumatized by the depravity of the Israeli occupation.
As noted by the Secretary-General in the report,
“The cumulative impact on children and the civilian
population in general of these military operations,
and the ongoing military occupation in the State of
Palestine, is devastating” (S/2015/409, para. 110).

40/96

18/06/2015

The average 8-year-old in Gaza has witnessed three
acts of major military aggression but has never set foot
outside Gaza. Too many young lives have been cut short
by the violence and terror of the occupying forces and
extremist settler militants, who, along with the Israeli
Government, should be included in the list of violators,
the list of shame.
The children who survive this constant aggression
are left to cope with deep physical and psychological
wounds, which gravely impairs their lives. Those
wounds result from the loss of family members, with
at least 1,500 children orphaned in the last Israeli
war alone. There have been detentions and arrests,
with children as young as 12 seized from their beds
in the dead of night, detained, interrogated, beaten,
blindfolded, strip-searched, forced to endure solitary
confinement and other acts amounting to torture and
prosecuted in the only juvenile military court system
in the world. There is also the illegal blockade by
which Israel has inhumanely deprived the Palestinians
in Gaza, isolated them from the world and obstructed
humanitarian assistance and recovery. Forced
displacement has been endured repeatedly by many
children, with the destruction of their homes and loss
of their life possessions.
Where else in the world would such deplorable
treatment of children be permitted? How long will the
Security Council allow Israel to act as a State above the
law, perpetrating such grave violations against children
with impunity?
This shameful situation renders meaningless the
law and the obligation to protect civilians in armed
conflict, and the accountability mechanisms established
for this purpose. The failure to apply the same standards
and demands for compliance to Israel undermines the
credibility of the international system and proves that
it is broken. This accountability gap clearly fosters
Israeli impunity, as shown in its callous response to the
report and the persistence of its violations against our
children, who are left to fend for themselves against
Israeli savagery. As the Council knows, had Israel
been added to the list of grave violators, a process of
increased oversight would have been initiated. The
United Nations and Israel would have had to negotiate a
time-bound, mandatory action plan to protect children.
Listing would also have provided the Council with the
tools to prevent and respond to future Israeli violations.
Israel’s exclusion from the list, despite the expert
advice of the Special Representative of the Secretary-

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

General and the United Nations agencies monitoring the
situation in Palestine, is a missed opportunity to hold
Israel accountable and to save the lives of Palestinian
children.
In 2009, the Secretary-General came before the
Council and stated that “All countries and all groups
must put the protection of children in situations of
armed conflict above politics.” (S/PV.6114, p. 3). We
echo that appeal today in the light of the tragic plight
of Palestinian children under Israeli occupation.
Israel must be held accountable for its crimes. We are
convinced that only collective international action can
compel it to cease its violations and respect the law.
Our pursuit of accountability and commitment to
international law are evident in our accession to the
Rome Statute and other international treaties. While the
Israeli Government continues to demonstrate in word
and deed that it has no interest in peace and the rule of
law and insists on denying the Palestinian people their
rights and entrenching its occupation, the Palestinian
leadership remains committed to peace.
To salvage the prospects for peace, we implore the
international community, with the Security Council
at the forefront, to act to uphold international law and
United Nations resolutions towards ending Israel’s
illegal occupation and achieving freedom and justice
for the Palestinian people. Until then, we again appeal
for protection of the Palestinian people, beginning with
our children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by congratulating Malaysia on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council and for
organizing this open debate in a timely manner on the
very important matter of children and armed conflict.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
presenting his annual report on children and armed
conflict (S/2015/409), which covers global trends on the
subject. My thanks go also to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Zerrougui and the other briefers
for their valuable inputs to this debate.
The year 2014 was sadly one in which we saw
many setbacks in the fight to protect children in armed
conflict. As the recent report of the Secretary-General
and other reports in the United Nations system on this
issue indicat, that year was an especially horrific one
for children trapped in conflict zones and targeted by

S/PV.7466

warring factions and belligerent entities with no respect
for international humanitarian law and the welfare
of our children. Current world events indicate that
children are suffering in massive numbers as a result
of armed conflicts. It is most deplorable that armed
conflicts continue to take a heavy toll on children.
The progress made on this front has unfortunately
been more than overshadowed by the exacerbation of
conflicts and an increase in indiscriminate attacks in
some countries of our region. At the same time, we have
witnessed the proliferation and growth of extremist
groups that systemically violate the rights of children.
Those extremist groups pose a significant challenge
for our region. They perpetrate acts of violence against
children, launch indiscriminate attacks on civilian
populations, target schools and health facilities and
abduct children in large numbers.
The trend of violent extremists infringing on the
rights of children should be of particular concern
to the international community. The nature of those
groups and their form and structure mean that many
standards and proven methods used by the international
community to protect children may be considerably
less effective, if not futile. The complete disregard for
civilians, including children, by Daesh, Jabhat Al-Nusra
and Al-Qaida affiliates, especially in Syria and Iraq,
has been particularly shocking, and the proliferation of
these tactics among such groups is worrisome.
Violent extremists have adopted widespread
abduction as a feature of their operations to inflict terror
and for the purpose of political brainwashing, ransom,
retaliation or sexual exploitation. The Boko Haram
gangs have been ravaging the parts of Nigeria and
surrounding areas primarily by terrorizing children.
The targeting of the children of religious and ethnic
minority groups is likewise a matter of grave concern.
The situation of children in Yemen is worrisome
as well. According to UNICEF reports, at least 279 of
the dead and 402 of the wounded have been children.
That marks an exponential and unacceptable jump
compared to the entire year of 2014 and makes clear
that the intensity of the conflict in Yemen can lead
to humanitarian crises for some time to come. The
systematic bombing and destruction of the logistical
infrastructure of a country that imports 90 per cent of
its food, for example, will undoubtedly have long-term
consequences.

15-1838041/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

As the Secretary-General’s report indicates, and
as evidenced in reports by United Nations agencies, in
Gaza alone, between 8 July and 26 August 2014, 540
Palestinian children were killed and 2,955 injured,
among them 1,000 estimated to be permanently disabled
as a result of the latest Israeli invasion. The number
of schools, kindergartens and hospitals damaged or
completely destroyed by Israeli forces during the
same period is the highest recorded number of all such
situations in 2014. Israel’s denial of humanitarian access
to the entire occupied Palestinian people endangers the
survival and well-being of Palestinian children, which
adds yet another record for the Israeli regime’s ignoring
international humanitarian law without being held
accountable for its grave violations against children.
We would like to take this opportunity to call
for accountability for the war crimes and violations
committed by Israel during its recent military aggression
against the Palestinian civilian population and for the
wanton destruction of vital civilian infrastructure in
the Gaza Strip. The international community, including
the Security Council, should ensure serious follow-up
efforts to bring an end to Israel’s impunity and to secure
justice for the victims.
The Security Council has identified six specific
criteria for grave violations that the Secretary-General
should use to update his lists of grave violators against
children in armed conflicts around the world, contained
in the annexes of his reports. The overwhelming
evidence indicates that systematic and gross human
right violations perpetrated by the Israeli regime and
army against Palestinian children under its occupation
clearly meet those criteria for listing. We therefore
join the many Member States that deeply regret the
decision not to list Israel in the annex of the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict, despite the recommendation of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in that regard.
Warring parties must make greater efforts to
protect children from conflict. Respect by all parties
for the civilian nature of schools, the inclusion of
policies regarding the rights of children in peace talks
and treaties, and the regular institution of humanitarian
pauses in the fighting can be significant steps towards
achieving that aim. The international community must
redouble its efforts to protect children in conflict by
taking a more aggressive stance against those who
are persistent perpetrators and those who abduct and
victimize children. Nations need to show greater

42/96

18/06/2015

leadership in countering the propaganda of violent
extremism, used for both the recruitment of children in
faraway places and the indoctrination of abductees, as
well as in protecting, rehabilitating and reintegrating
children saved from the grips of those elements.
Without strong action from the United Nations and
a genuine commitment from the community of nations,
this issue will have significant consequences and ripple
through generations. As the targeting of children has
become a growing trend among violent extremists
and an ever more prevalent feature of violent conflict,
the world should expect this issue to only grow more
brutal if it is not blunted by the will of the international
community.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers
to keep their statements concise in view of the long
speakers list.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We welcome this
debate and extend a special welcome to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, who is with us throughout the
debate today. We very much appreciate and value her
work and the work of her Office.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/409) once
again shines a light on the many ways in which children
are affected by armed conflict, on the increasing number
of horrendous crimes committed against them and on
the perpetrators of this violence. We support many of
the recommendations in the report, in particular the
one on the need to include abductions of children as
a trigger mechanism for listing. My brief intervention
will focus on three points today.
First, we are pleased to see a strong call for
accountability among the recommendations. It is of
the utmost importance to demand full respect for
international humanitarian law, human rights law
and refugee law. We are concerned about the sexual
exploitation and abuse case in the Central African
Republic and the systemic weaknesses within the
United Nations system it has brought to light. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s decision to establish
an independent investigation and look forward to its
results. Thirty per cent of the victims of reported cases
of sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Haiti, Liberia, South Sudan

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

and the Democratic Republic of the Congo were
minors. The United Nations proclaimed zero-tolerance
policy will be ineffective as long as accountability
mechanisms remain opaque or simply not in place and
reporting remains difficult or even dangerous.
The challenges in ensuring accountability for
sexual exploitation and abuse have been discussed for
many years, but with few tangible results. There is a
persistent danger that the important work of so many
could be publicly discredited owing to the unethical
and criminal acts committed with impunity by a few.
Troop-contributing countries have to ensure speedy
domestic investigations and prosecutions for violations
committed by their nationals. Otherwise, the United
Nations role and its crucial function in the area of
peacekeeping will be compromised.
Secondly, the list of perpetrators in the annexes
to the Secretary-General’s reports can be a very
powerful tool to influence the behaviour of parties to
a conflict. However, for this to be the case, the listing
and delisting process needs to be fair, consistent and
transparent. The vast majority of parties listed are
non-State actors, with whom it can be difficult to
engage. The International Committee of the Red Cross
and certain non-governmental organizations, such as
Geneva Call, are uniquely positioned in that regard,
and their experience should inform the Council’s work
in this area.
Some parties to conflicts seem to have made clear
commitments to engage, are eager to cooperate and have
signed so called deeds of commitment to stop violations
against children. Nevertheless, not a single non-State
actor/entity has been able to qualify for delisting so far,
due, inter alia, to a lack of knowledge and assistance
throughout the process. This has caused frustration
and is also a missed opportunity to motivate other
non-State actors to cooperate with a view to delisting.
It is therefore important to support organizations
that assist non-State actors in their efforts to achieve
delisting. We as Governments can further facilitate
such processes through the ratification of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, which
creates the necessary framework for engagement.
Finally, I would like to briefly touch upon the
issue of underage foreign terrorist fighters. We are
obviously struggling to find a response to this complex
phenomenon. Our knowledge of the root causes,

S/PV.7466

motivation and recruitment policies and processes
is still limited. We must not forget in this discussion
that we are talking about children, whose judgment
and resulting behaviour is that of legal minors. We
therefore look forward with great interest at so-called
soft-handed approaches based on the assumption that
poverty, discrimination, lack of socialization and
the absence of effective integration are often at the
root of radicalization. Instead of an exclusive focus
on criminalization, those strategies make use of
psychosocial counselling and help returnees find jobs or
education opportunities. We do not claim to know that
one approach works better than another, but we certainly
see value in exploring a stronger focus on reintegration.
What seems to be clear is that a comprehensive response
is needed that covers prevention, psycho-social support
and integration assistance to complement necessary
legal measures and action.
In conclusion, I would like to draw the Council’s
attention to the Safe Schools Declaration, which
endorses the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict.
We welcome that elaboration on existing international
humanitarian law and call upon others to join those
of us that have already endorsed the Guidelines at the
recently held safe schools conference in Oslo.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my sincere appreciation for your leadership,
Mr. President, in convening today’s open debate. Let
me also thank His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, United
Nations Secretary-General; Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict; Ms. Yoka Brandt,
Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF; and Ms. Eunice
Apio, of Facilitation for Peace and Development, for
their briefings.
Today, I would like to focus on three issues:
the abduction of children, child soldiers and the
rehabilitation and reintegration of child victims.
First, with regard, abduction, I would like to draw
the Security Council’s attention to the disturbing,
increasing trend of mass abductions of children. Last
year, it was reported that 276 schoolgirls had been
kidnapped by Boko Haram in Nigeria. There were 153
Kurdish boys and 412 Yazidi children abducted by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), in Syria

15-1838043/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

and Iraq. According to the Watch List on Children
and Armed Conflict, at least 24,422 children were
kidnapped between 2002 and 2013, of which 95.8 per
cent were taken by non-State armed groups.
The international community, especially the
Security Council, should take all the measures necessary
to alleviate such cruel and inhumane actions by
organizations like Boko Haram and ISIL. In that regard,
we support and have sponsored the new resolution 2225
(2015), which was just adopted today. The addition of
abductions as a trigger for the inclusion of parties in
the annexes of the Secretary-General’s annual report
will make a difference. It is essential, however, that
the relevant parties implement resolution 2225 (2015)
through action plans and other mechanisms.
Moreover, Japan would like to pay tribute to the
efforts made by all stakeholders in drafting the Lucens
Guidelines. We welcome the fact that the international
community’s recognition of the issue of protecting
schools and education is expanding. Japan will continue
keeping an eye on the development of the discussion on
the issue.
Secondly, Japan is commemorating the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1612 (2005). Japan took in the
adoption of the resolution as a member of the Council
at the time. The resolution marked an important
milestone, by establishing a monitoring and reporting
mechanism on the recruitment and use of child soldiers.
The “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign further
promotes the provisions set out in the resolution. Japan
has repeatedly expressed its support to the campaign.
The achievements made so far via the campaign are
to be commended, including the delisting of Chad and
the release of 400 child soldiers in Myanmar. In that
context, Japan has provided support for child soldier
victims through UNICEF. It is important to note that
the goal of the campaign is to prevent and end the
recruitment and use of children by national security
forces by 2016. In order to achieve that ambitious
goal, further enhancements and commitments are
required. Japan will continue to look into furthering its
contributions to support the campaign.
Lastly, the rehabilitation and reintegration of child
victims deserves as much attention as the prevention
of abduction and recruitment, as mentioned in the
Secretary-General’s current annual report (S/2015/409).
The victims of child abduction and recruitment have
been deprived of love and affection and remain aloof

44/96

18/06/2015

from a normal social life. In the worst cases, those
children become fiends and deviants or mindless
monsters, brainwashed and knowing nothing other than
how to use a Kalashnikov. Those children may have no
families or homes to return to. Even if they do make
it back, they may not be accepted or may be unable to
readapt to society. They have lost the opportunity to
become members of society. Bringing such children
back to a normal life should be an essential part of their
rehabilitation process.
With that aim in mind, in the past fiscal year
Japan provided a total of $23 million in contributions
for programmes to support the rehabilitation and
reintegration of child soldiers. Such programmes have
been implemented in countries such as the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and South Sudan. For instance, in South Sudan,
we supported efforts to reunite approximately 1,000
children with their families. That project also provided
them with psychological care. In addition, medical
care and counselling are being provided to women and
children who have experienced sexual abuse.
We should not leave anyone behind — especially
the children. When we are dealing with crimes that
have been committed against children, preventing and
rescuing children from such crimes is not sufficient. I
reiterate the necessity of also providing support to the
victims for their rehabilitation and reintegration into
society. By doing so, they can return as fully committed
members of society.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Armenia, Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and
Ukraine, align themselves with this statement.
I want to begin by warmly thanking in particular
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui, whom we strongly support. We also want to
thank the Malaysian presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this important debate.

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

The year 2014 has frequently been cited as the worst
year for children affected by armed conflict. In his new
annual report to the Council (S/2015/409), the SecretaryGeneral speaks of “unprecedented challenges in 2014
with regard to the protection of tens of millions of
children growing up in situations affected by conflict”
(S/2015/409, para. 5). Protracted armed conflicts and
current crises affect far too many children around the
world, keeping them away from school and exposing
them to the risk of recruitment and use as soldiers.
Atrocities against children that have made headlines,
including Boko Haram’s abduction of hundreds of
women and girls in Chibok and the abductions in Syria
and Iraq committed by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, serve to remind us of the special vulnerabilities
and needs of girls in this context.
The “increase in the frequency and scale of
abductions”, as noted in paragraph 8 of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, is alarming. In view of that increase,
but also in view of the fact that abductions are one of
the six grave violations that are being reported on under
the monitoring and reporting mechanism, it is only
logical to add abduction as a fifth trigger that leads
to listing in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s
report. In many cases abductions are a precursor of
other violations, such as recruitment and use of sexual
violence. We therefore very much welcome today’s
unanimous adoption of resolution 2225 (2015), which
that adds abduction as a trigger, and we are grateful for
Malaysia’s leadership in that regard. We hope that in
consequence this will lead to the conclusion of action
plans with listed parties that commit abductions. We
strongly condemn abductions of children and call on
all parties to release all abducted children immediately.
In several cases, extremist groups have abducted
school children to punish them for attending school.
That serves to remind us of the importance of
education not only for children’s development, but also
as a powerful tool to contribute to the prevention of
violent extremism and of conflict. Consequently, more
has to be done to better protect schools from attack
and to deter the military use thereof in accordance
with international law. We welcome the Council’s
commitment, stated inter alia in resolution 2143 (2014),
for enhanced monitoring of, and reporting on, the
military use of schools.
Many of the abductions are committed by
non-State armed actors, which also make up the vast
majority of listed parties. During the last open debate

S/PV.7466

in March (see S/PV.7414), under the French presidency,
we discussed possible measures to effectively address
this phenomenon. We are grateful for the non-paper
circulated by France that compiles a summary of the
proposals presented during that debate. We believe
that many of those proposals merit concrete follow-up.
Unconditional access for the United Nations to non-State
armed actors is essential for the adoption of action plans
to end and prevent violations and, more important, for
steps towards their effective implementation.
In order to prevent future violations, it is vital to
hold those responsible accountable. A high number
of the parties have been listed for at least five years,
and are therefore considered persistent perpetrators.
Fighting impunity needs to be part and parcel of our
actions and, whereas the primary responsibility lies
with States, the International Criminal Court has an
essential role to play in this regard.
Furthermore, the inclusion of child protection
provisions in the mandates of peace operations and
mandatory predeployment training on child protection
for all United Nations troops and police contingents are
crucial measures to ensure the effective protection of
children on the ground. In that context, the European
Union is strengthening its capacity on child protection
both at its headquarters and at operational level. We are
mainstreaming the issue of children affected by armed
conflict in our Common Security and Defence Policy
missions and operations. This year, the Union is again
organizing specific training on children and armed
conflict for its staff and that of its member States.
Predeployment child protection training modules
for civilian and military personnel have also been
finalized and are taught in the context of preparations
for deployment of European Union and third-country
personnel as part of the various civilian stabilization
missions.
The successful reintegration of children back into
society is a matter of primary concern for achieving
sustainable peace and development. That is the reason
that we are funding reintegration measures for released
child soldiers, for example in South Sudan. This
year, we plan to launch a specific call for proposals
from civil society organizations on future projects on
children associated with armed forces and groups as
well as children impacted by violence. The European
Union and its member States also continue to support
the “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui and

15-1838045/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

18/06/2015

UNICEF. We welcome the progress achieved so far and
hope for a successful conclusion in 2016.

against children. Today’s resolution 2225 (2015), which
Israel sponsored, is a positive step forward.

The tenth anniversary of the adoption of groundbreaking resolution 1612 (2005) in July this year should
provide a new impetus to the United Nations and its
States Members to give the protection of children
affected by armed conflict the highest priority and to
ensure that everything is being done to provide children
with better prospects for their future.

Last week, the Secretary-General published his
annual report (S/2015/404) on children and armed
conflict. With all the regimes, with all the organizations
that intentionally and strategically target children
throughout the world, it is simply absurd that the report
disproportionately focuses on Israel. The report has
17 paragraphs on Syria, 9 on Yemen, 8 on Iraq, 6 on
Libya and no less than 32 paragraphs on Israel. Yes, the
Council heard right: twice as much space was dedicated
to Israel than to Syria, where approximately a quarter of
a million people have been killed, including, according
to The New York Times, more than 3,500 children just
this year, while the report misleads by inexplicably
putting the number at 368.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): The girls and boys of today
represent the hope for a better tomorrow. When a
child is a victim of war, his world, his family and his
community lose their most precious possession: their
hope for a brighter future. The loss of any child is an
incomparable tragedy. The deliberate infliction of harm
on children is an inhumane crime. Protecting children
is our highest obligation.
According to the Jewish tradition, whoever saves
one life it is as if he has saved the entire world. Seventy
years after the establishment of this institution, there
are far too many lives we fail to save. The painful fact
is that children all over the world are suffering from
unprecedented cruelty and inhumanity.
In Nigeria, Boko Haram has already abducted
1,000 children, many of whom were placed on the
front line to act as human shields. In the Democratic
Republic of Congo, civilians, including children,
are being beheaded, mutilated and raped. In Yemen,
Saudi Arabia’s massive and indiscriminate air strikes
have hit hospitals and schools and killed hundreds of
civilians, including many children. The Houthis are
recruiting boys as young as 14 to use as child soldiers,
arming them with Kalashnikovs and sending them to
the front lines. In Iraq, the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria (ISIS) is forcing young girls to call their parents
to detail being gang-raped by dozens of men. In Syria,
ISIS forces abducted and tortured Kurdish children and
forced them to watch footage of ISIS beheadings and
attacks.
When we look at the world today through the
eyes of children, we see a terrifying picture. Too
many dreams are being shattered, too many hopes are
being extinguished and too many are robbed of their
childhoods by unimaginable brutality. It must stop.
The Security Council must act to end those atrocities

46/96

The reason for that skewed presentation is evident.
Instead of being balanced, neutral and focused on fact,
the report’s discussion of Israel is politicized, stained
with interests and distorts reality. What about Hamas,
a terrorist organization that as we speak runs military
summer camps for elementary school children? Surely
a report about the use of children in warfare would
discuss it in detail. Well, read through the report and
try to count how many times the name Hamas even
appears. Finding Hamas in this report is harder than
finding a needle in a haystack. In reality, Hamas and
other terrorist organizations launched approximately
4,000 rockets and mortars during last summer’s
conflict. Those missiles were deliberately directed
at Israel’s civilian population. In the words of Hamas
spokesman, Fawzi Barhoum,
“Our rockets are aimed at the Hebrews, the
murderers, the Israelis, the criminals. Our missiles
accurately target the homes of the Israelis and the
Zionists.”
More than 15,000 rockets and mortars have
been fired at Israel from Gaza since 2001. There is a
generation of children in Israel that lives under daily
threat of Hamas rockets and mortars.
Not only did Hamas deliberately target Israeli
civilians and children, it also demonstrates complete
disregard for the lives of Palestinian children. While
Israel tried to save Palestinian lives by warning them to
leave combat areas, Hamas threatened their lives if they
did. While Israel takes every precaution to avoid harm
to non-combatants, Hamas voids international law by
launching rockets from schools, hospitals, mosques and

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

other places in which children would usually be safe.
The military use of schools by Hamas is dreadful. As
today’s resolution states, such use is “in contravention
of applicable international law” (resolution 2225 (2015),
para. 4).
Omitted from the report was one clear fact: this
was not a war that Israel wanted. Israel deeply regrets
the harm caused to the Palestinian civilian population
during Operation Protective Edge. That operation
was in response to more than 450 rockets and mortars
launched from the Gaza Strip, including more than 60
in just one day, while Israel did not react. Israel took
all measures to de-escalate the conflict by accepting
ceasefire after ceasefire, while Hamas rejected all
attempts. In a war forced on Israel by Hamas Israel,
took unprecedented precautions to avoid the loss of life
of innocent civilians, going beyond what is required by
international law and what is done by any army in the
world.
The Israel Defense Forces used leaflets, phone
calls and text messages to warn the civilian population
to evacuate rocket launch sites. It aborted or suspended
operations against terror targets when it became
apparent that civilians would be harmed. And, even
while attacked by the ruling authority in Gaza, Israel
kept the flow of humanitarian assistance to the people
of Gaza.
I ask myself why all of these clear and crucial
facts are absent from the report of the Special
Representative. Is it possible that they simply failed to
notice? Unfortunately, the failure of this report goes far
deeper than mere oversight. The drafting of the report
was marked at every level by widespread, systematic
and institutionalized biased conduct against Israel.
From the outset, the regional working group
conveniently forgot to inform Israel of the writing of
the report, nor did they deem it necessary to seek input
from the Israeli authorities. Time after time, Israel tried
to provide official evidence and facts to the working
group, but we were flatly refused. Yet non-governmental
organizations with a publicly available record of
notorious anti-Israel activity were welcomed with open
arms as an integral part of the working group.
Furthermore, the Office of the Special Representative
left no real opportunity for Israel’s extensive
reservations to even be considered, thus making it
evident that the engagement with Israel by that Office
was a mere formality for the sake of checking the box.

S/PV.7466

Such practices contradict the relevant Security Council
resolutions and guidelines to involve Governments as
an integral part throughout the process.
We are extremely troubled by the fact that internal
sensitive information that was supposed to be known
only to the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and to United Nations officials was
leaked to the press in an intentional attempt to pressure
and dictate the final outcome to include Israel in the
report’s annex. Have members ever heard anywhere a
consideration of the Special Representative with regard
to listing or not listing countries except this time? Such
unauthorized and irresponsible leaks should not be
tolerated. They serve only to undermine the credibility
of the report, the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the entire United Nations
system. This conduct should be investigated.
No organization is perfect, and no procedure is
immune to criticism. Raising concerns with regard to
the practices and procedures of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict should not be automatically
perceived as mere national interest and is essential for
the protection of children.
I must express as well deep concern about the
report’s statement that the question of intent when
determining responsibility will not be a crucial
consideration. The laws of armed conflict provide one
of the critical barriers preventing war from descending
into unrestrained barbarism. Ignoring intention would
be contrary to existing international law and would
play into the hands of those who intentionally target
and use civilians in combat and leave children more
vulnerable. Without attention to intentions, those who
are responsible for harming children will remain free
to repeat their crimes, and we will fail in our sacred
obligation to the children of the world.
The Bible tells us that all children are a gift of God.
We have an obligation to do all we can to protect the
lives of the most vulnerable among us, no matter who
they are or where they are from. Israel’s concern for
the life and well-being of children knows no colour,
no ethnicity, no nationality or faith, and it knows no
borders. Israel’s commitment to the protection of
children is absolute. We will remain committed to
safeguard the lives of all children in accordance with
our democratic values, our moral conscience and our
belief in the sanctity of human life.

15-1838047/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

18/06/2015

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.

resolutions explicitly condemn attacks on schools and
hospitals.

Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We wish to thank the delegation of Malaysia
for having convened this open debate, and Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, for her
valuable input to the annual report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/409).

Mexico believes it is useful that in the Security
Council, the United Nations and States Members
reinforce our response to these serious violations,
including through existing mechanisms. We recognize
the usefulness of monitoring and of the inclusion
of a list of parties in conflict that are violating these
standards in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s
reports. Recent successful cases of the release of
children associated with armed conflicts through
United Nations facilitation is proof of how effective
these measures can be.

The report underscores the increase in extreme
violence recorded in 2014 and its relation with the serious
violations of the rights of girls and boys. This fact alone
must serve to reaffirm our collective determination to
keep this issue at the core of the international agenda.
Our participation today reflects the commitment of
Mexico to continue to contribute to raising awareness
about this issue. We did so when we chaired the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict in
2009 and 2010, which led to resolution 1882 (2009),
in which the Security Council firmly condemns the
abduction of children in situations of armed conflict.
We also underscore the practical progress achieved on
the ground, such as plans of action and the monitoring
and reporting mechanism on the six serious violations
committed against children.
Mexico has explicitly condemned acts carried out
by extremist groups, particularly during the violent
events of 2014, and it is with great concern that we note
that the most recent report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict highlights the increase in
abductions of children in conflict situations. Although
the records are insufficient, the Secretary-General
reports that more than 2,750 children have been
abducted in 12 conflict areas. Of those cases at least
1,730 were abducted by the self-proclaimed Islamic
State and 500 by Boko Haram.
The international community cannot ignore or
tolerate this situation. The abduction of children
may well constitute a crime against humanity and
a war crime. To meet this challenge we have an
extensive normative framework, such as the Geneva
Conventions, the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and international humanitarian law, which together
establish an obligation to ensure humane treatment for
civilians and attention to the specific vulnerabilities of
children, including prohibiting the taking of hostages,
among other things. A number of Security Council

48/96

We underscore the importance of penalizing this
crime in national legislation, as well as prosecuting
perpetrators in national tribunals or, if those tribunals
are unable or unwilling to do that, at the International
Criminal Court, as a preventative measure and in order
to combat impunity. Similarly, we consider it necessary
to strengthen actions to ensure effective protection of
places such as schools, hospitals and recreation centres
for children and adolescents in order to prevent acts of
violence that not only take innocent victims but also
diminish the possibilities of providing safe places for
children and their development in conflict and postconflict situations.
We must not forget that violence and abductions
have devastating psychological effects on children
and that in order to correct that impact and care for
those children and their families we need greater
psychological, medical and legal assistance, and that
involves considerable cost for the countries involved in
conflict.
The extreme violence that we saw in 2014
committed by the actors referred to in the SecretaryGeneral’s report will have a serious and lasting impact
on the children who have been their victims. Therefore
we, the international community, will face additional
long-term challenges in providing comprehensive
reintegration programmes. Those challenges pose
a potential additional risk for the resurgence of
violent acts in some regions where the situation is not
improving.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2225
(2015) today, in which the Secretary-General is
requested to include cases involving the abduction of
children in the annexes to his reports on children and
armed conflict. We recognize that cases such as that

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

of Dominic Ongwen of the Lord’s Resistance Army
show how contemptible such crimes against children
in armed conflict are. They are clear proof of how
violence in conflicts feeds upon itself and is repeated
when children are not protected. We therefore urge the
international community to take relevant measures
to halt the growing trend of child abductions and to
establish and strengthen the necessary mechanisms to
keep such crimes from happening.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Please
allow me to congratulate Malaysia on having organized
this public debate. Resolution 2225 (2015), just adopted
today by the Security Council, is a key contribution
to strengthening the agenda on children and armed
conflicts, which, as is well known, is of particular
importance to Luxembourg. I should also like to thank
the Secretary-General, his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, and the representative
of UNICEF, for their statements and briefings. We have
also listened with great attention to the testimony of
Ms. Eunice Apio, who shared her experience on the
ground based on her work with Ugandan child victims
of the Lord’s Resistance Army.
Luxembourg also fully aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.
The annual report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2015/409) reflects
the unprecedented challenges encountered in
2014 — recruitment, murders, sexual violence and
abductions ­— the daily fate of tens of thousands of
children during conflicts. We all remember the military
offensive last year in the Gaza Strip, which cost the lives
of 557 Palestinian children trapped by the hostilities,
as well as 4 Israeli children. Those violations are
abundantly documented in the current annual report.
We condemn in the strongest terms all violations
committed against all children. A child affected by
conflict is a victim, no matter the nationality. Also, the
perpetrators of those violations, no matter who they
are, must be held responsible for their actions.
Education is also threatened more and more in
armed conflicts, whether during attacks against schools
or in the context of their use for military purposes. In
either case the lives of children are directly threatened.
Such actions deprive future generations of education,
with the harmful consequences that that causes for the

S/PV.7466

country’s recovery. In Syria almost 900 schools were
partially or entirely destroyed by the end of 2014. Last
year, 60 attacks against schools were documented, and
two thirds of those attacks were perpetrated by Syrian
governmental forces. The regime does not hesitate to
bomb its own population in public areas, including
using barrel bombs, which indiscriminately sow death
in their wake, as in the recent attacks committed in the
province of Aleppo. In the regions occupied by Daesh,
schools, meant to be places of intellectual emancipation,
are transformed into places for indoctrination or simply
closed.
We call on all States to take specific measures
to dissuade parties in conflict from using schools for
military purposes, in accordance with resolution 2143
(2014) and today’s resolution 2225 (2015). Last month
in Oslo, Luxembourg, together with 36 other countries,
endorsed the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict
by endorsing the Safe Schools Declaration. We hope
that other Member States will also be able to endorse
those guidelines.
We welcome the progress achieved through the
“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign, aimed at preventing
the recruitment and use of children by national
security forces in times of conflict. We encourage all
actors concerned to redouble their efforts to ensure
the success of that initiative. At the same time, it is
urgent to develop specific strategies to deal with the
issue of non-State armed groups, which make up the
great majority of the parties listed in the annexes to
the Secretary-General’s annual report on the subject.
The scale of abuses committed by extremist groups
such as Daesh and Boko Haram demands a determined
response from the international community.
In that context, we welcome the fact that resolution
2225 (2015) adds child abductions as a new trigger for
the inclusion of parties responsible for such crimes
in the annexes to the annual report. That is a key
contribution to the existing normative framework and
will draw attention to a violation that has at times been
wrongly considered simply a consequence of child
recruitment or sexual violence. The addition of that new
trigger should encourage us to mobilize even more in
support of the signing and implementation of new plans
of action so as to end all violations against children.
I should like to stress the importance that my
delegation places on programmes for disarmament,

15-1838049/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

demobilization and reintegration. For children scarred
by war, reintegration must be the beginning of a new
chapter in their lives. It is crucial that post-conflict
plans, programmes and strategies for rebuilding and
reconstruction prioritize issues dealing with children
affected by the conflict. That also requires the
availability of the necessary resources.
There should be no impunity for those who commit
the worst atrocities against children. They must know
that they will be held accountable, including before the
International Criminal Court. Our sense of justice is at
stake. The protection of children is at stake.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Ms. Samson (Netherlands): I should like to thank
Malaysia, as President of the Council for this month,
for organizing today’s open debate. I should also
like to thank today’s briefers, in particular Special
Representative Ms. Zerrougui, whom we wish to
reassure of our continued strong support.
The Netherlands aligns itself with the statement of
the European Union.
Each year thousands of children are abducted
in armed conflicts, taken from their secure home
environment, leaving behind destroyed families and
destabilized communities. Their future is often filled
with horrific crimes such as systematic violence,
rape, indoctrination, forced conversion and forced
recruitment as child soldiers. We need to step up our
efforts to protect children, especially when they are the
most vulnerable, that is, in armed conflict situations.
Because of the abhorrent consequences of abduction,
such as child recruitment and sexual exploitation,
abductions should trigger increased attention from the
international community.
In this intervention I should like to focus on the link
between the indoctrination and the recruitment of child
soldiers and will touch upon prevention, monitoring
and reporting and accountability.
States are primarily responsible for protecting their
populations from atrocity crimes. Special focus should
be placed on protecting the most vulnerable groups,
such as children. The Netherlands remains strongly
committed to the principle of the responsibility to
protect. We believe that prevention is at the core of
the responsibility to protect. We have a growing toolbox of prevention instruments to work with, allowing

50/96

18/06/2015

for tailor-made approaches. We have a responsibility
to take the necessary measures to safeguard children,
especially in areas where rebel groups are active.
When prevention fails, as it has in several cases
mentioned in the annex to the Secretary-General’s
report on children in armed conflict (S/2015/409), the
monitoring and reporting of abductions are crucial. The
reference to such cases in the report of the SecretaryGeneral provides a strong political signal. It forms the
basis for condemning abductions and clearly shows
the international community where to focus its efforts.
We therefore reiterate our full support for designating
abductions as a fifth criterion for listing in the annex to
the Secretary-General’s annual report.
We need to ensure accountability for violations
of international humanitarian law in general and for
violations that affect civilian populations and children
in particular. Whereas the International Criminal
Court (ICC) can play an important role, the primary
responsibility to hold perpetrators accountable lies
with States. Therefore, national capacity has to be
strengthened where needed. We need to be aware
of the fact that often perpetrators were once victims
of abduction themselves. Tragically, in many cases
abductees are recruited and become perpetrators
themselves when they are forced to commit atrocities
against their own families and friends. It is therefore
crucial to consider alternative non-judicial measures
and a comprehensive package of psycho-social support
for children who escape from rebel groups.
The Ongwen case at the International Criminal
Court is an extreme example of an abductee who turned
into a perpetrator. After being abducted at age 10, he rose
through the ranks of the Lord’s Resistance Army and
became one of the top commanders and has now been
indicted by the ICC for atrocious crimes. The dilemma
of victims becoming perpetrators raises important
questions about how to ensure accountability. More
importantly, it confirms the importance of preventing
abduction and child recruitment, as that can reinforce
conflicts.
As long as the root causes of conflicts are not
addressed, children remain vulnerable to abduction
and recruitment. We believe that children are often
deliberately used as weapons in conflicts. Children
are specifically targeted by extremist groups, such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Boko
Haram, indoctrinated with extremist ideology and then

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

deployed as fighters. We should address those new
threats and risks in an overall child-protection strategy
and interrupt the cycle of abduction, indoctrination and
recruitment of children.
In conclusion, I should like to underline and reiterate
our support for the Safe Schools Declaration and the
underlying guidelines, which usefully complement
existing international law and include incentives for
all actors involved in armed conflict to respect student
safety and the right to education. In addition, let me
reiterate our strong support for the United Nations
“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign. Momentum is
building, and the goal of the campaign is within reach.
Such initiatives directly contribute to a better situation
for children in conflict and deserve strong support from
all of us.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand) (spoke in French): Let me
join others in congratulating Malaysia on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Let me also express my appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his latest report on children and armed
conflict (S/2015/409), the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
and the representatives of UNICEF and other civil
groups for their insightful briefings.
We welcome the holding of this debate on children
and armed conflict for the second time this year, which
reflects the continuing importance that the Council
and United Nations States Members attach to this
issue. It is also an opportunity to reflect on how best
the international community can lessen the impact of
armed conflict on future generations.
We align ourselves with the statement that will be
made on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) by the representative of Viet Nam.
At this important juncture, the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1612 (2005), which established the Council’s
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
let me express our confidence that, under Malaysia’s
able chairmanship, the Working Group will positively
contribute to the ongoing international efforts to end
impunity and ensure accountability, and thus create an
environment in which children are far removed from
armed conflicts.

S/PV.7466

New challenges have emerged since 2005. As
evidence shows, non-State actors have become more
involved in grave abuses and violence against children
in situations of armed conflict. Hence, the success
or failure of child-protection efforts today depends
primarily on how the issue of non-State actors is
addressed. We believe that, owing to the unique context
of each conflict, it is necessary for the key childprotection stakeholders in the United Nations system
to work in close consultation with the Governments
concerned in cases involving non-State actors, and that
in accordance with their respective mandates.
Another issue of concern to us is the abduction
of children. We have therefore closely followed the
current discussion in the Working Group regarding
the recommendation in the Secretary-General’s report
to expand the tools available to gather information
and report on this issue, which in our view needs
careful consideration by all concerned. As a matter of
principle, protecting children from all forms of violence
must be a priority when considering the mandates of
peacekeeping operations.
Let me also commend the success of the “Children,
Not Soldiers” campaign in preventing the recruitment
of child soldiers and enhancing public awareness that
children have no place in an armed conflict. The success
of the campaign should be replicated so as to deter other
grave violations of children’s rights. At the same time,
efforts must be made by the international community
to reduce the impact of armed conflict on children,
with a long-term strategy to lessen past traumas for
the victims and to secure long-term resources for their
successful reintegration and rehabilitation.
The Secretary-General’s report on children and
armed conflict is useful in assisting Member States in
determining how to direct limited resources to protect
children where they are needed most. We encourage
closer consultation and engagement between Member
States and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
so as to ensure that, to the fullest extent possible, the
report is based on objective, accurate, reliable and
verifiable information. That commitment is critical to
the protection of children in various situations and must
not be underestimated. In that regard, we endeavour
to seek better ways of establishing engagement and
dialogue, based on the best interests of our children, in
support of that mandate.

15-1838051/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

For our part, we have consistently remained
engaged with the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict regarding the report. We find that dialogue
to be extremely necessary. Indeed, events taking place
in our Kingdom that are mentioned in the report are
duly addressed by the Royal Thai Government, which,
with its sovereign responsibility, has been taking action
to maintain law and order in accordance with Thai
law and the Kingdom’s international obligations. We
nevertheless stand ready to develop further dialogue
with the Office in the future in that regard.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating the Kingdom
of Thailand’s commitment to combating violations
of children’s rights, anywhere and by any parties.
Suffering by children is not acceptable. That must end
immediately, and those responsible must be brought to
justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to wish you,
Mr. President, a blessed Ramadan. Allow me to
congratulate my dear friend His Excellency Dato Sri
Anifah Aman, Minister for Foreign Affairs, and his
friendly country, Malaysia, on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
for holding this important meeting.
I would like to start with two pieces of news before
I read out my statement. The first is that Daesh herds
of Israeli settlers attacked and set fire to the Church of
Loaves and Fishes on Lake Tiberias, in Upper Galilee,
Palestine. That church was so named because Jesus
Christ multiplied the fishes there. Today, the Daesh
herds of Israeli settlers have burned it down and on its
walls wrote malicious graffiti offensive to humankind
and to religions. The second piece of news is directly
related to the topic under discussion. According to the
Turkish newspaper Cumhuriyet, the Turkish regime has
backed down from transporting 1 million detonators to
terrorist groups in Syria via Jordan. I wanted to bring
those two pieces of news to the Council’s attention.
At the time when the Government of Syria is
receiving the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, in Damascus, in
keeping with its serious commitment to eliminating
terrorism and to finding a Syrian political solution to
the crisis in Syria, the terrorist armed groups, which

52/96

18/06/2015

some would like to call “moderate”, have pounded the
cities of Aleppo and Damascus and the rural areas with
all kinds of missiles, shells and mortars, and have set
off booby-trapped cars over the past two days. Those
groups have spared no residential area, school or
hospital from their acts. That has resulted in the death
and injury of hundreds of civilians, the majority of
whom are women and children.
That was the subject of two letters that I sent to the
President of the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral on 16 June, hoping that the information
contained in those letters would be taken seriously by
the leaders of this international Organization and not be
omitted from their future reports. We have had to deal
with this problem in the past, and we are still facing the
same problem in the report of the Secretary-General
under discussion today (S/2015/409).
Just yesterday 7,000 mortar shells and rockets fell
on the city of Aleppo. That figure could be useful to the
representative of Luxembourg, who just had the floor. I
would like to enlighten her cultural understanding and
knowledge of the situation in Syria.
We are discussing the third report on children and
armed conflict issued by the Secretary-General based
on the recommendations of his Special Representative
Ms. Zerrougui. These reports should have taken into
consideration the information received from all the
parties concerned — particularly all Governments,
including the Syrian Government — with regard
to the situation of the children in our country.
Regretably, however, what we have witnessed over
the past years, despite our close cooperation with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
her Office, is a dubious disregard by that Office of
much correspondence and documented governmental
evidence refuting the allegations included in this report
and the preceding reports.
We have sent to the Office of the Special
Representative a list of the names of the children killed
by the terrorists and a list of the schools and hospitals
that they targeted. We have sent her all the information
that is relevant to her mandate and have provided
her with hundreds, even thousands, of documents on
actions committed by the terrorist armed groups against
the children in Syria since the onset of the crisis. The
latest of this correspondence was dated 30 March, and
in it we provided Syria’s detailed reply with regard to
the allegations against the Government in Syria. That

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

reply and the evidence we provided were not taken into
consideration in this report. Not one of those actions we
detailed were mentioned in the report. That is a source
of concern for us and tarnishes the image of those who
drafted the report.
That leads us to one conclusion: the people who
wrote these reports have become a tool in the hands
of some influential countries in this international
Organization with a view to tarnishing the image of the
Syrian Government. The drafters of these reports will
not accept any view that has not been endorsed by those
influential countries. That accounts for the lack of any
recommendation to add the Israeli armed forces to the
lists in the annex of the report as the party responsible
for the killing of thousands of Palestinians under
occupation over the last six months. It also accounts
for the failure by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General over the last years to even mention
the suffering of the Syrian children in the occupied
Syrian Golan.
Despite what has been said, I think the general
line of thinking behind this report is to ignore facts
and only mention the numbers of the victims. It fails
to mention the real causes behind the crisis and denies
the role played by sponsor countries, especially their
role in increasing the grave violations of the rights of
our children, especially the recruitment of children by
terrorist and extremist groups.
Despite all those acts, our country has assumed its
responsibility and provided protection for its citizens.
I think we have to refute all the allegations against
the Syrian Government, which is actually fighting
terrorism, instead of accusing the countries that sponsor
terrorism in the country.
In Syria and the neighbouring refugee camps, the
heinous ways used to recruit children are unprecedented.
They have targeted 4-year-old children. I do not believe
that we have just been imagining the propaganda videos
released by Daesh depicting children, some under 10
years old, collectively executing dozens of detainees
held by that terrorist organization, either by shooting
or beheading them.
How have children come to commit these
murderous massacres? Regrettably, terrorist groups
have indoctrinated our children by teaching them their
murderous ideologies, after abducting them from their
loved ones and instructing them on how to commit such
crimes, on the basis of takfiri and Wahhabi teachings.

S/PV.7466

We have witnessed the horrendous and appalling
massacre committed by Al-Nusra Front terrorist
operatives against 40 Syrian civilians in the village
of Qalb Al-Loza in rural Idlib last week. More than
half of the victims were children. The massacre was
carried out because the villagers had refused to recruit
their children into the Al-Nusra terrorist group. In this
connection, our country supports adding the crime of
the abduction of children as a form of grave violation,
identifying those responsible for such crimes and listing
them in the annexes to the report of the SecretaryGeneral. We must recall here that the crimes committed
by Daesh and the Al-Nusra Group have their roots in
the Middle Ages, with the Seljuks, the Ottomans and
the Janissary army.
Despite all of that, the Syrian Government is
making every effort to protect its children from this
terrorist extremist ideology. We have been successful in
reopening 207 schools in the area of rural Hasakah, but
more than 532 schools are still closed because they are
controlled by Daesh operatives. These schools are used
to stockpile weapons. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General is accusing the Syrian Government
of targeting schools without really explaining the
situation or indicating who is using them for terrorist
purposes. The Syrian Government has spared no effort in
fostering cooperation with the Special Representative’s
monitoring and reporting team; we have provided
her Office with fully documented information on the
hundreds of crimes and grave violations committed
by these groups, in the hope that these acts will be
immediately investigated.
Some say that two thirds of the schools that were
destroyed were destroyed by the Syrian Government, as
if they had counted these schools one by one and thus
reached this conclusion. As I mentioned earlier, the
Syrian Government has spared no effort in cooperating
with the Special Representative in the area of monitoring
and reporting. However, we have not seen any effective
or concrete actions to that end.
What is required today is to put an end to the
policies adopted by terrorism-sponsoring Goverments;
some of these countries are members of the Council.
It is also important to take measures to hold these
Governments accountable and to implement the
Security Council resolutions on combating terrorism,
especially resolution 2199 (2015). It is also important
to provide support for the Syrian Government, with a
view to rehabilitating and reintegrating children into

15-1838053/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

their communities. Otherwise, ammunition and fuel for
this war will continue to flow into the country from
outside Syria. New generations within and outside
Syria will be raised against the backdrop of bloodshed
and violence, which will only further the agendas of
terrorist organizations and their backers and prolong
the crisis, which may spread worldwide.
The President: Once again, I wish to remind all
speakers to keep their statements concise, as we are
only halfway through our speakers’ list.
I now give the floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Winid (Poland): Poland aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union. I should like to add a few remarks in my national
capacity.
First, I would like to thank the Malaysian presidency
for organizing this timely and important debate, and I
welcome the adoption of the resolution on the abduction
of children (resolution 2225 (2015)), which Poland
co-sponsored. I also thank today’s briefers, in particular
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
for her moving update.
Children are the ones that suffer most in the course
of and following armed conflicts. Growing up in a
hostile environment has an immense impact on a child’s
health, physical integrity, education and social abilities.
Although there are no exact figures and the
numbers are constantly changing, tens of thousands
of children continue to serve in Government forces or
armed opposition groups. It is high time to intensify
our efforts to suppress this dreadful trend. As the main
initiator of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
adopted almost 26 years ago, Poland is doing its utmost
to raise awareness about children’s rights and ensure
that they are respected in their own countries and
internationally.
In this regard, recently the Polish Government has
provided assistance to a number of Syrian families
suffering from the horror of conflict. As a sign of
solidarity with those persecuted, we have committed to
helping Syrian children resume normal lives in Poland.
I wish to seize this opportunity to extend my warm
thanks to the Governments of Jordan and Lebanon for
their support in the evacuation of Syrian refugees on
route from the conflict area to Poland.

54/96

18/06/2015

Bearing in mind the provisions contained in the
preamble to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and the desire expressed therein for children to grow up
“in a family environment, in an atmosphere of
happiness, love and understanding”,
we are of the opinion that the international community
should undertake all possible steps to eradicate the root
causes and consequences of the involvement of children
in armed conflict.
Comprehensive action plans should be elaborated
to help children recuperate and more effectively adjust
to living conditions during hostilities and in the postwar period. In this context, ensuring universal access to
education must be a priority. Poland is therefore proud
to have been one of the first countries to endorse the
Safe Schools Declaration, signed in Oslo, which aims
to prevent the military use of schools during armed
conflict.
I would like to thank in particular Ms. Zama
Coursen-Neff, director of the Children’s Rights Division
of Human Rights Watch, who is actively promoting the
concept of safe schools. I also thank Ambassador Geir
Pedersen of Norway and Ambassador María Cristina
Perceval of Argentina for their Governments’ leadership
and engagement in promoting this crucial initiative.
We are concerned that in South Sudan, Syria,
the Congo and Mali, children are being abducted or
recruited as soldiers, thus becoming active participants
in armed conflicts. Their recruitment is carried out in
a violent and cruel way. Some of them enter military
service voluntarily, just to escape poverty or protect their
families. In that context, let me recall that resolution 2143
(2014) underscores the importance of mainstreaming
child-protection issues when undertaking securitysector reform, including age-assessment mechanisms
to prevent underage recruitment and the establishment
of child-protection units in national security forces.
Last but not least, it is of the utmost importance, in
our opinion, that all countries sign, ratify and effectively
implement the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict. Along those lines, violators of
those provisions should ultimately face international
accountability mechanisms, such as the International
Criminal Court.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7466

Ms. Lind (Estonia): First, I want to warmly
thank today’s briefers and, in particular, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui, for her briefing and her tireless efforts. We
also thank the Malaysian presidency for organizing this
important debate.

by the conflict. Over 68 children had been killed and
176 wounded in eastern Ukraine as of the end of March
2014, and the actual numbers are probably higher. We
would ask the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict to look into
those grave violations against children in Ukraine.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

We see impunity as clearly one of the main reasons
for the recurrence of those grave violations against
children. It is only by consistent prosecution that we
can deter the commission of such crimes. In order to
achieve that, we reiterate the important role of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in situations where
States are unable or unwilling to bring perpetrators
to justice domestically. In order to make good on
its commitment to deal effectively with persistent
perpetrators, the Council could increase pressure on
them by including violations against children in the
mandate of all sanctions committees and by including
individuals sought by the ICC on sanctions lists. In
the context of today’s discussion, we also welcome
the Court’s efforts in preparing a policy paper on the
protection of children. However, when talking about
accountability, we should not close our eyes to actions
committed by the United Nations system personnel. All
violations by United Nations staff and United Nations
peacekeeping troops need to be addressed.

We would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2015/409), which provides a solid — although
deeply concerning — basis for today’s debate.
It is extremely worrying that violence rose to
unprecedented levels in 2014, leading to a dramatic
increase in grave violations against children. Last
year was full of challenges for the protection of tens
of millions of children growing up in, among other
countries, the Central African Republic, Iraq, Nigeria,
South Sudan, Syria and, most recently, in Yemen, where
the security situation has deteriorated.
We strongly support the initiative of Malaysia to
introduce the abduction of children as an additional
criterion in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s
reports on children and armed conflict. The abduction
of children is unfortunately indeed a prevalent feature
of contemporary armed conflict. It is used as a tactic of
war to terrorize, suppress and humiliate communities.
According to the Secretary-General’s report, in Iraq
and Syria alone, more than 1,000 girls and boys were
abducted by the Islamic State in the Levant in 2014.
In that regard, we welcome the adoption of resolution
2225 (2015) in the Council today, which adds abduction
as a trigger for listing. As a next step, we need to ensure
that child-protection provisions are incorporated in the
most efficient way into peace processes, negotiations
and ceasefires.
A considerable number of violations against
children are carried out by non-State armed groups,
which was one of the focuses of our previous debate
on the subject (see S/PV.7414). We commend the
work of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zerrougui in addressing the challenging task
of engaging with armed groups, and the case-by-case
approach aimed at ending the recruitment and use of
children. However, more needs to be done by all those
concerned.
I would also like to draw attention to the situation
in Ukraine, as 1.7 million children there are affected

Finally, allow me to mention Estonia’s contribution
to the advancement of the children and armed conflict
agenda. We recently supported UNICEF’s work in South
Sudan, the Central African Republic, Gaza, Syria and
Somalia. I am glad to announce that Estonia will support
the Office of the Secretary-General on Children and
Armed Conflict this year with a contribution of €30,000.
Children deserve a safe and happy environment to grow
up in. If the Organization — and by that I mean us,
its Members — can do something to ensure that goal,
we should not hesitate to seize every opportunity to do
so. I hope that today’s debate represents a tangible step
forward in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for allowing my delegation to
speak in this debate.
Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
would like to make the following statement in its
national capacity.

15-1838055/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

My country welcomes the annual report of the
Secretary-General on today’s topic (S/2015/409) and
deplores the fact that armed conflict continues to
affect children disproportionately. In fact, the annual
report notes that we faced unprecedented challenges
in 2014 in attempting to ensure the protection of
tens of millions of children growing up in countries
affected by conflict. One phenomenon that is becoming
increasingly common, according to the report, is
that of the mass abduction of civilians — including
children. The information contained in the report
shows that, given the increased frequency and number
of abductions, children need to be better protected.
Belgium supports the request of the Secretary-General
to the Council to increase the types of tools available,
which include those used by child-protection agencies
to collect and share information on child abductions.
In that regard, Belgium believes that it would be useful
to add the abduction of children as a trigger violation
in compiling the lists annexed to the annual report. For
that reason, my country decided to sponsor resolution
2225 (2015), adopted by the Council today.
The report also shows that children continue to
be victims of rape and other forms of sexual violence.
The impunity that the perpetrators of sexual violence
enjoy remains a subject of deep concern. A climate
of impunity, characterized by a lack of disciplinary
procedures, sanctions and criminal prosecutions,
contributes to creating an environment filled with
risks for children. Belgium wishes to underline the
importance of ensuring effective access to justice for
victims of sexual violence.
In conclusion, we would like to stress that the
indiscriminate use of weapons — including barrel
bombs — is prohibited under international humanitarian
law. We are shocked by the indiscriminate attacks in
civilian areas in Syria, which continue to kill and maim
thousands of people — many of whom are children. In
that context, Belgium would also like to reiterate its
concern over the use of explosive weapons — particularly
in densely populated regions — and calls on all parties
to armed conflict to renounce their use. My country also
calls on those States that have yet to ratify the relevant
international instruments, to do so as soon as possible,
particularly the conventions banning anti-personnel
mines and cluster munitions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.

56/96

18/06/2015

Mr. Schieb (Germany): I thank you, Madam
President, for hosting today’s debate. I also thank all
the participants who have provided us with insightful
briefings. Germany also extends its appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his annual report (S/2015/409).
Germany aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union.
We consider it to be of great value that the Council
continues to pay close attention to the children and
armed conflict agenda. Parties to conflicts that hurt
children for the sake of strategic advantage are guilty of
some of the worst crimes imaginable. The perpetrators
show an abominable degree of treachery and cowardice.
They destroy not only the lives of children but the very
foundation of societies. Germany therefore strongly
believes that it is the Security Council’s responsibility
to firmly oppose such practices wherever they occur.
We need to shed light on those who use and abuse
children in the most horrible ways. We must hold them
accountable and, even more importantly, we must
redouble our efforts to prevent such crimes from being
committed. Germany therefore welcomes the Council’s
decision to list abductions as a trigger for inclusion
in the annex to the Secretary-General’s annual report
(see S/2015/409). As a strong supporter of the children
and armed conflict portfolio, Germany was pleased to
co-sponsor resolution 2225 (2015), adopted today.
Allow me to make three points. First, the SecretaryGeneral’s report notes that the number of abductions
is increasing. That is a matter of great concern, all
the more so because abductions are a precursor to
other grave violations. The heinous abuse of children
at the hands of such terrorist groups as Boko Haram
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
for example, shows this fact clearly. We hope that the
additional trigger and the mechanism associated with
it will be effective in preventing future abductions. We
would find it particularly helpful if the next report of
the Secretary-General indicated where abductions are
occurring beyond the well-known cases in Nigeria, Iraq
and Syria, and away from the media spotlight.
Secondly, we reiterate our call to use the existing
sanctions regimes more effectively to increase
accountability for grave violations against children. The
sanctions committees must define designation criteria
relating to children and armed conflict and encourage
the Special Representative to share information with
them. The Security Council must not shy away from

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

using the information collected through the monitoring
and reporting process.
Thirdly, I would like to point out that those
entrusted with the protection of children must never
become perpetrators themselves. We condemn all
cases of sexual abuse in the context of peacekeeping
missions led or mandated by the United Nations.
We therefore welcome the Secretary-General’s zero
tolerance approach. We call on all troop contributors
and the Secretariat to hold all perpetrators accountable.
We call for stronger internal oversight in the Secretariat
and in its justice mechanisms, and for the protection of
whistle-blowers. We look forward to the results of the
independent external review initiated by the SecretaryGeneral with regard to reported abuse.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow me
to begin by thanking the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Malaysia, His Excellency Mr. Dato Sri Anifah
Aman, for his presence, and to take this opportunity
to congratulate the Ambassador of Malaysia, His
Excellency Mr. Ramlan Bin Ibrahim, for his commitment
and tireless efforts as Chair of the Security Council
Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict. I would
also like to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, for her courage and dedication to the
thorough implementation of her mandate and the high
quality of her report. I would also like to thank the
representative of UNICEF for her briefing.
A year after the launch of the “Children, Not
Soldiers” campaign and 10 years after the adoption
of resolution 1612 (2005), much progress has been
made. Children continue, however, to be the first
victims of conflicts. The year 2014 saw an alarming
intensification and a dangerous recurrence of conflicts,
which are becoming increasingly complex, with
unprecedented forms of violence, destructive effects
and the involvement of violent extremist groups, all of
which has made clear the great vulnerability of tens of
millions of children.
The mass abduction of children by Daesh and
Boko Haram has become an increasingly widespread
characteristic of conflict situations. The whole world,
powerless, frustrated and outraged, is witnessing a
wave of child abductions being systematically used as
a military tactic to terrorize, subjugate and humiliate

S/PV.7466

entire communities. Children are also being abducted
for the purposes of recruitment and exploitation for
all sorts of tasks, including their use as human shields
or as suicide bombers. Many are used as combatants,
messengers, sex slaves, spies or traffickers, or even as
beasts of burden to transport ammunition. Snatched
from normal life, school and the bosom of their families,
they are carried off by armed groups and thrust into a
world of violence and horror. Their abduction is often a
precursor to other grave violations against them, such
as murder, mutilation, recruitment, exploitation and
sexual violence.
Another source of concern is their detention
and the denial of their basic liberty in response to
their presumed association with extremist groups.
Children should be treated as victims. The prohibition
of violence, in particular murder, mutilation, cruel
treatment and torture, against civilians, in particular
children, is a principle of international customary law,
universally applicable to all armed conflicts. The illegal
and arbitrary detention of children is prohibited under
international humanitarian and human rights law.
No cause can justify the abduction of children.
They have the right to be protected at school, at home,
in their environment and in their community. Those
abducted by State or non-State armed groups and
subsequently released have lived through terrible scenes
and psychologically traumatic experiences during
their captivity. How can such children be expected to
get over their suffering, their traumas, and be able to
rebuild their life or start it anew? They need our support
as a matter of priority. As Ms. Zerrougui emphasized
this morning in her statement, the continuation of and
increase in child recruitment in armed conflict, in
particular by jihadi armed groups including the Islamic
State, and the abduction of hundreds of girls by the
terrorist group Boko Haram, demand our attention
and the coordination of the efforts of the international
community.
Morocco condemns in the strongest possible terms
all forms of violence against children, their abduction
by State or non-State armed groups, their use as shields
near arms depots or military camps, their being taken
as hostages or their recruitment at refugee camps.
Morocco also condemns attacks on schools or hospitals
and the use of such facilities for tactical purposes.
It is the international community’s duty to take
strong emergency measures to hold accountable all

15-1838057/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

those who continue to flout international law and
the rules for the protection of children, wherever
they are. The coordination of such efforts among the
various stakeholders in the United Nations system is a
guarantee of effectiveness and success, but the primary
responsibility falls above all on the parties to conflict,
who must comply with their international obligations in
accordance with the resolutions of the Security Council
and the relevant international conventions.
Although today’s debate has the merit of
remobilizing all the stakeholders in the international
community, it must, unfortunately, be acknowledged
that the efforts made so far to end violence against
children and their involvement or use in armed
conflicts are insufficient. My delegation believes that
the international community’s efforts would benefit
from being part of a composite, strategic approach
that not only addresses ongoing conflict situations but
also emphasizes prevention through the establishment
of democracy and the upholding of human rights, the
enhancement of good governance and the promotion
of sustainable development. At the same time, the
approach must be pragmatic, combining incentives
with more binding measures, in particular with regard
to accountability and the struggle against impunity.
Lastly, the resettlement of children who have been
victims of terror and scenes of horror during their
abduction, and their reintegration into society, must be
given a high priority. There is no single solution, but
various methods are effective in reducing, for example,
the number of child soldiers in non-State armed groups,
including the strengthening of the rule of law, the
mobilization of resources for rehabilitation programmes
and the analysis of the social, political and economic
dynamics that result in children allowing themselves
to be enlisted. It is time that crimes committed against
children in armed conflict be considered crimes against
humanity, for children are the future of their nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
I would like to begin by thanking the Malaysian
presidency for enabling us to participate in this debate
on children and armed conflict.
(spoke in English)
In the past year we have seen horrific situations in
armed conflict in which children have been primary

58/96

18/06/2015

targets, particularly for violent extremists, with
abductions, recruitment and the use of child soldiers in
active hostilities and the violent radicalization of youth,
as well as sexual exploitation and abuse which, as we
note with great concern and dismay, has sometimes
been perpetrated by personnel attached to peace
support operations.
The international community was horrified by Boko
Haram’s abduction of 276 schoolgirls in Nigeria in the
spring of last year. Less well known but also deplorable
were the abductions by the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria of 153 Kurdish boys in Syria and hundreds of
Yazidi children in western Iraq, as well as the case of
89 schoolboys kidnapped in South Sudan. While mass
abductions draw the media limelight, hundreds of
children have been abducted by such groups both before
and since those events. Canada strongly condemns the
abductions and calls for the immediate release of all
abducted children without delay. The international
community must work to ensure that the children
receive the support they require and are reunited with
their families immediately.
(spoke in French)
Sadly, abductions are often simply the precursors to
other grave violations such as forced recruitment, forced
conversion and sexual violence. They have especially
horrible consequences for girls, who are exposed to
sexual violence, slavery and forced marriage, as well as
forced recruitment. Furthermore, they face difficulties
once they are released, since they are often the victims
of social stigmatization that hinders their reintegration
into their communities.
We are horrified that armed groups are abducting
children from schools. When parents fear that their
children might be abducted, they are less likely to send
them to school, and the repercussions of that decision
are particularly hard on girls. This is very worrying,
given the fact that education is a very powerful tool for
ensuring the achievement of many development goals,
including improved maternal, newborn and child health
and the eradication of child, early and forced marriage.
(spoke in English)
Canada condemns the unlawful use of schools
by armed parties for military purposes. We call on
all parties to armed conflict to respect international
humanitarian law and refrain from using schools as
bases, barracks, weapons caches or detention centres.

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

We urge Member States to undertake preventive
measures to guard against children’s abductions. We
must hold those who commit abductions to account, and
ensure safe conditions for children who are released.
We therefore welcome the adoption today of resolution
2225 (2015), on abductions, of which Canada was
honoured to be a sponsor.
Ten years ago, the international community
established the monitoring and reporting mechanism on
grave violations against children in situations of armed
conflict, designed to systematically monitor, document
and report on such violations. Canada is proud to have
supported that initiative, and while the problem is far
from solved, we have seen some small glimmers of
hope. This year saw the delisting of Chad, a decline
of violations in countries such as Côte d’Ivoire and the
release of hundreds of child soldiers.
(spoke in French)
Canada was deeply saddened to learn that many
children, both Israeli and Palestinian, were injured
and killed during the conflict that erupted in Gaza
in the summer of 2014, for which Hamas is solely
responsible. As the Secretary-General notes in his
report (S/2015/409), the indiscriminate firing of rockets
by Palestinian armed groups from populated areas
endangered civilian populations in both Israel and Gaza
and led to deaths and injuries among children.
Canada is disappointed, however, that in his report,
rather than calling on all parties to take steps to protect
children affected by armed conflict, the SecretaryGeneral demonstrates an overt bias in singling out
Israel for one-sided and disproportionate criticism.
The fact that 32 paragraphs in the report are devoted
to Israel — giving it far more attention than any other
Member State, including Syria, the Central African
Republic and the Sudan — speaks to the need to provide
a more honest, impartial and balanced view of the
situation on the ground than the one in this document.
This biased view undermines the integrity of such an
important document. Moreover, the United Nations
should better address the significant underreporting of
the deaths of children in situations such as in Syria, so
that Member States can have an accurate view of the
effects on children of that deadly conflict.
(spoke in English)
Any sexual abuse or exploitation is simply
unacceptable. With regard to today’s debate, however,

S/PV.7466

we would like to shine a spotlight on the heinous
practice of targeting children. Canada condemns in the
strongest terms all forms of sexual abuse or exploitation
of children by any party to a conflict. Our country is
committed to ensuring that the rights of children are
protected in all settings, particularly in situations
of armed conflict. I would like to assure the Council
that we will continue to work with all members of the
international community to ensure that all children, all
over the world, have safe spaces in which to grow and
learn. That is our duty and our responsibility.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Riecken (Austria): Austria fully aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier by the observer of
the European Union.
In my national capacity, I would like to thank the
Malaysian presidency of the Council for convening
today’s open debate. Austria welcomes the discussion’s
particular focus and condemns the extremely worrying
rise in abductions of children by parties to armed
conflict, in contravention of the applicable international
law.
We appreciate the Secretary-General’s submission
of his most recent annual report on children and armed
conflict (S/2015/409), including the list of perpetrators
in its annexes. We support his call to the Council to add
abductions as a fifth trigger violation for listing in the
annexes, and therefore welcome today’s adoption of a
resolution (resolution 2225 (2015)) that adds abduction
as a trigger. We also welcome the hard and committed
work of Special Representative Zerrougui, as well as
that of UNICEF, the Departments of Peacekeeping
Operations and Political Affairs and the Resident
Coordinators as co-Chairs of the country task forces,
along with that of the task force members and recognized
partners in the field. Together with the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, chaired by Malaysia,
they implement the Security Council’s well-established
framework for protecting children in armed conflict.
The signing of action plans, especially with
non-State armed actors, which make up the vast majority
of listed parties, must be facilitated and efforts must
made to implement them. The Governments concerned
should play a supportive role in that process and
allow the United Nations access to the relevant areas.
Furthermore, provisions on child protection should be
included in peace talks and agreements. Austria stresses

15-1838059/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

the importance of fighting impunity and ensuring
accountability under national and international
jurisdictions. And we should pay special attention to
the victims of armed conflict, especially girls. Crimes
must not go unpunished, and their effective prosecution
must be ensured through regional justice mechanisms
and the International Criminal Court if efforts at the
national level do not produce the expected results.
Every child should have access to education,
including in regions of armed conflict. Recent events
have shown the timeliness of a focus on protecting
schools against attacks and avoiding their use for
military purposes. Austria actively supported the
consultations on the Safe Schools Declaration, adopted
at the Oslo Conference on Safe Schools at the end of
May. We are pleased to see how many countries have
already endorsed the Declaration and encourage all
other Member States to do so. Furthermore, Austria
urges all parties to armed conflicts to use the Lucens
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict.
We strongly condemn the recruitment of children
by armed forces. We support the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers and
children affected by war and reiterate our commitment
to the 2014 United Nations Children, Not Soldiers
campaign. Monitoring and reporting on the detention
of children for their association with armed forces or
groups must continue. Austria actively supported the
elaboration of the United Nations Model Strategies
and Practical Measures on the Elimination of Violence
against Children in the Field of Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice (General Assembly resolution 69/194,
annex) and calls on Member States to use them.
We commend the Secretariat’s efforts, including
the expert seminars organized in the past two years
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs in London and Oslo, to raise awareness
about the devastating humanitarian consequences of
explosive weapons for civilians, including children,
and to restrict their use in populated areas where they
cause indiscriminate harm. Austria itself will host an
expert meeting in Vienna on 21 and 22 September 2015.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s recommendation
to avoid the use of explosive weapons with wide-area
effects in populated areas and the Secretariat’s efforts
to develop practical measures and guidance to reduce
their humanitarian impact. In that regard, we welcome
the Secretary-General’s initiative to study national

60/96

18/06/2015

practices, and we encourage countries to support him
in that regard.
Finally, we urge Member States who have not yet
done so to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I first wish to thank
Malaysia for organizing this timely high-level debate
and to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and other
speakers for their briefings.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement made
earlier today on behalf of the European Union.
Slovenia shares the concerns expressed by many
other delegations that 2014 was the worst year for the
tens of millions of children affected by conflicts around
the world and deplores all grave violations committed
against them. Children should not be recruited as
soldiers, used as suicide bombers, trafficked or sold
for use in hostilities, forcibly married, raped or used as
sex slaves. They should not serve as deliberate targets
of killing or maiming, including as a consequence of
unexploded remnants or landmines.
My delegation has been very concerned about
the increased prevalence of mass abductions in 2014,
particularly those by extremist groups. Abductions
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and by
Daesh in Syria and Iraq and by Boko Haram in
Nigeria and neighbouring States are just examples of
the most striking cases. Abductions have long-term
consequences, not only for the abducted children and
their families, but for communities. Sometimes, as
outlined in the Secretary-General’s latest annual report
on children and armed conflict (S/2015/409), such
acts also impact national and international peace and
security.
In addition, abductions may trigger the recruitment,
mobilization and indoctrination of children and can
be seen as an early warning signs for mass atrocities.
Those issues were discussed at the conference Rights
for Peace: Challenges and Opportunities, organized by
Slovenia earlier this year. Slovenia therefore welcomes
the Security Council’s decision in resolution 2225
(2015) to add abductions as a trigger for listing parties
in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s annual report.

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

We would also like to reiterate our concern
regarding the increased number of attacks and the
military use of schools in 2014, such as the attacks by
the Taliban in Afghanistan and Pakistan and by Boko
Haram in Nigeria. In that regard, we would like to
recall resolution 2134 (2014) and call on all parties to
the conflict to respect the civilian character of schools
in accordance of international humanitarian law.
On the other hand, we would like to take note with
appreciation of the progress made in 2014 towards ending
and preventing the recruitment and the use of children
by armed forces and groups. We note with appreciation
the progress this Council has made in including issues
of children and armed conflict in country-specific
resolutions, presidential statements, sanctions regimes
and mandates of relevant peacekeeping and political
missions, in the work of the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, and in briefings
to the Council by relevant United Nations stakeholders.
However, there is a gap in the implementation of the
Council’s decisions on the ground. In the 10 years since
the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), the normative
framework on children and armed conflict has been set,
and efforts to transform this framework into actions
by the Council have been addressed. We now need to
translate Council decisions into concrete actions on the
ground. We agree with the Secretary-General’s report
on the need to address the lack of accountability and the
issue of impunity that accompanies it, and we therefore
welcome the inclusion of the call to fight impunity in
resolution 2225 (2015), adopted today. Perpetrators
of such violations must be held accountable in order
to prove that crimes committed against children in
conflict are inadmissible.
Ten years ago, the Security Council adopted that
landmark resolution, 1612 (2005), which established
the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Slovenia has always paid particular attention to the
plight of children affected by armed conflict, especially
their physical and psychosocial rehabilitation. In 2014
and 2015, we have supported projects focusing on the
rehabilitation of children from Ukraine, Belarus and
Palestine, implemented by the International Trust Fund
Enhancing Human Security, which is based in Slovenia.
Finally, let me use this opportunity to encourage
the Security Council to continue to address the issue
of children and armed conflict and to seek the most

S/PV.7466

effective means to improve their situation. The adoption
of a new resolution today is an important step in that
direction, and for that reason, Slovenia was proud to
join other Member States in co-sponsoring it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
congratulate Malaysia on its Council presidency for the
month of June.
Since the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) 10
years ago, the international community has continued
to raise awareness regarding the protection of children
in armed conflicts. Our efforts, however, have often
been hampered by blindness and savagery. In 2014,
we witnessed how countless children were sacrificed
in conflicts for which they were not responsible.
Our concern is that victimizing children is not only
unacceptable in itself but sows the seeds for conflicts
in future generations.
As the “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign, launched
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui and UNICEF, points out, children are not
soldiers. No responsible member of the international
community should use children for military purposes.
Nor should the sacrifice of children be accepted as a
mere unintended consequence of military actions. “An
eye for an eye will make the whole world blind”.
We support the Secretary-General, who stresses our
common humanity and calls upon all Member States not
to lose sight of the vital objective of protecting children,
which is both a moral imperative and a legal obligation.
We also support the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. Accountability
is the key to ending gross violations against children
and preventing their recurrence. Monitoring and
reporting, listing in the Secretary-General’s report,
targeted sanctions and enhanced justice mechanisms
have proved to be effective in seeking accountability.
We welcome resolution 2225 (2015), adopted today,
which includes abductions as a new trigger for listing
in the Secretary-General’s annual report. Enriching
our toolkit for the protection of children is a signal
that our shared vision is expanding, while pressuring
all stakeholders to join us. It is encouraging that, this
year, armed groups in the Central African Republic and
South Sudan have released children under their control.
Extremist groups such as Boko Haram and the Islamic

15-1838061/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

State in Iraq and the Levant, however, are likely to
remain persistent. That is when a more fundamental
and determined approach should be taken.
Lastly, we stress that children cannot be completely
safe from devastating armed conflicts once they break
out. Prevention is the best strategy. As a member of
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Republic of Korea
will continue to make efforts to prevent relapses into
conflict. When prevention fails, a political solution
should be swiftly sought. We should be especially
vigilant with respect to situations in which the
overwhelming sacrifice of children is overshadowed by
the political and military context and perceived as an
inevitable part of armed conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Like
other delegations, Switzerland is deeply concerned by
the scale of violence perpetrated against children.
First of all, the abduction of children is becoming
a war practice used in systematic campaigns of
intimidation and reprisals against civilian populations.
Switzerland is particularly concerned by those
developments, because they are often the precursor
to many other serious violations committed against
children, such as torture, sexual violence and enforced
disappearances.
Switzerland therefore welcomes the decision of the
Security Council to make the abduction of children a
criterion for listing in the Secretary-General’s annual
report on children and armed conflict, and that is why
my country decided to co-sponsor the resolution.
Secondly, many non-State armed groups are
attacking children’s education, either by forcing
children to stop attending classes and to join their
ranks while exploiting them for propaganda purposes
or by misusing educational facilities. Schools should be
safe places where children can learn and should in no
case be used as shields or shelters for combatants. In
that regard, Switzerland welcomes the signing of the
Safe Schools Declaration by 37 States that committed
themselves to ensuring that schools would no longer be
targeted in conflicts.
Thirdly, violations against children by non-State
armed groups remain a major challenge, as others
have already noted. Switzerland believes that it is
urgent to find measures to strengthen compliance

62/96

18/06/2015

with international law by those actors. In that regard,
we welcome the non-paper prepared by France for
the March 2015 debate, which called for Member
States to ensure that in their fight against terrorism
and violent extremism they comply with international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law and that
they avoid criminalizing any contact initiated for
exclusively humanitarian reasons with non-State armed
groups considered extremist. We strongly urge the
international community to support organizations such
as the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Geneva Call, which have direct access to such groups
and which can make a difference through dialogue,
awareness-raising and training aimed at implementing
action plans and at ending violations against children.
Switzerland calls on States to view children
primarily as victims and to draw up measures that
will not adversely affect them, in accordance with
international humanitarian law and human rights. My
country believes that we should avoid the detention of
children suspected of having or determined to have
links to armed groups considered violent extremists.
In addition, the international community should give
higher priority to youth awareness-raising programmes
aimed at the prevention of all forms of extremism and to
include a deradicalization component in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.
Finally, Switzerland believes that the international
community should send a clear signal that there will
be no impunity for crimes committed against children.
While States have the primary responsibility to take the
necessary steps to bring the perpetrators of such acts
to justice, the International Criminal Court, as others
have noted, can play an important role when States are
unable or unwilling to do so,
I cannot conclude my remarks without thanking
Ms. Leila Zerrougui and her team, whose important
work Switzerland thoroughly supports.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. González Serafini (Argentina) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to thank Malaysia for its
initiative in organizing this debate and for the concept
note (S/2015/402, annex) it distributed to guide today’s
discussion. I would also like to acknowledge the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia and to
recognize the work of his country in its leadership of
the Security Council Working Group on Children and

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

Armed Conflict. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his statement and his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, as
well as the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF and
Ms. Eunice Apio, for their briefings.
A few days from now it will be 10 years since the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which Argentina
firmly supported as a member of the Council at that
time. That resolution was particularly significant
because it authorized the creation of an oversight
and reporting mechanism to monitor, document and
systematically report grave violations of children’s
human rights. It also created the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict with
the aim of recognizing, guaranteeing and protecting the
rights of children in situations of armed conflict.
In that framework, it bears repeating that Argentina
decisively supports the work of the Council to prevent,
avoid and halt grave violations of the rights of children
in the context of armed conflicts. That commitment
has been repeatedly demonstrated, as we were one of
the first States to ratify the 2002 Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and to have
actively promoted the adoption of resolutions 1261
(1999), 1612 (2005) and 2143 (2014). By the same token,
we joined in co-sponsoring resolution 2225 (2015),
which the Council adopted this morning.
Moreover, we highlight the progress achieved
in the area of prevention and protection of the rights
of children through the coordinated activities of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
and the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in collaboration with UNICEF and
other United Nations organs. We firmly support the
need to agree and implement measures to increase
the pressure on both State and non-State actors who
continue to commit violations. In that connection,
we repeat that there is need for greater coordination
between the system for the protection of children in
armed conflicts and the different sanctions regimes so
that sanctions can be imposed on the perpetrators of the
most flagrant violations committed against children in
conflict situations.
The protection of children from a human rights
perspective must continue to be our priority. For that
reason, it must be taken into account in defining the
mandates of peacekeeping operations and special

S/PV.7466

political missions, as well as in the Council’s
endeavours in the area of peacebuilding, by integrating
more specialists into the different missions this body
authorizes. It is also important for States in this
Organization to ensure that training and preparation
for the adequate protection of the rights of children in
situations of armed conflict is not limited exclusively
to personnel who are directly responsible for protecting
children on the ground.
In fact, it is vital to incorporate in training
programmes for military, police and civilian personnel
comprising the missions of the United Nations a focus
on human rights and full awareness of the rights of
children and adolescents, as well as knowledge and
understanding of strategies and processes for the
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration of
children in situations of armed conflict. We also agree
on the need to involve various stakeholders in order
to advocate for an end to the involvement of children
in armed forces and groups, including, among others,
human rights activists, teachers, representatives of
civil society, family members, health workers, religious
leaders and other community actors.
Beyond the legal advances on the issue and the
accomplishments of the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, there is still
much room for improvement. We must fight impunity in
an unequivocal way for all those groups or individuals
who commit these crimes. In that connection, this
Council established two international tribunals — those
for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Today we
have a system of international justice for the most
serious crimes, including war crimes, no longer based
on ad hoc tribunals but on a permanent court: the
International Criminal Court established by the Rome
Statute in 1998. In March 2012, the Court issued its
first judgement, which found Thomas Lubanga Dyilo
guilty of the war crime of recruiting children under
15 years to participate in hostilities in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. With that ruling, the Court made
a significant contribution to the doctrine of protecting
children in armed conflicts.
Argentina, like the international community, is
fully aware of the devastating effects on children of
armed conflicts as a result of their recruitment, their
abduction, indiscriminate attacks against civilian areas
or direct attacks against civilians by explosive weapons,
air strikes, or the use of terror tactics that cause an
unbearable number of casualties among children.

15-1838063/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

We recognize the outstanding work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, during the last year, particularly the United
Nations Children, Not Soldiers campaign, to put an
end to the recruitment and use of children by security
forces of Governments in conflict situations before
the end of 2016. We welcome those Governments that
have already joined that campaign to ensure that in the
near future we end the inconceivable practice of having
child soldiers.
In closing, we also express our concern over and
strongly condemn the increasing use of schools for
military purposes and the increase in attacks against
schools and hospitals. We believe this matter merits
particular attention from the international community
since it radically affects the right to education and the
health of thousands of children worldwide. Therefore
Argentina is committed to the process of the Lucens
Guidelines to Protect Schools and Universities from
Military Use during Armed Conflict.
To that end, we wish to highlight in particular
the adoption last May of the Oslo Declaration on Safe
Schools, which was promoted by Norway and Argentina,
among other countries. To date 39 countries have joined
it. That Declaration commits States to implement the
Lucens Guidelines to Protect Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict, thereby
ensuring the right to education and protection of
children and young people in armed conflicts. We call
on States Members of the United Nations, particularly
members of the Council, to endorse the Declaration.
Finally, we stress once again the need to adopt an
unequivocal focus that sees children as victims and not
as perpetrators, because their alleged involvement in
armed conflict has been forced through recruitment,
kidnapping and other methods, including physical,
sexual, psychological and economic violence and
subjection to sexual slavery. In that regard, we wish
to highlight and to welcome the adoption tomorrow
by the General Assembly of a resolution establishing
19 June, the date of adoption of Security Council
resolution 1820 (2008), as the International Day for
the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict. We
believe that the establishment of such an international
day will contribute in a significant way to raising the
international community’s awareness of the need to
combat the crimes of sexual violence in conflict, and
also to provide multisectoral and multidimensional
assistance to victims and put an end to the impunity

64/96

18/06/2015

of the perpetrators of such crimes through an effective
system of accountability before the relevant national
and international legal systems.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mr. Pouleas (Greece): I would like to congratulate
the Malaysian presidency for convening this open
debate on children and armed conflict, a topic which
has been high on the agenda of the Security Council.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative Ms. Leila Zerrougui and the
other speakers for their thought-provoking briefings.
Greece aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union. We would like to
add a few words in our national capacity.
At the outset, allow me to acknowledge the
importance of the monitoring and reporting mechanism
pertaining to mass and grave violations against children
in armed conflict. The latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/409), which lays out gross violations
committed against children in armed conflicts, is
particularly important. Sadly, it includes some of the
worst human rights violations a child could experience,
including death, abduction and forced recruitment,
which take place from Syria and Iraq to Nigeria and
South Sudan.
Among the unprecedented challenges highlighted
in the report, it is particularly alarming that in 2014
there was an upward trend in the abduction of children
by armed groups. Abductions of children have been
used as a tactic to terrorize ethnic groups or religious
communities. In Iraq and Syria, over 1,000 girls and
boys were abducted by the so-called Islamic State. In
Nigeria, Boko Haram abducted hundreds of women and
girls in Chibok. Abductions are often followed by other
grave human rights violations, such as recruitment,
rape or even killing.
It is crucial that abductions are included in the
criteria for listing in the Secretary-General’s report
on children in armed conflict. Greece welcomes and
co-sponsored today’s Security Council resolution
2225 (2015), which adds abductions to the criteria for
including responsible parties in the Secretary-General’s
report. The unanimous adoption of this resolution
is an important step in enhancing the international
community’s ability to face this alarming trend and
to bring perpetrators to justice. However, much more

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

needs to be done to further strengthen international
efforts to protect children in armed conflicts.
It is imperative to ensure that children are able to
grow up in a safe environment, free from exploitation,
abuse and any form of violence. In that connection we
strongly encourage all States to sign, ratify and fully
implement the international human rights framework
for the protection of children, including the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
In Greece, by virtue of national legislation in
2011, the recruitment of children in armed conflicts
constitutes a war crime under the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and is punished as such
by the national judicial system with at least 10 years
of imprisonment. In addition, the competent Greek
authorities are currently elaborating an action plan
on the rights of the child, which has a distinct chapter
on children and armed conflict. More specifically,
an awareness-raising campaign in schools is being
developed, to be launched with a view to organizing
information seminars on the Optional Protocol on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.
Furthermore, Greece was among the 39 countries
that joined the Safe Schools Declaration in Oslo on
29 May, which calls upon parties to an armed conflict to
avoid using educational buildings for military purposes
or making them targets of attack. We believe that the
Safe Schools Declaration provides a concrete way for
countries to commit to protecting children’s education,
even during armed conflict.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that we remain
committed to effectively ensuring respect for and
protection of the fundamental rights of children as
a crucial guarantee for the future of our societies.
My country fully subscribes to the need to intensify
international and regional efforts to strengthen
cooperation in putting an end to the grave violations
against children in situations of armed conflict around
the world.

S/PV.7466

proposals for dealing with non-State armed groups
and their consistent and grave violations of children’s
rights.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement made earlier
by the observer of the European Union and welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2225 (2015) this morning,
which we were glad to sponsor.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on children and armed conflict (S/2015/409) and
to acknowledge the existing list of persistent violators
as a useful tool against those responsible for committing
crimes against children. We fully support the report’s
recommendations.
Croatia welcomes in particular all the efforts of
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, who intensively and tirelessly advocates for
the rights and well-being of children affected by armed
conflict across the globe. Her active engagement in a
case-by-case approach has significantly contributed
to the integration of child protection into a number of
peacemaking activities. While there are no new parties
listed in the report, in our view her role is indisputable
and must be further strengthened.
We share the concern of the Secretary-General
about egregious violations to which children were
subjected during the reporting period, encompassing
also those children who were detained under the
suspicion of being associated with extremist groups.
In that regard, we have to be more than clear — it is
better to say “adamant” — that those children have to
be treated primarily as victims and not as perpetrators.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.

Violations committed against children during
armed conflict are today, more than ever, part of the
changing nature of the armed-conflict landscape.
We are continuously witnessing grave violations of
children’s rights committed by Boko Haram and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, putting children’s
lives in danger and robbing them of their childhood. We
fully condemn the appalling atrocities committed by
Boko Haram, including abductions of girls, as well as
sexual abuse and all other acts of cruelty that directly
or indirectly affect children.

Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I will start by thanking
the Malaysian presidency of the Council for convening
this debate, which provides us with an opportunity
to continue our fruitful debate from March (see
S/PV.7414), when we were glad to contribute concrete

All of those acts represent grave violations
of international human rights and international
humanitarian law. However, due to their extreme nature
and the scale of threat they pose to citizens, they are
also acts of terrorism. In that vein, the real response to

15-1838065/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

this challenge requires serious and broad international
assistance through counter-terrorism measures.
Croatia believes that the mistreatment of children
must be addressed decisively and reiterates its support
for the inclusion of abduction among the listing criteria
in our efforts to ensure that perpetrators are held
accountable. Furthermore, let me once again add our
voice to those demanding that all perpetrators must
be brought to justice, for which we cannot adequately
stress the importance of significantly strengthening
the role of domestic courts. However, it is also of the
utmost importance that the Security Council refer
cases of serious crimes to the International Criminal
Court, in accordance with its supplementary role and
with due regard to the fact that children are specifically
protected by the Rome Statute.
Croatia fully supports the campaign “Children, Not
Soldiers” and its aim to end and prevent recruitment
and use of children by Government armed forces in
conflict by 2016. In that regard, we welcome the results
recently achieved in Myanmar and Chad.
We would also like to use this opportunity to call on
all countries to become party to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, as well as to
support the efforts of Somalia to join the family of the
parties to that Convention.
The issue of the protection of children during armed
conflict needs to remain on the agenda of this body,
with the goal of preventing further child recruitment
as well as to fully reintegrate former child soldiers. In
that regard, we note the tenth anniversary of resolution
1612 (2005), which established the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
which continues to actively contribute to the mission
and vision for a world without child soldiers and without
child abuse in times of conflict.
We pledge here today our full and unequivocal
support to finally bridging the gap between the
commitments towards and the actual practice of
ensuring childhoods free from fear and violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen Phuong Nga (Viet Nam): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the 10 member States of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,

66/96

18/06/2015

the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and my
own country, Viet Nam.
I congratulate you, Madam President, on
Malaysia’s assumption of the Council presidency and
its chairmanship of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. It is indeed a pleasure to see a
fellow ASEAN member steering the work of the
Council. We also commend Malaysia’s initiative to
hold this important debate on children and armed
conflict. We are grateful to the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative and the other briefers for their
comprehensive statements and briefings.
Last year saw unprecedented challenges to the
protection of tens of millions of children in countries
affected by conflicts. Children continue to suffer the
most, especially given the unparalleled rise of violent
extremism. As the Secretary-General states in his
report (S/2015/409), it is an affront to our humanity.
ASEAN is particularly alarmed by the rise in
abduction as a tactic of war. In conflicts across regions,
major armed terrorist groups are now increasingly
employing the abduction of children as a means to
terrorize and indoctrinate and, most worryingly,
to sustain themselves. We therefore commend the
Malaysian presidency for its efforts towards the
Council’s adoption of resolution 2225 (2015) today, to
strengthen measures for protecting children in armed
conflict, including steps to address the issue of the
abduction of children. The resolution also stresses
the importance of strengthening national capacities in
providing protection and relief to all children affected
by armed conflict.
ASEAN shares the view that a comprehensive
approach is needed to protect children in armed conflict,
particularly in addressing the issue of abduction.
While stressing the primary responsibility and
authority of States, ASEAN once again emphasizes the
need to address the root causes of the hardships that
children must bear in situations of armed conflict.
It is also equally important that the Council and the
international community continue their efforts to
address the impacts of armed conflict on children.
ASEAN believes that the inclusion of abduction
as an additional criterion for listing in the annexes of
the Secretary-General’s report could help strengthen
mechanisms for monitoring violations against children.

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

ASEAN also believes that prudence must be
exercised so as to avoid unnecessarily complicating
issues on the ground, especially in situations not on
the agenda of the Council. All listing efforts should be
objective and comprehensive. They should be based on
credible and impartial information, take into account
the efforts made by Member States, and be in line with
the responsibility and authority of States.
Furthermore, in implementing the mechanism and
action plans already in place, it is important that all the
relevant actors are properly informed and coordinated.
Children’s alleged associations with extremist groups
should not be reason to deprive them of liberty. Parties
concerned should also refrain from military actions if
risks to children are associated with such actions.
The Council should also continue to take a
cooperative approach and provide necessary assistance
to relevant parties that are cooperating with the United
Nations through the implementation of action plans to
end grave violation against children in armed conflicts.
In our region, ASEAN has been stepping up
efforts to tackle issues that children are faced with,
at both the national and the regional levels, as well as
in institutional and practical areas. In 2015, ASEAN’s
priority is to strengthen its regional mechanism in order
to give effect to the high-level commitment to make
progress on this issue. The ASEAN Commission for
the Protection and Promotion of the Rights of Women
and Children is now developing a regional plan of
action for the implementation of the Declaration on the
Elimination of Violence against Children, as adopted
at the twenty-third ASEAN Summit in 2014, including
through regional outreach activities. ASEAN has also
consulted and cooperated closely with United Nations
agencies and mechanisms, including UNICEF and the
Secretary-General’s Special Representatives on related
issues.
Much remains to be done, yet there are grounds
for optimism. It goes without saying that since the first
time the Council substantively addressed the issue of
children and armed conflict (see S/PRST/1998/18),
the international community has made great strides
in reducing the suffering that children have to bear in
conflict situations. Awareness on this acute issue has
been raised; institutions have been established; criteria
put forth and initiatives launched and implemented.
ASEAN remains strongly committed to addressing
issues that children are facing, especially in conflict

S/PV.7466

situations. Let us work closely together to ensure a
better future for children, to make sure that children are
not soldiers and not among those who suffer, because
children are our common future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the delegation of
Malaysia on its assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. I also wish to pay tribute to
the Mission of Lithuania for its excellent stewardship
of the Council’s work last month. I would also like to
say how much my country’s delegation appreciates the
annual report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2015/409), which has been presented
to the Council.
We fully align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the League of Arab States. We
also congratulate all Muslims on the celebration of
Ramadan.
A simple glance at the issues debated in the Council
concerning Iraq — the direct threat to international
peace and security, the threats to Iraq’s national unity
and stability, the humanitarian crisis, the issue of foreign
terrorist fighters and the violations of the rights of
women — leads us to note that all of those phenomenons
stem from one single source, namely, terrorism. The
Council and the international community can bear
witness to the fact that Iraq is under threat because of
Daesh. We are all unanimous in recognizing that as an
international problem, because there is an international
coalition that supports Iraq in its efforts to combat that
international terrorist organization, which is putting
the region and even the entire world at risk.
Today we are addressing the issue of the protection
of children in armed conflicts. Regardless of the
reality — there are no actual conflicts in Iraq, because
there are no warring parties — Iraq is suffering
from the scourge of international terrorism, which
is affecting all of its citizens. The crimes committed
by Daesh fall under the six categories of the grave
violations identified by the Security Council, namely,
the killing and maiming of children, the recruitment
and use of children as soldiers, sexual violence against
children, attacks on schools and hospitals, the denial of
humanitarian assistance and the abduction of children.
Daesh has also carried out the displacement of and

15-1838067/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

trafficking in Iraqi children in the regions under its
control.
My country’s delegation would like to make the
following comments concerning the portion relating
to Iraq in the report of the Secretary-General. My
country’s delegation subscribes to the report’s finding
that underscores the exacerbation of the level of
violence in my country beginning in the second half
of 2014. There was, indeed, during that period an
unprecedented increase in accidents and security
incidents and violence targeting civilians in general
and children in particular, owing to the barbaric attacks
perpetrated against a large portion of my country by
the Daesh terrorist organization, especially after Daesh
occupied the city of Mosul and other Iraqi cities and
towns. Daesh has committed the worst crimes and
attacks against Iraqi children, which has reached
alarming levels in their cruelty and criminality and can
be classified as crimes against humanity, in accordance
with the reports drafted by the competent international
bodies.
Daesh has also targeted the educational sector in
many ways. It has closed many schools and put them
to use for their criminal ends. It has also changed the
educational curriculum by adding subject matter that
fuels hatred and incites violence and extremism and
terrorism so as to influence the beliefs and values of
children through miseducation and prepare them to
accept terrorist and extremist ideas with a view to
creating a new generation of terrorists and murderers.
Daesh recruits children by force to commit acts
of war in the service of that terrorist organization by
carrying out widespread brainwashing operations in
order to use children at a later point for suicide attacks
and in other acts of war and terrorist acts. Beyond the
above-mentioned crimes, the attacks by Daesh against
peaceful Iraqi cities have led to the greatest wave of
internal displacement that Iraq has ever experienced, as
civilians have fled the terrorist cruelty of Daesh. That
has increased the suffering of children in Iraq, who
have become displaced persons and have been deprived
of their education and a peaceful life in their cities.
The Government of my country affirms its
appreciation for the role played by the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict and its role in monitoring
of the situation of children in armed conflict and
protecting them from the horrors of war. However,

68/96

18/06/2015

we would like to express our reservations concerning
certain paragraphs in the report that do not faithfully
reflect the current reality in Iraq and that weaken the
international front of solidarity aimed at combatting
terrorism, as they lack precision and objectivity. In
fact, we have sent an official letter in that regard to the
Under-Secretary-General.
The Iraqi Government, has done its best, within its
resource constraints, to ensure the protection of children
and to promote their rights. The Iraqi law on military
service punishes anyone who uses children under 18 in
the military for any reason, because this deprives them
of their childhood. We would like to underscore that
three days ago, the Iraqi entity that deals with issues
related to children, under the leadership of Mr. Haider
Al Abadi, held a conference with broad participation
at the regional and international levels, including the
United Nations and other international organizations
involved with children, on the protection of children.
The conference focused on the need to move children
far away from conflict zones and to prevent their
recruitment in Iraq, highlighting the forced recruitment
of children by Daesh in the areas that they control.
Iraq also extended an official invitation to Ms. Leila
Zerrougui to attend the meeting.
To conclude, my delegation would like to reaffirm
that Iraq is currently the victim of the most horrific
attacks that this society has ever seen. Daesh is seeking
to change human values, thoughts and ideas to make
them extremist and barbaric, thereby victimizing all
of society. It is also trying to put an end to all of the
national and regional relationships on which Iraqi
society has always been based, as peaceful coexistence
was always its fundamental pillar.
We would therefore ask the international community
to support all of the segments of Iraqi society in foiling
these barbaric attacks, so that Iraqi children can return
to their families and live in dignity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me first thank Malaysia
for having convened this open debate and express my
delegation’s warm welcome to His Excellency Dato Sri
Anifah Aman, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia.
We also thank the Secretary-General and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, along with the Deputy Executive

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

Director of UNICEF and the Director of Facilitation for
Peace and Development, for their presentations.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of Viet Nam, on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and that to
be made later by the representative of Kuwait, on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
We have listened attentively to all of the
presentations made here in the Security Council today.
Clearly, children should never have to be the victims,
or bear the burden, of a conflict that they did not create
or choose to be part of. With no power to escape,
many children have been taken away forcefully from
their families and communities by State or non-State
actors and placed in life-threatening situations. It
is a shock to our conscience when we hear that child
abduction is being used systematically as a tool of war,
with the intention of spreading fear and subduing and
humiliating entire communities. Many of these children
are forced to become child soldiers. They are also
forced to become tactical agents. Girls face a greater
risk compared to boys, as they are often specifically
targeted for abduction, sexual slavery and forced
marriage. Worse yet, girls are abducted for trafficking
as well.
In the light of these violations, Indonesia condemns
child abduction in armed conflict and is deeply troubled
by the increasing number of such cases recently.
Indonesia joins the international community in calling
for the immediate release of abducted children, without
preconditions.
Indonesia also stresses the need for a more vigorous,
sustained, coordinated and well-supported endeavour,
firmly rooted in international humanitarian law, refugee
law and human rights law, aimed at protecting children,
who are disproportionately affected in armed conflicts,
including as victims of abduction. Clearly, the Security
Council has a critical role in this undertaking.
Given the present situation, we would like to share
some of our views on this issue.
First, it is critical to ensure that the emerging trend
of child abduction in armed conflict is not perpetuated.
All perpetrators, regardless of their status as State
or non-State actors, should be held accountable for
gross violations of human rights and humanitarian
law. It is imperative that the Security Council and
other international organizations take all measures

S/PV.7466

necessary to ensure that parties to armed conflicts
simply — I repeat, simply — comply with international
humanitarian laws and standards.
Secondly, children associated with armed groups
or forces should be first and foremost treated as
victims. Efforts should be focused on their effective
rehabilitation and reintegration into society. In this
regard, any legal process against child soldiers or
children associated with armed groups, in our view,
should apply strictly a restorative-justice paradigm.
We should also acknowledge that hunger, poverty,
discrimination and marginalization may lure children
to return to armed conflicts voluntarily. They will
become a threat to fragile peace deals when they feel
that they are not accepted in society and know nothing
but violence as a way of life.
Thirdly, we support the idea of further expanding
the normative framework for the protection of children
in armed conflict by adding abduction as a criterion for
listing those parties that violate international norms.
Fourthly, we support the ongoing movement to
strengthen the international framework with a view
to preventing the military use of schools during
armed conflict. In this regard, we welcome the recent
convening of the Oslo Conference on Safe Schools.
Fifthly, we recognize the importance of establishing
a mandatory pre-deployment requirement for childprotection training for all countries contributing troops
to United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Sixthly and lastly, we believe that the international
community, in particular the United Nations, should
invest more resources in and devote greater attention to
conflict prevention, as this is the best way of protecting
children from armed conflict.
In addition, enhanced efforts to strengthen the
normative and operational framework for protecting
children in armed conflict should be made, even in time
of peace, including by building national capacities and
institutions and by sensitizing the public at large to the
issues. Indonesia will continue to put a high priority on
safeguarding children.
In conclusion, it is our collective duty to put an end
to the nightmares and the suffering of child victims of
armed conflict. Their place is in the peaceful setting
of their homes and communities, with other children

15-1838069/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

in classrooms, and living a carefree childhood without
knowing the fear of being abducted.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Uruguay would like to thank and
congratulate Malaysia on its assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month and for the
presence of its Minister for Foreign Affairs here today.
We would also like to echo congratulations to Malaysia
on organizing this open debate on children and armed
conflict, focused, in particular, on the abduction of
children by armed groups and armed forces, and the
detention of children accused of having links with
armed groups and forces. We welcome the statement by
the Secretary-General and the briefings by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and the Deputy Executive Director
of UNICEF.
Today’s debate reasserts the commitment of the
Security Council to defend the rights of children and
the Council’s conviction that there is an urgent need to
adopt measures to protect their rights and their lives in
view of the recent violations of those rights by armed
groups. In that regard, Uruguay expresses its full
support for resolution 2225 (2015) adopted today.
For Uruguay, the protection and promotion of
human rights, and particularly those of children, are a
key priority of our domestic and international policies.
That is demonstrated by Uruguay’s commitment to the
work under way, in particular by the adoption, each
year, of resolutions on the rights of the child here in
New York and in Geneva, where traditionally we have
played an active role, and also by my country’s ongoing
concern for the unqualified respect for the rights
of children — particularly their right to education.
We have, accordingly, condemned the use of schools
and other education centres for military purposes. In
that regard, Uruguay is one of 38 countries that has
supported the Safe Schools Declaration. It is essential
that States implement the standards of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and its additional protocols,
as well as other international relevant conventions.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which established a
monitoring and reporting mechanism to report on this
type of violations of children’s rights. However, over
the past five years, there has been a significant increase

70/96

18/06/2015

in those crimes in countries unable to prevent them.
The situation worsened during 2014 with the continuing
growth in violence and the participation of armed
groups in areas of conflict. I am referring in particular
to the Central African Republic, Iraq, Nigeria, Syria,
Palestine, South Sudan, Yemen and Afghanistan.
Armed groups now resort to the mass abduction of
children with greater ease and frequency. Moreover,
the situation has worsened because such groups have
not limited themselves merely to the recruitment of
children, but also have committed the gravest abuses
and most aberrant violations of the rights of the children
whom they have abducted. From The statistics provided
by the Secretary-General in his annual reports show
that between 2002 and 2014 more than 24,420 children
were abducted. That should be seen as an approximate
number, and it would appear that the actual figure is
much greater. Accordingly, we need to obtain more
accurate information regarding such cases.
We know that approximately 95 per cent of
abductions are carried out by non-State armed groups.
Those groups must be fought and eradicated. That is the
only solution, given their espousal of extreme violence,
which includes, among other abuses, using abducted
children as suicide bombers or as human shields;
recruiting them as soldiers; and coercing them into
work or sexual slavery — all of which is committed
barbarously and with total impunity. One need only
mention the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria’s treatment
of girls as currency and in forced marriages.
Despite the legal framework and global tools
available to deal with such violence, there is still
no effective implementation of those tools in the
domestic legislation of countries, as well as a lack of
the necessary cooperation at the regional level. There
will be no lasting solution until those problems are
solved. States must be accountable in their obligation
to protect the people under their sovereignty, and we
must punish those groups operating within States
who are responsible for the serious violations of the
human rights of children. Such violations should be
considered crimes against humanity and be condemned
and punished accordingly. Abductions should serve as
a trigger for an adequate response by the international
community — including the adoption of sanctions and
an increase in cooperation aimed at combating them.
In addition to the situation that we just referred
to, the numerous arrests of children for their actual

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

or alleged membership or association within armed
groups are also of utmost concern to the international
community. It presents a challenge for Member States
and for agencies responsible for protecting children. For
my country, combating sexual violence during armed
conflict is of the highest priority. As we have mentioned
earlier, Uruguay participates in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of Congo and contributes approximately
1,000 troops for the protection of civilians there.
Members of the Joint Protection Teams are used to
monitor and address violations of human rights in
remote regions. Those peacekeepers collaborate with
civil-society associations and provide various types of
support, including the supply of food and water, as well
as medical care. They also conduct patrols to prevent
the rape of women and girls in remote locations.
It is vital that we reinforce the Organization’s and
the Security Council’s actions aimed at confronting the
impunity enjoyed by armed groups that are responsible
for the abduction of children, and that we improve the
legal protection for children, as well as their human
rights. Accordingly, my delegation urgently calls for
the adoption of appropriate measures, such as sanctions
and the improvement of cooperation at the regional
level.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Panama.
Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank Malaysia for presiding over the
Security Council this month and for having convened
this open debate on an issue of such great importance
to the international community as children and armed
conflict.
It is of great concern to see the increase in armed
conflicts and humanitarian crises throughout the
world, conflicts in which boys and girls continue to
be used as soldiers. While some have been able to
escape the violence with their families, many of them,
unfortunately, remain under threat, putting their entire
future in jeopardy. Both girls and boys are used as
tools of war, and they are exposed to sexual violence,
psychological trauma, abduction, recruitment, and
other violations of their human rights. For those boys
and girls, their hopes for a dignified life by 2030 will
not be achieved.
We welcome the initiatives taken by UNICEF,
the United Nations Population Fund, UN-Women and

S/PV.7466

other United Nations agencies in addressing this issue.
In particular, we commend the work of Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, as well as all
the other actors involved in implementing the Security
Council mandate for the protection of children in armed
conflict and in ensuring an effective and comprehensive
follow-up to the reporting mechanism.
We must stand firm if we wish to permanently
eliminate the recruitment of children in armed conflict.
While children have no voice in political conflicts, they
have the most to lose. This past week saw the publication
of a report by the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations, which bears a close connection
with the subject at hand. It recommended prohibiting
the sending of peacekeeping troops from countries
currently on the lists in the Secretary-General’s annual
reports on children and armed conflict and conflictrelated sexual violence, as long as they remain on the
list. We believe that the establishment of accountability,
the elimination of impunity, and the imposition of
prosecution and penalties are important in efforts
to proceed against all those who commit violations
against children. National justice systems, regional
and subregional cooperation and the international
community should ensure that such proceedings take
place. Political will, the implementation of initiatives
to protect children affected by armed conflict and the
establishment of protection mechanisms are essential
to the prevention of violations against children and the
recovery of children affected by armed conflicts, and it
is our responsibility as States to play that role.
I am pleased to announce that Panama has taken
the decision to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration,
presented on 29 May at the Oslo Conference on Safe
Schools: Protecting Education from Attack, since there
are 28 million children in conflict areas today who
cannot go to school, and, according to the Conference’s
2014 report, “Education under Attack”, schools have
been attacked in 70 countries. We call on those Member
States that have not yet done so to join this initiative. We
wish to reiterate our commitment to the global effort to
protect students, teachers, schools and universities by
supporting the Declaration.
Lastly, we support resolution 2225 (2015) on
children and armed conflict, introduced today by the
representative of Malaysia under the agenda item, a
resolution of which we were a sponsor and which seeks
to strengthen efforts to address the abduction of children

15-1838071/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

in armed conflict. We would reiterate the primary role
of States in protecting and assisting all the children
concerned. We hope through such tangible efforts to
reverse the tragic upward trend in the recruitment of
children in armed conflicts and at the same time to
focus on ensuring that those children can participate
in the reconstruction of their communities and States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): At the outset, let me
thank Malaysia for organizing today’s open debate and
express my appreciation for the work and dedication
of today’s briefers, the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Ms. Yoka Brandt and Ms. Eunice
Apio, not only for their presentations but also for the
work they are doing on behalf of children in the most
challenging situations imaginable. Slovakia wishes
to align itself with the statement made earlier by the
representative of the European Union. We welcome the
adoption of resolution 2225 (2015), which we proudly
co-sponsored; it is designed to strengthen efforts to
address the abduction of children and to reaffirm
measures for the protection of children in armed
conflict.
Not long ago, in March, we gathered here in the
Security Council Chamber to seek to put an end to what
has unfortunately become a daily reality for millions of
children in conflict-affected areas (see S/PV.7410). Less
than three months later, we are back here discussing the
issue again. One could, of course, ask whether twice in
three months is not too often. Unfortunately, it is not.
As stated in the Secretary-General’s recently published
report on children and armed conflict (S/2015/409),
“There were unprecedented challenges in 2014
with regard to the protection of tens of millions
of children growing up in situations affected
by conflict ... Mass abductions of civilians,
including children, have become an increasingly
prevalent feature of conflict in many situations ...
The abduction of children had primarily been a
precursor to other violations, such as killing and
maiming, recruitment and use, or sexual violence”.
That is the unfortunate reality, 10 years after the
Security Council adopted its resolution 1612 (2005),
on children and armed conflict, and now the topic has
become a regular item on the Council agenda.

72/96

18/06/2015

Allow me to point out another area of concern:
terrorism and violent extremism. That threat to
children has at least three dimensions. First, children
have become deliberate targets, often subjected to
extreme violence ranging from sexual abuse and forced
marriage to kidnappings and brutal killings. Secondly,
they have become weapons, made to fight alongside
armed groups and at times used as human bombs.
Twenty-seven suicide attacks were reported in the first
five months of this year, and it is an even more tragic
fact that women and children carried out three quarters
of those attacks. Thirdly, many children have become
trapped in the web of terrorist narratives. It is the
younger generation that most actively uses the Internet
and social networks. At the same time, it is the Internet
and social media that serve to spread such narratives
and lure young people into the ranks of terrorists and
violent extremists.
Our response must be strong, targeted and
comprehensive. We must continuously focus on children
and teenagers. We must approach them at a very early
stage in a manner with which they are familiar and using
language they understand — and they most certainly do
not understand the language of bureaucracy, especially
not that of international bureaucracy. We must give
them genuine prospects for their future and banish the
false dreams of terrorist propaganda, which very often
turn into nightmares.
I would like to point out four areas on which to
concentrate in order to improve the situation of children
in armed conflict. The first is peacekeeping and child
protection. Let me highlight the critical importance of
providing military, police and civilian peacekeepers
with adequate pre-deployment and in-mission
training on mission-specific child-protection issues.
Priority should be given to combating all types and
forms of sexual violence committed against children.
The inclusion of child protection in the training of
peacekeepers, the mandates of crisis-management
operations, standard operating procedures and rules of
engagement should be mandatory for all uniformed and
civilian peacekeeping personnel.
The second area is the restoration of justice and
security. That is a key aspect of post-conflict recovery and
peacebuilding. Countries in post-conflict development
must, with the help of the international community, take
concrete steps to address the restoration of justice and
security, and demonstrate their commitment to the rule
of law and to the vital democratic principle of civilian

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

control of the armed and security forces. Among many
other factors, properly tailored security-sector reforms
affect the safety and security of children and youth. In
its resolution 2143 (2014) on children and armed conflict,
the Security Council expressed the clear conviction that
“the protection of children in armed conflict should be
an important aspect of any comprehensive strategy to
resolve conflict and build peace”.
The third area is the establishment of childprotection units in national security forces. We must
go far beyond a zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse in such forces. Units should be
trained how to address child and youth issues in the
traumatic post-conflict period.
The fourth area is education and communication. In
order to raise young people who are resistant to extremist
ideologies, we should handle our communication
strategies better and implement “educate-to-tolerate”
curricula so as to form a generation that will view
social diversity as a natural environment to live in.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Kabentayev (Kazakhstan): I thank the
presidency of Malaysia for drawing attention to
the need to protect children from violence, abuse,
detention and, in particular, forced disappearance and
abduction during armed conflicts, all of which assumed
unprecedented and alarming proportions last year. My
delegation commends the Security Council and its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict for
their attention to and progress in reducing the number
of war crimes against children.
As the horror and frequency of such crimes intensify,
however, with ever larger numbers of children becoming
victims, it is imperative that we respond more speedily
than we have done so far, both to new, emerging crises
and to protracted, worsening conflicts. Kazakhstan is
a staunch supporter of and committed to the rigorous
implementation of international humanitarian, humanrights and criminal law, and would therefore like to
present the following points for consideration.
First, the issue of children in armed conflict needs
to be better integrated into the Council’s countryspecific work, and a child-protection mandate must
be incorporated into all peacekeeping missions, with
an officer delegated for that purpose. Such a directive
can be effective only if troops, police and civilian

S/PV.7466

personnel on the ground receive adequate orientation,
as well as prior training in their home countries before
deployment. Our efforts would have better results if
there were greater coordination between the Security
Council, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and the regional structures and United Nations country
teams on the ground.
All Member States should endorse and implement
UNICEF’s “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign, for,
as Human Rights Watch estimates, nearly 300,000
children are serving as child soldiers for Government
forces and rebel groups in armed conflicts around the
world. Statistics also indicate that as many as 70 per
cent of the soldiers in some armed groups are children,
with girls also recruited, though mainly as sex slaves.
The abduction of children should therefore be added as a
new trigger for inclusion in the annexes to the SecretaryGeneral’s reports, along with the other four triggers:
recruitment, sexual violence, killing and maiming
and attacks on schools and hospitals. Furthermore, all
perpetrators must be brought to justice through stricter
enforcement of the Rome Statutes when countries are
unwilling or unable to protect children. Countries that
are powerless need regional and international support
and capacity-building on several fronts, including the
military, the promotion of good governance and the
rule of law.
My delegation applauds the work of the Watchlist
on Children and Armed Conflict and other human
rights defenders of children and endorses the proposals
they have made, i.e., recommending that the SecretaryGeneral include in the annexes to his report those
actors in a conflict who engage in abductions of
children, and that all parties to a conflict should treat
children as victims, ensuring first of all their full
treatment, rehabilitation and reintegration into society.
Furthermore, every effort should be made to prevent
attacks on educational institutions and end the military
use of schools; that requires calling on conflicting
parties to uphold the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration.
There must also be a greater concerted effort to hold
security-sector actors in conflict zones accountable for
effectively protecting children and to ensure that the
United Nations national action plans are adopted.
In conclusion, Kazakhstan, in upholding the rights
and dignity of the child, will join the international
community in supporting the safe and secure protection

15-1838073/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

of children, who are the most vulnerable group of all in
armed conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Ms. Yparraguirre (Philippines): The Philippines
congratulates Malaysia on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council this month and appreciates
its initiative in organizing today’s debate on children
and armed conflict.
The Philippines aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the Permanent Representative of
Viet Nam on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.
As a manifestation of the steadfast commitment of
the Philippines to the protection of children, especially
in situations of armed conflict, our Government
continues to take steps in that area with the cooperation
and support of various agencies in Government, civil
society and our partners in the United Nations system.
Last year, after 40 years of bloody conflict and 16 years
of a difficult peace process, the Government concluded
peace negotiations with the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front (MILF) and signed a comprehensive agreement on
the Bangsamoro. Draft legislation designed to become
the legal framework and governing law for the new
Bangsamoro entity is now under consideration in the
Philippine Congress. Last Tuesday we implemented the
first phase of the decommissioning of MILF combatants
and their firearms. With those confidence-building
developments, we now have lasting peace in the
southern Philippines within our grasp, so that our
children may wake each day and end each day in a safe
and peaceful environment whether they are at home, at
play or at school.
Council members will recall that in 2009 the MILF
signed a United Nations action plan aimed at addressing
the issue of the Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces’
recruitment and use of child soldiers. That agreement
was renewed in 2013, and UNICEF’s child-protection
specialist based in the southern Philippines remains
confident that the MILF will continue to cooperate
in order to secure its removal from the list of groups
that exploit children in armed conflict. UNICEF has
also completed its orientation and training on child
rights across 31 MILF base commands and seven
front commands in Mindanao for Bangsamoro Islamic
Armed Forces commanders and troops. We hope that
the second phase of the action plan, which seeks to

74/96

18/06/2015

implement a communication campaign, will get under
way soon. Other activities under the action plan, such
as ensuring the United Nations unhindered access for
verification purposes and separating former MILF
combatants found to be under 18 years of age, will also
continue.
In his report (S/2015/409), the Secretary-General
notes a decline in cases of child-soldier recruitment in
the Philippines, from 20 in 2013 to seven in 2014. The
Philippine Government is continuing to work hard to
bring that number down to zero. On behalf of the armed
forces of the Philippines, it has submitted a strategic
plan on preventing and responding to grave children’s
rights violations in situations of armed conflict, as well
as a draft circular on child protection during armed
conflict situations. It has also issued guidelines for
the conduct of activities by the armed forces of the
Philippines inside or within the premises of schools and
hospitals.
In that context, the Department of Education
of the Philippines has implemented its guidelines
on the protection of children during armed conflict
by requiring school heads, as well as teaching and
non-teaching personnel, to report within 24 hours any
information about or incident of grave child-rights
violations to the Council for the Welfare of Children,
providing information on the date, time and location
of the incident, the name, number, gender and age of
the children affected and the armed groups involved.
We have also established an inter-agency committee
on children in armed conflict, which serves as a
monitoring, reporting and response system on grave
child-rights violations in situations of armed conflict.
The team works with the United Nations Development
Programme as part of the technical working group of
the United Nations country task force on monitoring
and reporting grave child-rights violations in armed
conflicts.
The Philippines remains committed to keeping our
children safe and will continue to engage and cooperate
with all stakeholders in the prevention of grave childrights violations, as well as in monitoring, reporting
and responding to such violations committed in the
context of armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Laram (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking Malaysia for focusing

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

its presidency of the Council on the suffering of the
millions of children affected by conflict, and for its
efforts as Chair of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. I would like to thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Malaysia for presiding over today’s
debate and participating in it. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, the Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF and the Director of the Facilitation
for Peace and Development organization for their
valuable participation. We align ourselves with the
statements delivered on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and the Group of Arab States. We
commend the Council’s adoption of resolution 2225
(2015) on children and armed conflict, of which Qatar
was a sponsor.
Despite all relevant Council initiatives and
resolutions, the Secretary-General’s recent annual
report on children and armed conflict (S/2015/409)
highlights the fact that 2014 witnessed unprecedented
challenges with regard to the protection of tens of
millions of children who are growing up in areas affected
by conflict and where mass abductions of children have
become a prominent feature. The documentation of
human rights violations during conflicts is important.
However, such documentation will not be as beneficial
as it should be if it is not complemented by the
enforcement of laws and by intensive, comprehensive
and coordinated efforts to prevent future violations and
to achieve accountability.
My country believes in the importance of
education, which can have a positive impact on
children’s sound upbringing, free from extremism or
violence. For that reason, during times of crisis, we
have placed the utmost importance on the education of
children, an interest that has been materialized in the
establishment of our Education Above All foundation,
which is Qatar’s global initiative to provide educational
opportunities to societies that suffer from poverty and
conflict. The foundation’s programmes include an
international initiative, Educate a Child, implemented
in cooperation with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, which aims to provide
high-quality primary-school education to children all
over the world and to empower children in conflict
areas. We actively participated in the Oslo Conference
on Safe Schools: Protecting Education from Attack,
held in May. We also supported the Oslo Declaration on
Safe Schools, out of our belief that education is of the

S/PV.7466

utmost importance, in accordance with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which stipulates that
everyone has the right to education.
We reiterate the call to continue to prevent attacks
against schools and to put an end to their use for
military purposes, in accordance with the provisions
of international humanitarian law, human rights law
and the relevant Council resolutions. We commend
the important role of the Global Coalition to Protect
Education from Attack in its efforts to develop
guidelines for protecting schools and universities
from being used for military purposes during armed
conflicts.
The Secretary-General’s annual report highlights
the grave violations against children in various parts of
the world resulting from attacks by warring parties. We
are especially concerned about the violations against
children in the occupied Palestinian Arab territories and
in Syria, which are detailed in the report. Children will
continue to suffer and be victimized if the international
community does not resolve those conflicts. In that
regard, all parties that perpetrate such violations must
be held accountable, so that we can end the loss of
children’s lives and provide reparations to victims.
In conclusion, the world has realized that building
safe and stable societies and achieving security and
civility in the world must begin with protecting and
providing children with a sound and safe environment.
Hence, we are facing a test of our ability to honour
and implement the international conventions and
instruments adopted by the international community if
we really want to maintain international security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): We would
like to reiterate our congratulations to Malaysia on
its presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Madam President, we know that Malaysia has all
the requisite qualities to conduct a debate on this
issue, namely, the fate of children in armed conflict.
Furthermore, my country’s delegation would like to pay
tribute to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and the Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF for their briefings. We also pay
tribute to the Malaysian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Anifah Aman.

15-1838075/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

The Sudan aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the Arab States. We welcome the fact that
resolution 2225 (2015), adopted this morning, mandates
that those parties responsible for abductions are to
be listed in the annex of future annual reports of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.
The rights of children are a priority for the Sudanese
Government. Proof can be seen in the Government’s
measures and progressive steps, of which I would like
to cite a few examples.
First, in terms of our international commitments,
my country’s Government has ratified the optional
protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child — the Optional Protocol on the involvement of
children in armed conflict and the Optional Protocol
on the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography. My Government has also ratified the
two relevant Conventions of the International Labour
Organization related to children, No. 182 of 1999, on
the worst forms of child labour, and No. 138 of 1973,
on the minimum age for admission to employment and
work. We supported and took part in the ceremony that
launched the “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign on the
issue of children and armed conflict, organized by the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and UNICEF.
Secondly, in our national legislation, the code for
the police, the security forces and the armed forces
prohibits the recruitment of those under the age of 18.
We also have a justice system for young people, and a
2010 law that deals with child employment. A number
of measures in the justice system cover minors. In
regard to the mechanisms for the protection of children,
the Sudanese Government has established a special unit
within the armed forces to protect children.
Thirdly, in the Ministry of the Interior, we have
established a National Council for Child Welfare. The
Prosecutor General is responsible for dealing with
crimes committed in Darfur, for instance, and has
acted on all allegations since 2003, particularly the
violations of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
In addition, we have established a commission on the
recruitment of children in the Darfur and Blue Nile
provinces. In July 2014, we developed a 10-year plan to
promote and protect the rights of the child in the Sudan.
Fourthly, in terms of our cooperation with United
Nations agencies responsible for the rights of the child,
the Sudanese Government, through its Permanent

76/96

18/06/2015

Mission to the United Nations, remains in contact with
the Offices of the Under-Secretary-General, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict, and UNICEF when dealing with
concerns regarding children. My Government is
continuing its efforts to promote the status of children.
The National Council for Child Welfare in the Sudan has
established a national coordination committee and a task
force on the status of children in emergency situations,
which deals with all issues related to children. Among
the committee’s mandates is the protection of children
in emergency situations and the coordination of issues
with UNICEF and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
In that regard, the National Council for Child
Welfare in the Sudan organized a seminar on national
cultures and their impact on the protection of children,
particularly with regard to the recruitment of children
in armed conflicts. Furthermore, the various players in
that area are striving to complete the final work plan
on the protection of children in armed conflicts. In the
light of those policies and the specific steps we have
taken with regard to children, we call for the Sudan to
be removed from the listing in the annex to the latest
report of the Secretary-General on the situation of
children in armed conflict.
I would like here to categorically refute and reject
the contents of paragraph 183 of that report, which
contains errors that lead to confusion. The paragraph
is based on naive accusations that were broadcast by
Radio Dabanga about the village of Thabit last October.
We categorically reject that information. We would like
to remind members of the Council of the documentary
evidence that has been presented in that regard and
which should put an end to those lies once and for all.
Those accusations were very naive and superficial lies.
No one with the least experience in the traditions of
those nomadic and rural communities could believe
such erroneous information. Members will recall that
that radio station is simply a source of lies and is used
as a tool by the armed groups that reject peace, with its
headquarters in the Netherlands. UNAMID visited the
area and issued a report in November 2014 that refuted
the allegations. We wish, therefore, for this newer
information to be reflected in the Secretary-General’s
report, because the Secretary-General’s reports to the
Council must be based on correct, verified information
and not on rumours. Furthermore, there is no link
whatsoever between that information and the mandate

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

of Ms. Zerrougui. The same information appeared
in the Secretary-General’s report on sexual violence
(S/2015/203), which was submitted to the Security
Council in April. That constitutes duplication, because
there are two offices presenting separate reports on
the same issue, both of which were submitted to the
Security Council. So, is that not duplication?
There are also contradictions in the report. I am
speaking here of paragraph 174. Although there has
been no new case of recruitment by the Sudanese Army,
the United Nations received reliable reports indicating
that the Popular Defence Force was recruiting and using
children; however, the Popular Defence Force referred
to in that paragraph has now become an integral part
of the Sudanese Armed Forces, and they assume the
same responsibility as our armed forces. That has been
the case for years. It is not a new fact. Furthermore,
eyewitnesses suggest that 15- to 17-year-old boys are
present in the rapid-response force in Nyala. So our
question is whether any eyewitness could precisely
determine the age of the individuals participating.
According to paragraph 184, schools were damaged
or destroyed. Eight attacks were pointed out. But the
report does not detail where those alleged incidents
took place, or whether they were carried out by rebel
groups with which members are familiar and which
were described in detail in the Secretary-General’s
latest report on Darfur (S/2015/378).
In order to adopt a comprehensive approach with
respect to children, we urge that the following measures
be taken. First of all, we must help countries affected
by conflict put an end to such conflicts, and we must
convince or force rebel forces to lay down their weapons
and to participate actively and seriously in the political
settlement process. We must also tackle the underlying
causes of the recruitment of children into armed forces
and the various root causes that led to the conflicts
themselves. Secondly, we must deal with causes such as
poverty and climate change, we must end the unilateral
sanctions against certain countries, we must write off
the external debt of developing countries and provide
them with technical assistance, we must ensure capacitybuilding in terms of education and health care, and we
must also help such countries to rebuild. Thirdly, it is
not enough for the rebel groups to sign various plans to
combat the recruitment of children. We must condemn
the acts of those rebel groups and force them to disarm
and participate in the negotiation process. Fourthly,
Governments must be able to take part in all efforts to

S/PV.7466

deal with children and armed conflict, based on respect
for national sovereignty and transparency.
To conclude, the delegation of the Sudan reasserts
its commitment to work with the United Nations
agencies dealing with children and armed conflict, but
we call for the Secretary-General’s reports to be based
on verified and true information. They should not use
confusing words with variable geometry. Finally, we
call on all information or allegations to be shared with
the Permanent Mission to the United Nations of the
country concerned and with the Government before
they are included in the Secretary-General‘s reports
and submitted to the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Makharoblishvili (Georgia): At the outset,
allow me to thank the Malaysian presidency for
organizing this open debate on children and armed
conflict, and to further thank Dato Sri Anifah Aman,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia, for presiding
over today’s meeting.
Let me also thank Mr. Ban Ki-moon, SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF, and Ms. Eunice Apio,
Director of the Facilitation for Peace and Development
organization, for their comprehensive briefings and
thoughtful analyses.
We applaud the efforts of the Malaysian presidency
on behalf of resolution 2225 (2015) adopted today, of
which Georgia was a sponsor.
My country fully aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union. I would
like to add a few remarks in my national capacity.
The Secretary-General states in his latest annual
report on the item before us: “There were unprecedented
challenges in 2014 with regard to the protection of tens
of millions of children growing up in situations affected
by conflict”. (S/2015/409, para.5) To our dismay, that
is today’s reality. UNICEF called 2014 “a devastating
year for children, with as many as 15 million caught
in conflicts in Palestine, Syria, Iraq, South Sudan, the
Central African Republic, and Ukraine”.
We believe that the Council should address this
important issue more actively and resolutely, because

15-1838077/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

we face an ever-increasing trend of violence against
children in both conflict and non-conflict situations,
including violence committed by non-State actors.
Despite broad understanding of the nature of the
problem and despite the numerous efforts at the regional
and international levels to address them, we have yet to
see tangible progress on the ground. Children continue
to be abducted in armed-conflict situations, recruited as
combatants, and boys and girls continue to fall victim
to acts of violence, murder, maiming and arbitrary
detention committed by parties to conflict across the
globe. Boko Haram’s abduction of hundreds of women
and girls in Chibok and the kidnappings in Syria and
Iraq committed by Daesh are glaring examples of the
types of gross violations to which children are subjected
in armed conflicts. The areas controlled by non-State
actors and terrorist groups, as well as territories under
foreign occupation, are zones of grave risk for children,
with imminent threats to their lives by actors who
operate in total disregard for internationally recognized
legal norms.
Let me use this opportunity to reiterate that the
issue of child protection is of great importance for
Georgia. Our Government spares no effort to ensure
adequate living conditions for children affected
by internal displacement. Such measures include
expanding social and education assistance programmes
and implementing a comprehensive national strategy.
Unfortunately, my Government has been deprived of
the opportunity to address the humanitarian needs of
children affected by conflict who live in regions that
remain under illegal Russian military occupation. We
are extremely concerned that fundamental human
rights continue to be violated on a daily basis. That
becomes especially disturbing considering the absence
of international monitoring mechanisms inside the
occupied regions of Georgia. Children residing in
the Tskhinvali and Abkhazia regions are deprived of
minimal safeguards for the protection of their rights,
as envisioned by the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of the Child.
The Georgian children living under foreign
occupation are being prevented from exercising their
fundamental right to education in their mother tongue,
which is guaranteed by the Constitution of Georgia and
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Freedom
of movement is also severely restricted for Georgian
children living under occupation. The intensive
process of the installation of barbed-wire fences

78/96

18/06/2015

and embankments along the occupation line in the
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions significantly affects
the livelihoods of the local population, including
those of children. Russian military forces do not allow
schoolchildren to cross the occupation line to attend
classes on the territory controlled by the Georgian
Government. On a number of tragic occasions, even
people seeking medical care have died en route to the
hospital after being denied passage across the dividing
line. We fear that the so-called integration treaties
recently signed by the Russian Federation with the
aforementioned Georgian regions will cause further
deterioration in the living conditions of the families
residing inside the occupied territories.
We once again call on the Russian Federation to
respect the fundamental principles of international
law, including the Charter of the United Nations, the
Helsinki Final Act and other legal instruments within
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, as well as the provisions of the August 2008
ceasefire agreement between Georgia and Russia.
We have a common responsibility to strengthen
our efforts to protect children in armed conflict. We
need to take concrete and tangible steps to alleviate the
consequences of armed hostilities for new generations
and safeguard their rights and freedoms. For its part,
Georgia stands ready to contribute to concerted
international efforts and to help ensure more effective
protection of the population caught up in armed conflict
or in post-conflict situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We are honoured by the
presence among us of the Foreign Minister of Malaysia
this morning. We value the remarks by the SecretaryGeneral and the briefing by his Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict.
During the year under review, existing challenges
of child recruitment and abuse were exacerbated
by the mass abduction of children from schools and
communities. Those horrendous and barbarous acts
were committed by non-State actors, who use such
tactics to terrorize societies. It is our hope that the
unanimous adoption today of resolution 2225 (2015)
will help address the worrying trend of abductions of
children in situations of armed conflict.

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

Peacekeeping missions, where so mandated, can
play an important role. To effectively accomplish
that, they must receive the necessary training and
the requisite resources. As one of the largest troopcontributing countries, Pakistan welcomes focused
pre-deployment and in-mission training in that regard.
It is also important that persistent perpetrators of
violence against children be identified and brought to
justice through national judicial systems. To that end,
investigative and prosecution capacities should be
strengthened at all levels.
The year 2014 was a grim one for the hapless
children of occupied Palestine. The 50-day military
invasion of Gaza left 550 Palestinian children dead and
more than 4,000 injured. Images of children killed on
a beach in Gaza are still fresh in our minds. Yet they
have conveniently been described as “accidental” by an
Israeli inquiry. The international community could not
stop that massacre, and with no accountability in sight,
its non-recurrence cannot be guaranteed. Pakistan
is concerned about the selective approach to the
listing adopted for this year’s report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict (S/2015/409).
It amounts to condoning the grave crimes committed
against Palestinian children. Such an approach not only
damages the credibility of the mandate, it also sets a bad
precedent for the future. The international community
must not shy away from listing those involved in grave
crimes against children in situations of armed conflict.
The recruitment and use of children in conflict is a
horrendous crime. The Security Council’s efforts over
the past 16 years have produced significant results.
The commendable work done by the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, which Malaysia
currently chairs, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General’s Children, Not Soldiers campaign,
have also greatly helped. Thousands of children have
been demobilized, rehabilitated and reintegrated into
society. Yet the job is far from accomplished. We have
to redouble our efforts to fully achieve its goals by the
target date of 2016.
The scourge of child recruitment and other grave
crimes against children cannot be fully countered
without addressing the root causes of armed conflict.
Conflict resolution and conflict prevention must
receive due attention from the Security Council and the
international community. We welcome the focus of the

S/PV.7466

report of the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations on this aspect.
Finally, we would like to stress once again that
the legal parameters of the mandate of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict established by
Security Council resolutions must be fully respected.
Our focus must remain on situations of armed conflict.
In that context, we want to state for the record that
references to Pakistan in the report are not within the
purview of the established mandate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Al-Otaibi (Kuwait): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate Malaysia on its presidency of the
Security Council for this month and to welcome the
convening of this open debate of vital importance for
the protection and well-being of children in conflict
by His Excellency Dato Sri Anifah Aman, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Malaysia.
We deeply appreciate the role played by Malaysia,
the Chair of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. The adoption today of
resolution 2225 (2015), which includes abductions as
an additional violation whereby parties engaging in
abduction will be listed in the annexes of the Security
Council’s annual report, is a step forward towards
ending this grave violation committed against children
in contravention of international law.
I have the honour to deliver the following statement
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), in my capacity as Chair of the OIC Group.
The OIC Group has carefully reviewed the report of
the Secretary General on children and armed conflict
(S/2015/409). We would like to express our profound
appreciation for the efforts made in the preparation of
the report and the role played by Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, in identifying the
cases that fall within the scope of her mandate. They
highlight the situations of children growing up in areas
affected by conflict, in particular, as mentioned in the
report, those children in several countries affected by
major crises — Israel, the State of Palestine, the Central
African Republic, Syria, South Sudan, Iraq and Nigeria.
Despite all that, the report excludes Israel from
its annexes of parties committing grave violations
against children in armed conflict, which, regrettably,

15-1838079/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

contradicts the legitimate recommendation of the
impartial and evidence-based report, naming Israel
as a grave violator of children’s human rights. Such a
decision will not only put United Nations integrity and
credibility at stake, it also further emboldens Israel, in
terms of impunity, to continue committing its flagrant
and systematic violations of human rights, which have
been persistently carried out with total disrespect
for international law and disregard for the lives and
rights of the Palestinian people, including children.
The Group is therefore deeply disappointed by that
deplorable decision.
The OIC believes that the 2015 annual report on
children and armed conflict, prepared by Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, constitutes
a credible instrument, among other documents, for
identifying and illustrating Israel’s innumerable
violations, perpetrated mainly against Palestinian
children. In that regard, the OIC reaffirms the need
for it to remain committed to the substantive mandate
of the United Nations Office and to serve as a leading
United Nations advocate for strengthening the rule
of law and ensuring the protection and well-being of
children, as enshrined in international conventions and
human rights standards.
In the meantime, the OIC shares concerns over the
continuing crimes committed by Israel, the occupying
Power, against the Palestinian people, including
children, who have been enduring severe violations that
are not limited merely to murder, arrest, interrogation
and torture, but include the destruction of their
education, recreation and health facilities, among other
things.
There is no need to recall that the human rights
indicators for Palestinian children, who compose 53 per
cent of the total population, have deteriorated sharply
as a result of the latest Israeli military offensive — in
summer 2014 — which left more than 550 children
dead and 3,370 injured, more than 1,000 of whom were
left permanently disabled, as well as at least 370,000
children, according to reports of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, who require
specialized psychological support. Furthermore, the
devastating impact of Israel’s restrictions on movement
by way of checkpoints, the apartheid wall and the
ongoing blockade of the Gaza Strip have worsened the
rising poverty, isolation, despair and deprivation that

80/96

18/06/2015

scores of Palestinian children have been experiencing
at an alarming rate.
The Organization of Islamic Cooperation reiterates
its call on the international community, particularly the
Security Council, to uphold its responsibility to avert
the deteriorating situation in Palestine and to ensure
justice and protection for the rights of the vulnerable
Palestinian children and the integrity of efforts to
provide a political horizon for moving forward. That
will help to empower the Palestinian people to regain
their inalienable rights and provide hope, at a time
of widespread desperation, to the new generations of
Palestinians that their legitimate aspirations to a future
free of abuse and violence will be achieved.
The OIC Group expresses its profound concern
with regard to the negative impact of armed conflict on
children, including the recruitment and use of children
in conflict, mass abductions of children, sexual violence
committed against them, their killing and maiming and
attacks on schools and hospitals committed by various
actors. The international community should respond to
threats to peace and security in full compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law.
In that regard, we greatly value the Special
Representative’s initiatives to include child-protection
provisions in peace negotiations and agreements, and
her “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign aimed at ending
and preventing the recruitment and use of children by
the end of 2016. We welcome Chad’s full compliance
with the measures detailed in its action plan as the first
country to be delisted from the annexes to last year’s
Secretary-General’s report (see S/2014/339, para. 217).
In conclusion, although wars and armed conflict
affect society as a whole — men, women and children
alike — children are the most vulnerable and the most
in need of our protection; they are the hope of the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cambodia.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): Allow me to express my
congratulations to Malaysia on assuming the presidency
of the Council this month and to thank it for having
organized this very important meeting. My delegation
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for the
preparation of the annual report on children and armed
conflict (S/2015/409) and his tireless efforts in working
to improve the situation of children worldwide.

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

Before I deliver my national statement, I should say
that my delegation would like to associate itself with
the statement made by the Permanent Representative
of Viet Nam on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.
We share the concerns expressed by many
delegations about the difficult situation that millions
of children face as a result of armed conflicts, and we
would like to emphasize the importance of the debate
for children who are victims of non-State armed groups.
Violence against children and attacks on their welfare
are on the rise globally and are well documented.
Abductions, rape, torture, slavery, attacks on schools
and the use of children as combatants, suicide bombers
and executioners cannot be tolerated by the international
community.
Cambodia strongly condemns all forms of violence
perpetrated against children. My delegation is deeply
concerned about the increasing trend of abductions of
children by non-State armed groups. The SecretaryGeneral’s report notes accurately that this practice
serves as “a precursor to other violations, such as
killing and maiming, recruitment and use, or sexual
violence”; moreover, abduction is used as “a tactic to
terrorize or target particular ethnic groups or religious
communities” (S/2015/409, para. 6) The international
community must devote close attention to that
disturbing terrorist tactic, which is used to dehumanize,
humiliate and subjugate entire populations, particularly
women and children.
As a State party to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and a signatory to its 2000 Optional Protocol
on the involvement of children in armed conflict,
Cambodia supports United Nations initiatives aimed at
protecting children in conflict.
The primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security rests with the United
Nations, and we, as the international community, must
assert the rule of law. We must strengthen existing
legal instruments on the protection of children in
armed conflict. To that end, we welcome the efforts
of the Malaysian delegation to include abduction as
an additional violation triggering inclusion of a party
within the annexes of the Secretary-General’s reports
on children and armed conflict.
Children are the future; they are the future of our
progress and our civilization’s development. Children
deserve to be raised in nurturing environments without

S/PV.7466

experiencing the physical and psychological trauma of
armed conflict.
In that light, I reiterate my delegation’s longstanding
position that in order to protect children from violence,
slavery and the everyday horrors of war, we must
address the deep-rooted causes of conflict. Conflict
prevention is a prerequisite for sustainable peace and
respect for human rights. Poverty, discrimination,
lack of education, social exclusion and inequality only
perpetuate the cycle of violence.
Preventing the use of children in armed conflict
can be achieved only through the creation of adequate
social, political and economic conditions worldwide. We
must take careful note of that, because no sustainable
development agenda can be successfully applied
without first securing a safe and prosperous future for
our children.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
Royal Government of Cambodia is resolved to protect
children and their rights in situations of armed conflict.
We are committed to working with our global partners,
States Members of the United Nations and United
Nations agencies in our efforts to end the victimization
of children by non-State armed groups. It is only
by working together that we can ensure that future
generations of children can live free and in peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like to start by thanking
the Malaysian presidency for convening this open
debate on children and armed conflict. We welcome
the adoption earlier today of resolution 2225 (2015), of
which Turkey was a sponsor.
As underlined in the report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2015/409), the year
2014 saw unprecedented challenges for millions of
children growing up in countries affected by conflict.
The increased momentum achieved by the tireless
efforts of Special Representative Zerrougui has paved
the way for tangible progress. The groundbreaking
“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign, led by her Office,
deserves unflagging support. Nevertheless, there
remain significant shortcomings in protecting children
in armed conflicts that require focused attention from
the international community.
Unfortunately, with the changing nature of
conflicts, acts such as mass abductions, torture and

15-1838081/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

sexual violence, attacks on schools and hospitals,
limited access to even the most basic humanitarian
requirements and wide-scale displacement have
immense and disproportionate effects on children.
Several of the conflicts we face today in various
geographic locations have revealed the increasing
involvement of non-State armed groups in violating
even the basic rights of children. The appalling crimes
committed by terrorist organizations, such as Daesh
and Boko Haram, must be highlighted in that regard.
Moreover, the Secretary-General’s report outlines
the dire situation of Palestinian children, who face
unacceptable violations that contravene international
law. As many delegations have already expressed
today, in the light of the violations committed against
Palestinian children, the list contained in the annex of
the Secretary-General’s report is incomplete without
due reference thereto. We agree with the observations
highlighted in the statement recently delivered by the
representative of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.
A display of joint and robust political determination,
as well as concerted action, is our most crucial tool for
addressing the issue of children and armed conflict.
The efforts of the United Nations to provide essential
assistance to children, as well as monitoring and
reporting functions that facilitate better planning,
protection and response, should be supported. The
continued implementation of the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse
by United Nations peacekeeping operations remains
crucial. Furthermore, the decision to include parties
that engage in patterns of abduction of children in
situations of armed conflict in the annexes to the report
of the Secretary-General sends a strong message to
those who perpetrate such unacceptable acts.
As we try to identify tools that we can use to put
pressure on non-State armed groups to prevent any
recruitment or use of children on their part, we should
bear in mind that signing documents with such actors
can lead to exploitation of the issue and encourage
them to use such documents as a means of propaganda
in order to claim legitimacy. We therefore believe that
all international organizations and non-governmental
organizations should refrain from drawing up any kind
of document, including in the form of so-called deeds
of commitment, with terrorist organizations. Instead,
reinforcing the legal framework for the prevention

82/96

18/06/2015

and punishment of the recruiting activities of terrorist
organizations should be the priority.
I will refrain from taking up the Council’s valuable
time to respond to certain baseless accusations made
by the representative of the Syrian regime, which we
categorically reject. We are with the Syrian people, and
we stand by them. Our engagement and assistance take
place in the sight of the international community and
in close cooperation with international organizations,
including United Nations agencies.
The report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict once again revealed the saddening
deterioration of the situation of children in Syria, just
across our border. In fact, as the crisis enters its fifth
year, a generation of young Syrians faces the danger of
being lost to a cycle of violence. I would like to share
some figures with the Council to make the picture
clear for all of us. According to UNICEF, 7.3 million
children are directly affected by the conflict in Syria.
Of those, 3.5 million have become internally displaced
persons, and 5.9 million children inside Syria need aid.
Moreover, 3.5 million children are out of school owing
to the conflict. There are 323,000 children below the
age of 5 who are either under siege or in locations that
are very difficult to reach. In addition, 2 million Syrian
children have fled to neighbouring countries.
Despite all of the challenges, Turkey has pursued
an open-door policy for Syrians fleeing their country
without any discrimination based on religion or ethnic
origin. Approximately 260,000 Syrians are being
accommodated in 25 temporary protection centres
in Turkey. In addition, more than 1.5 million Syrians
continue to live outside those centres in various cities
in Turkey. We cannot overemphasize the fact that
children are among the most vulnerable groups in this
crisis situation. We are extending every possible form
of help to meet the growing needs of Syrian children,
especially in the fields of education and health care.
There are more than 550,000 school-age Syrian
children in Turkey. Around 70,000 are being educated
in classrooms at temporary protection centres. Outside
those centres are almost 480,000 children who need
education. Emphasis needs to be placed on creating
more classrooms and education opportunities for those
children, with the help of the international community.
The most recent clashes in and around Tel Abyad,
which is situated right across from our Akçakale
border crossing, are a source of grave concern. They

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

have triggered a new influx of displaced people into
Turkey. The forced displacement of the Arab and
Turkoman populations of the northern regions of Syria
is unacceptable and is bound to further deepen the crisis
in Syria. In fact, we informed the Security Council and
the Secretary-General of the situation in a letter dated
14 June.
In conclusion, I would like to underline Turkey’s
unwavering support for all international and regional
efforts related to the protection of children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate Malaysia on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month, and I align
Egypt’s statement with that delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation. We take note of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2015/409) and commend
Ms. Leila Zerrougui for a job well done in preparing
the report. We also congratulate Chad on having been
delisted from the 2014 report and on its full compliance
with its action plan. We call on the parties currently on
the list to exert greater efforts to ensure their delisting
from the coming report.
The Security Council’s resolutions provide the
United Nations and the international community with
tools for effectively addressing the six grave violations
against children in armed conflict, starting with the
Secretary-General’s annual report on children and
armed conflict and ending with the creation of the
Security Council’s Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. Despite the pivotal role those tools
play in protecting children in armed conflict and ending
the impunity of perpetrators, there are some persistent
challenges to their achievement of their full potential
in that task.
This year’s report succeeded in enlightening us
with regard to the heinous violations committed against
children all over the world, including those committed
in Syria, Iraq and Africa by terrorist groups such as
Daesh, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
Boko Haram. Regrettably, however, it failed to make its
annexes fully reflective of the facts stated in the report.
According to the mandate given to the SecretaryGeneral, any party that commits one or more of the
six violations against children should be listed in the
annexes to the report. The aim of that listing is to start

S/PV.7466

a dialogue with the listed parties on the development of
concrete, time-bound action plans to halt and prevent
violations against children.
According to the report, Israel is believed to have
been involved in three of the six grave violations by
killing Palestinian children, targeting schools and
hospitals, and denying humanitarian access to the
Palestinian people. However, Israel was not listed in
the annexes to the report. According to another report
(S/2014/650) of the Secretary-General, on the peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine, at least 2,104
Palestinians have reportedly been killed, including
at least 495 children. In that context, we are against
preferential treatment being granted to any party,
since that would constitute an apparent case of double
standards. In that regard, Egypt calls on the Secretariat
to rectify that deficiency in the next report.
This year, as we celebrate the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1612 (2005) and the first anniversary of the
“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign, we should fulfil
our commitments to protecting innocent children in
armed conflicts and refrain from any action that could
exacerbate their suffering.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Zimbabwe.
Mr. Shava (Zimbabwe): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 15 States members of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC).
Allow me to welcome and thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Malaysia for presiding over this
important debate. I also wish to express gratitude
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui; and other briefers for their
invaluable presentations this morning.
This debate comes at a critical time in the
maintenance of international peace and security, with
the current upsurge in violence attributed largely to
non-State actors. Tens of thousands of children have not
only been displaced and separated from their families
but also recruited, maimed, killed or forced to kill.
The horrific videos released by the Islamic State in
Iraq and Sham (ISIS) showing a young boy executing
a captive and a teenage suicide bomber bear testimony
to the extent of the grave violations committed against
children who are forced to commit despicable acts of
violence.

15-1838083/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

As we mark the tenth anniversary of resolution
1612 (2005), which established the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, this debate is a
significant step in assessing the progress achieved so
far on combating grave violations against children
in situations of armed conflict. This year also marks
the first anniversary of the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign, which was launched in March 2014 by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict along with UNICEF,
which is aimed at preventing the recruitment and
use of children in armed conflict. SADC believes
that the campaign’s primary goal of achieving childfree Government armed forces in conflict by 2016 is
attainable.
A significant number of children affected by
conflict live on the African continent. In an effort
to protect children affected by armed conflict, the
African Union has ensured that child-protection
concerns are central elements of the peace and security
of the continent. Strengthening cooperation among its
member States and subregional organizations with a
view to improving child protection remains a priority
of the African Union. The African Charter on the
Rights and Welfare of the Child, which came into force
in November 1999, addresses the issue of child soldiers.
In its article 22.2, it states that:
“States Parties to the present Charter shall
take all necessary measures to ensure that no child
shall take a direct part in hostilities and refrain in
particular from recruiting any child”.
At the subregional level, most SADC member
States have signed and ratified international childrights-protection instruments and have enacted various
legislative measures to give effect to them. The
provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of children
in armed conflict and other instruments provide us with
guidelines on how to address the protection of children
in armed conflict. SADC believes that strengthening
the cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations would enhance the protection of
children in armed conflict.
As the African continent and its subregions
continue to play important and significant roles in
the continent’s mediation, conflict-resolution and
peacebuilding processes, it is imperative to make that
partnership stronger in order to confront the complex

84/96

18/06/2015

emerging challenges emanating from the proliferation
of armed gangs and extremist groups. An example of
this cooperation is the joint action taken by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in freeing
child soldiers from the grip of armed groups. In South
Sudan, the Democratic Movement/Army-Cobra Faction
has released 1,757 children since January 2015 to
UNICEF and its partners.
While significant progress has been made in
achieving child-free Government armed forces, it must
be noted that Governments are not the only recruiters
of children. The current increase in the proliferation
of non-State armed groups poses a great threat to the
protection of children. The heinous acts committed
by Boko Haram and ISIS highlight the increasing
violence perpetrated through abductions, killings and
the instilling and perpetuating of extremist ideology in
societies through indoctrination.
Recruitment is not the only danger to which children
are exposed. Violations and abuses against children in
armed conflict take many other forms, including sexual
slavery, human trafficking and involvement in suicide
bombings.
SADC strongly condemns attacks on schools
and hospitals, which deprive children of the right to
education and health. Those who commit atrocities
against children must be held accountable for their
actions. Children’s rights to education and health must
be guaranteed, and the Security Council must condemn
equally firmly such violations, wherever in the world
they occur. We must redouble our efforts to protect
children and to respect their rights in time of war as
in time of peace. The international community must
confront decisively the devastating impact of armed
conflicts on children in the many regions of the world
where they are occurring. In this context, the whole
range of tools available should be used to exert pressure
on both States and non-State armed groups in order to
end and prevent grave violations of children’s rights in
situations of conflict.
SADC also believes that in order to end and
prevent the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict, the United Nations and regional organizations
should secure a commitment from parties to conflicts
to promote child protection in the context of political
dialogue during peace talks. Mainstreaming the

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

protection of children’s rights in final peace agreements
would go a long way towards promoting children’s
rights.
We underscore the need to build local and regional
capacities, particularly in the judiciary, to deal with
perpetrators of violence against children. Holding
perpetrators accountable helps to prevent impunity for
the recruitment and use of children in armed conflict.
Accountability requires instituting legal measures to
criminalize violence against children.
In conclusion, SADC wishes once again to
underscore the necessity of conflict prevention and
the need to tackle its root causes, including the ethnic,
religious, social and economic factors that facilitate the
recruitment of children by non-State armed groups. The
trauma experienced by children during armed conflict
affects them for the long term and can contribute to
recurring cycles of violence if left unattended. It
is therefore vital to reintegrate and rehabilitate the
children in those areas so as to ensure that they receive
the medical, psychological, educational and economic
support they need to rebuild their lives and realize their
full potential.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Holy See.
Archbishop Auza (Holy See): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to congratulate Malaysia on its
presidency of the Council this month and in particular for
scheduling this debate on children and armed conflict.
One of the saddest developments in the evolution of
armed conflict is that increasing numbers of victims
are civilians. In the early 1900s, approximately 5 per
cent of fatalities were civilians, whereas in the 1990s
the percentage was over 90, including a large children.
While a disproportionate number of children are killed
and injured in conflicts, countless others grow up with
their material and emotional needs unmet. The entire
fabric of life and society is torn, as homes, schools,
health systems and religious institutions are no longer
safe from attacks and military operations. Indeed, those
institutions have become frequent targets in armed
conflicts.
The year 2014 has been proclaimed the worst ever
for children affected by armed conflict. An estimated
230 million children currently live in areas affected by
such conflicts, and new levels of violence have been
inflicted on them through their use as suicide bombers
and human shields. The Secretary-General’s annual

S/PV.7466

report (S/2015/409) on children and armed conflict
provides a horror list of the forms of violence to which
children were subjected in 2014: they were killed,
maimed, abducted, enslaved, recruited as soldiers,
displaced, trafficked and sexually abused. We can
safely affirm that never in recent memory have so many
children been subjected to such brutality.
It is very important to highlight the issue of the
abduction of children in armed conflict, because it
is often the gateway to more serious abuses against
children and graver violations of international
humanitarian law. The 24 April 2014 abduction of 276
schoolgirls by Boko Haram exemplifies the horrors of
that specific crime and highlights the added challenges
involved in bringing non-State armed and terrorist
groups to justice and into compliance with national
and international human-rights laws, especially as they
relate to child-protection obligations.
There has been progress in combating violence
against children in armed conflict. The “Children, Not
Soldiers” campaign has strengthened the commitment
of the Governments concerned. The Council has
focused its efforts and resources on that question
on numerous occasions. However, the gap between
legislation and implementation remains very wide and
the emergence of new challenges requires new tools. My
delegation therefore believes that we must strengthen
our response to the crime of abduction and its trail of
further crimes against children in armed conflict. We
believe the Council can and must do still more. My
delegation has prepared a five-point recommendation
for consideration, and we are pleased that several of its
points are already contained in resolution 2225 (2015),
which has just been adopted.
First, specific child-protection commitments
aimed at the rapid release of children from armed
forces and armed groups should be incorporated into
peacebuilding efforts. Accordingly, the Council should
consider expanding resolution 1612 (2005) to include
abduction as an additional issue to be specifically
monitored in peacekeeping operations.
Secondly, considering the increase in the number of
cases of abduction, the Holy See notes with satisfaction
that in accordance with the resolution adopted today,
the Security Council requests the Secretary-General to
include, in the annexes to his annual report on children
and armed conflict, those parties to conflicts that
engage in the abduction of children.

15-1838085/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

Thirdly, the care and rehabilitation of children
who have been rescued from armed groups must be
backed by adequate and long-term resources in order
to ensure as far as is possible the children’s successful
reintegration into their families and into society and
that they do not remain hostages to the horrors they
have survived.
Fourthly, putting an end to impunity must be a key
part of the healing process, as well as a deterrent for
future potential perpetrators.
Fifthly, the prohibition against using schools,
hospitals and other institutions for children for
military purposes and armed attacks must be strictly
implemented and those practices condemned in the
strongest possible terms. The Holy See is therefore
pleased that that too is strongly stated in the resolution
adopted today.
I would like to assure the Council that the Holy
See and the Catholic Church, in general, have been
and continue to be actively engaged in providing
specialized support to child victims, including many
forms of trauma-healing services and reconciliation
with families. I wish to mention, in particular, the
Saint Monica’s Centre in Gulu, Uganda, which has
dedicated itself for many years to the rehabilitation of
child victims of the Lord’s Resistance Army; there are
many similar institutions in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as well. Numerous initiatives have been
launched to raise public awareness of this plague and
help child victims reunite with their families.
In areas of armed conflict, we have noted that
faith communities have demonstrated that they are
an essential element in the recovery and reintegration
of child victims into normal life. In addition, faith
communities are a key part of an early-warning system
for preventing abductions.
Horrendous as they are, the crimes committed
against children in armed conflict are but one
manifestation of a violent world. We must combat all
forms of violence, especially those that breed crimes
against children in armed conflict, and we must not
cease to foster an education that promotes peaceful and
harmonious co-existence among peoples.
The Holy See therefore exhorts the international
community and the Council, in particular, to engage in
more vigorous diplomacy in order to put an end to all
the situations of violence that rob so many children of

86/96

18/06/2015

their present and future. The protection of children is a
serious moral and legal obligation. To protect children
in armed conflict from all forms of violence is to protect
our future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Montenegro.
Mr. Perović (Montenegro): We thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened today’s debate
on children and armed conflict, and we commend
Malaysia’s strong commitment to the issue during its
term on the Council. I would also like to thank today’s
briefers for their presentations and their important
work on the issue.
Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European
Union. I would like, however, to highlight some points
of particular importance to my country.
We are witnessing the dramatic consequences
of the violence affecting 230 million children in the
world owing to the evolving character of contemporary
conflicts. Heinous crimes are being committed, with
an alarming rise in abductions, especially the mass
abductions of children that have taken place in Syria,
Iraq, Nigeria and South Sudan. The issue of children
and armed conflict is a global one that requires an
urgent and collective response, and the adoption of
today’s resolution 2225 (2015) is a step forward in
advancing the agenda of children and armed conflict.
This year marks the first anniversary of the
“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign, which is aimed
at ending the recruitment and use of children by
Government armed forces in conflict by 2016. That is an
ambitious undertaking that requires working together
and sharing our expertise and resources in order to end
child recruitment in the next two years. The example
of Chad proves that action plans can work. We call on
all parties, States and non-State actors that have not
concluded action plans to follow the example of Chad,
and we call on those that have signed to honour their
commitments in full. In that regard, we would like to
stress that Member States must enable United Nations
personnel to gain access to areas controlled by armed
non-State actors in order to end violations there, as well
as to conclude and implement action plans.
We see the increasing and worrying trend of attacks
on schools and their use for military purposes, as well
as the abduction and detention of children, which we

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

find alarming. At the same time, we must be aware
that the consequences of such attacks go beyond the
destruction of schools. They concern the future of an
entire generation, a future without hope that will only
sow the seeds of further conflict. We therefore welcome
the emphasis in resolution 2143 (2014) on concerns
regarding the military use of schools, and would like
to take this opportunity to call on all parties to armed
conflict to refrain from such use. In that regard, we
also welcome the adoption today of resolution 2225
(2015) and the addition of abduction as a new trigger
for the listing of parties to conflict in the annexes to
the Secretary-General’s report on children and armed
conflict (see S/2015/409). Such addition will enhance
our ability to hold perpetrators to account.
More, however, needs to be done. The International
Criminal Court (ICC) and national judicial authorities
have an important role to play in responding to
violations as they occur. It is also vital that the Security
Council make use whenever possible of the option of
referring situations to the ICC, and that the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict should further
consider means of increasing pressure on persistent
perpetrators of human rights violations and putting an
end to impunity.
With regard to United Nations peacekeeping
and political missions and the indispensable role
they play, Montenegro would like to advocate for the
incorporation of a strong child-protection component
in the missions’ mandates. Such incorporation would
require that peacekeepers and military and security
personnel receive specialized pre-deployment training
on child protection.
Montenegro remains committed to our noble joint
objectives and to rising to the challenge of providing
the world’s children with a safer future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Lwin (Myanmar): Our delegation would like
to congratulate Malaysia on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and the chairmanship
of the Council’s Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. We would also like to express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for his opening remarks. We also thank
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, and
the other briefers for their presentations. Myanmar

S/PV.7466

also aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
My delegation fully shares the international
community’s concern regarding the increase in the
number of grave violations committed against children
in armed conflicts in many parts of the world. The
decision to focus today on the abduction of children is
also very timely and relevant, since we are witnessing
a disturbing new trend in abductions, used mainly
by non-State actors for their purposes. There is no
doubt that in an insecure environment children are
most vulnerable to the serious consequences of armed
conflicts.
Myanmar has always fully supported the search
for a sustainable solution able to protect innocent
children from the effects of armed conflicts. We have
also supported the “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign,
launched last year to end the recruitment and use of
children by Government armed forces by 2016. We are
encouraged by the steady progress made in the first
year of the campaign. Six of the seven countries that
continue to recruit and use children have cooperated
with the United Nations by signing and recommitting
to action plans to end and prevent such recruitment.
The Security Council must therefore take a cooperative
rather than a punitive approach to this sensitive issue
in the case of the parties cooperating with the United
Nations.
My own country, Myanmar, is indeed one of the
countries actively engaging with the United Nations to
address the matter. Since our action plan was signed in
June 2012, Myanmar has honoured its commitments by
taking a series of measures in regular consultation with
the United Nations country task force on monitoring and
reporting and the central committee for the prevention
of the military recruitment of underage children of
the Ministry of Defence of Myanmar. The action plan
has been extended twice, each time for six months.
Over 35 monitoring visits to regional commands and
regiments have been conducted. Nationwide awarenessraising campaigns to combat the recruitment and use of
minors have been launched. Over 12,000 members of
the armed forces have received training on the action
plan. Almost all of the steps outlined in the plan,
including the issuance of orders prohibiting underage
recruitment, the verification of ages, the identification
and release of underage recruits, their reintegration
into society and the punishment of offenders, have

15-1838087/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

been taken. The increase in the number of complaints
can be attributed to such factors as growing awareness,
greater freedom of expression and the repeated filing of
similar complaints. The recruitment of children under
18 is strictly prohibited under the existing regulations.
Any such complaints would relate to crimes perpetrated
by individuals rather than to the policy of the armed
forces.
Some of the information in the Secretary-General’s
report on children and armed conflict (S/2015/409) has
been overtaken by recent developments in Myanmar.
On 4 June, the Government armed forces discharged
a further 51 children from military service after
verification of their ages. Since the action plan was
signed in 2012, a total of 645 underage children have
been discharged from military service and have been
reunited with their families. In accordance with the Joint
Strategy for the Elimination of Forced Labour, signed
by Myanmar and the International Labour Organization
(ILO), a directive criminalizing forced recruitments
has been issued. A total of 327 perpetrators, including
50 officers and 277 other ranks, have been punished
for the wrongful recruitment of minors. Since June
last year, recruitment centres rather than infantry units
have been solely responsible for recruitment, and more
supporting personal documentation has been required
of new recruits so that their age can be verified and
forgery prevented. The Supplementary Understanding
signed by Myanmar and the ILO has also effectively
prevented action against underage recruits as deserters
from the armed forces.
My delegation would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict for rightly reflecting in his report
some of the positive measures taken by Myanmar. At
the same time, the Government has been making every
effort to sign a nationwide ceasefire agreement with the
ethnic armed groups to end the conflicts in the country,
which have lasted over six decades. The ending of
armed conflicts will eradicate the suffering caused by
violence against innocent children.
In conclusion, my delegation is also pleased to
inform the Security Council that an invitation has
been extended to Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative, to visit Myanmar and
hold consultations for the further advancement of the
work plan. We are looking forward to welcoming her
to Myanmar soon, so that we can remove the remaining
obstacles to reaching the common goal of ending the

88/96

18/06/2015

recruitment and use of children in the Government
armed forces by 2016.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Ahmed Fathalla, Permanent Observer
of the League of Arab States to the United Nations.
Mr. Fathalla (League of Arab States) (spoke in
Arabic): To begin with, I would like to congratulate the
Republic of Malaysia on its presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We wish Malaysia every success
and are grateful for its convening of this important
meeting on the topic of children and armed conflict.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General for his report, contained in
document S/2015/409, which the League of Arab States
considers extremely important. However, we would
have wished the report to be clearer in naming those
responsible for grave violations against Palestinian
children in its annexes. We hope that today’s meeting
can help to produce a comprehensive vision for
strengthening efforts to protect children during armed
conflict, and, most importantly, to ensure that they are
not forced to participate in conflicts, whether as part of
regular Government armed forces or non-State armed
groups.
Our region has found itself in exceptional
circumstances in recent years, with many children in
Arab States, particularly Iraq, Syria, Palestine, Libya
and Yemen, living in very difficult conditions. That
has made the members of the League of Arab States
more determined than ever to continue to take the
route of implementing international agreements and
instruments concerning children and preventing any
form of violence against them. The League believes we
must protect children in armed conflict and is therefore
actively working to improve its cooperation with the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict. To that end,
the Secretaries-General of the League and the United
Nations signed a cooperation agreement on the margins
of the high-level segment of the General Assembly at
its sixty-ninth session, resulting in a plan of action that
includes programmes and activities aimed at protecting
children affected by conflict and strengthening their
rights. The activities include a high-level forum to be
held on the margins of the Arab Summit scheduled for
March 2016. At that time we will launch a comprehensive
Arab strategy for protecting children affected by armed
conflict and reintegrating them into society.

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

I would like to shed some light on various facts
cited in the Secretary-General’s report relating to
grave violations against Palestinian children living
under Israeli occupation. First, the percentage of deaths
among Palestinian children is the third highest in the
world; an average of 10 Palestinian children are killed
every day, and more than 1.8 million Palestinians in
Gaza are suffering under occupation and have been
collectively punished as a result of the blockade
imposed on Gaza since 2007. That has harmed the
more than 80 per cent of families in Gaza that rely on
humanitarian assistance, on top of the destruction in
2014 of at least 543 Palestinian schools. All of that has
an impact on Palestinian children and on the possibility
that they can be nurtured and grow to be good citizens
in a safe society.
Concerning the situation of children in Gaza, there
must be serious and sincere efforts made to rebuild the
Gaza Strip and guarantee children their basic right to
live in dignity and safety. There must be accountability
for crimes and grave violations of international
humanitarian law. Children need to be able to live
in dignity and safety, and when we talk about grave
violations of international humanitarian and humanrights law, we are also talking about violations of the
four Geneva Conventions and the other international
instruments that guarantee the safety and security of
peoples living under occupation.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the support
of the League of Arab States for the work of Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, regarding
the promotion and protection of the rights of children
affected by such conflict. The League supports the
“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign launched last year
by Ms. Zerrougui with a view to ending by 2016 the
recruitment and use of children by any Government
armed forces, and we are working and cooperating
with the United Nations to persuade three Arab States
to respond positively to the campaign, leaving all
Arab States free of that dangerous phenomenon as
well as of children’s participation in wars and armed
conflict. We welcome the efforts being made to end
child recruitment by Government forces and we are
establishing various frameworks for cooperation in
achieving that noble goal. However, we should also
focus on the violations committed by non-State armed
groups against children, since most of the parties listed
in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s report are

S/PV.7466

non-State actors. We must stand together to face this
danger to international peace and security, and that is
the primary responsibility of the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Ms. Mogobe (Botswana): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on Malaysia’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
and to offer our continued support for the Council’s
work.
Botswana aligns itself with the statement delivered
a short while ago by the representative of Zimbabwe
on behalf of the Southern African Development
Community.
My delegation is grateful to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important and highly relevant debate,
which comes at a critical juncture in our history, as
violent conflict continues to escalate at unprecedented
speed across the regions of the world. We are also
grateful for the panelists’ insightful briefings today,
which have given us the opportunity to more fully
appreciate the risks and dangers faced by children
affected by armed conflict. Those conflicts have also
taken on an alarmingly insidious character, increasingly
targeting innocent civilians and subjecting them to
unspeakable acts of terror and an assortment of types
of exploitation and abuse. The rise in non-State actors
involved in such conflicts further complicates their
already complex nature.
The threat to international peace and security
posed by those developments is as real today as it ever
was, and it requires that the Council act urgently and
decisively to address it. Chief among the Council’s
objectives as it does so must be ensuring the protection
and promotion of the rights of children everywhere,
including in armed conflict, and to enable the creation
of an environment conducive to effective and timely
responses to the unparalleled humanitarian crises we
are seeing in many parts of the world.
We have taken solemn note of the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report on this subject (S/2015/409),
which highlights the fact that children affected by
major crises are being exposed to the most shocking
kinds of violations. Botswana is deeply concerned
about the gravity of such evolving violations against
children, including abductions, which have been
occurring recently at a startling rate. The report shows

15-1838089/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

that whereas in the past mass abductions of civilians,
including children in conflict situations, were largely
a means to an end, today they are also an end in
themselves, with the prime objective of inflicting terror.
It is altogether unacceptable that children are
employed as mere tools or objects in war and terror. They
are being robbed of their innocence and their childhood
by being forcibly removed from their communities,
recruited into armies to maim and kill — and often
maimed and killed themselves — made into human
bombs and shields, exposed to sexual violence and
other traumatic forms of exploitation and unlawfully
detained on suspicion of identifying with this or that
group. Needless to say, such situations have devastating
consequences for the health and well-being of those
children and their families who survive them, as well
as of society at large. We thus have a moral duty and
obligation, as responsible members of the international
community, to ensure that urgent and radical measures
are taken to protect children from such grave violations
of their rights.
We must guarantee full protection of children’s
rights, including their ability to attend school without
interruption and to enjoy access to all social services
that contribute to their development, good health and
well-being so that they can realize their full potential.
Whatever means the international community finally
decides on in pursuit of that noble objective must also
ensure the full prosecution and accountability of the
perpetrators of such heinous acts. It is also crucial that
security personnel, including those in peacekeeping
missions, be held accountable for the violations that
they commit against the very civilians and children
they have the responsibility to protect. Confidence and
trust in our troops is a fundamental prerequisite for the
success of any peacekeeping mission.
In this year of the tenth anniversary of resolution
1612 (2005), which created a platform for Council
members to conduct a continuous assessment of
violations against children affected by armed conflict
and to ensure the full implementation of initiatives for
their protection, we must be able to demonstrate notable
progress in that regard and have the unwavering resolve
to further consolidate our efforts. Botswana commends
the efforts made by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, together with UNICEF, in
launching a year ago the “Children, Not Soldiers”
campaign, which continues to raise awareness of this

90/96

18/06/2015

issue. We are also encouraged by the full Council
support for resolution 2225 (2015), adopted earlier
today, which we hope will also help address the issue.
In conclusion, Botswana wishes to reaffirm its
commitment to all the international conventions to
which we are party that protect the rights of children as
well as those calling for accountability for perpetrators
of gross human rights violations. It is clear that in
some States where major conflicts and crises continue
to rage, the authorities have manifestly failed in
their responsibility to protect civilian populations.
It is therefore my country’s view that the onus and
responsibility for acting lies squarely with the Council
and the global community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): On behalf of
the delegation of Azerbaijan, I would like to thank
the Malaysian presidency for having convened this
important and timely debate and for its leadership in
advancing the issue of child protection in the Council’s
work. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his annual report on children and armed conflict
(S/2015/409).
Armed conflict and foreign occupation are both
the root cause and the result of grave violations against
children. The proliferation of non-State armed groups,
their easy access to armaments and their increased use
of abduction, recruitment and sexual abuse as a tactic of
war have contributed to the rise, intensity and brutality
of crises, which have emerged as a common challenge
related to the protection of children.
Azerbaijan is deeply concerned about the
dramatic increase in the number of child casualties
and the disproportionate impact of armed conflicts on
children’s security, safety, health and welfare. We have
always been consistent in demanding strict observance
by the parties to an armed conflict of their obligations
under international humanitarian and human rights law,
in all circumstances. The vulnerability of children in
wartime brings an element of urgency, dedication and
strong commitment to worldwide protection efforts,
which must be free of selectivity.
During the Armenian aggression against my
country, thousands of Azerbaijani children were
deprived of their basic rights; thousands of them were
killed and maimed on the basis of ethnic hatred or

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

taken hostage and forcibly displaced from their homes.
Armenia’s continuing denial of those children’s right
to return to their homes has social consequences and
implications for the possibility of achieving lasting
peace. Many of the children and their families have
also gone missing, and despite the continued efforts of
the Government and the International Committee of the
Red Cross, their fates are still unknown. More than 20
years after the signing of the ceasefire agreement, the
civilian population and facilities of Azerbaijan have
remained subject to targeted and indiscriminate attacks
by the Armenian armed forces.
We appreciate the activities of United Nations
mechanisms aimed at ensuring more effective protection
of the rights of children and improving the situation
of children affected by armed conflict, pursuant to
resolutions 1379 (2001), 1882 (2009), 1998 (2011) and
2143 (2014), and we welcome the progress made in
that regard, including the “Children, Not Soldiers”
campaign. Particular consideration should be given to
internally displaced children in terms of ensuring their
right to return and the implications of illegal policies
in situations of foreign occupation for the protection of
children’s rights.
We appreciate and commend the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui. The
fulfilment of the Special Representative’s mandate with
respect to all situations of armed conflict, including
those of a protracted nature, is crucial in that regard.
Efforts to achieve peace cannot be conducted in
a manner that contradicts the established norms of
international law. It is therefore imperative that such
efforts and peace agreements should never encourage
the acceptance of situations resulting from the unlawful
use of force or other serious violations of international
law, such as war crimes, crimes against humanity,
genocide and ethnic cleansing. Important steps have
been taken in a number of situations of armed conflict
to achieve accountability for grave violations against
children. However, serious challenges remain. We join
the call for more resolute efforts to end impunity and
find a long-term and sustained solution for eliminating
and preventing illegal practices affecting the rights of
children.
I would like to conclude by welcoming the adoption
today of resolution 2225 (2015), which demonstrates
the Council’s continued determination to address the

S/PV.7466

problem in a comprehensive manner, with a focus on
the phenomenon of abduction.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Grignon (Kenya): I thank you, Madam President,
for having convened today’s debate. Kenya welcomes
the global importance and priority that the Security
Council and the international community continue
to attach to the protection of children affected by or
involved in armed conflicts. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2015/409), which
enumerates the grave violations committed against
children in armed conflicts, and for impressing on us
the urgency of the need for greater protection of our
children.
The recruitment of children as weapons of war
underlies larger and more systemic issues that include
the breakdown of a country’s social fabric and imply
a long-term generational aspect to the conflict and
the possibility of future mass atrocities. We need to
address the root causes of conflict, including political,
social and economic inequalities. Child protection
should be part and parcel of any strategy for managing
and preventing conflict. In that regard, we appreciate
the progress being made through the monitoring and
reporting mechanism and the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.
Kenya is deeply concerned about the fact that
the number of children being recruited or abducted,
and even volunteering to take part in armed conflict
throughout the world, has escalated to unprecedented
levels. Child soldiers are engaged in severe conflicts
where there has been evidence of horrific abuse and
brutal violence. We call on the Security Council to
address this critical issue as a specific priority concern.
We note with dismay the current unprecedented
challenges presented by the protection of children
who are growing up in situations affected by conflict.
The subjection of children to reprehensible acts of
violence and abuse must move humanity to reimagine
the responsibility to protect; it is indeed our collective
moral imperative and legal obligation.
In Kenya, the volatile situations in South Sudan,
Somalia and, more recently, Yemen are of great concern
and present a clear, persistent and continuing threat to
our national security. Armed groups such as Al-Shabaab
and Boko Haram continue to be emboldened and will
not be defeated or discouraged from abducting and

15-1838091/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

recruiting children by engagement and diplomacy alone.
The Security Council and the international community
must intercede to save the world’s future.
Decades of conflict in our region have resulted in
a continued flow of refugees into Kenya. The burden
of hosting nearly 600,000 refugees continues to
place great strains on the delivery of social services,
particularly in education, health and the provision of
security. The majority of the refugees are women and
children, including ex-soldiers and children involved in
armed conflict. The world must not continue to permit
children to grow up in refugee camps where they can
hardly survive, let alone thrive. We therefore urge the
Security Council to spare no effort and to engage robustly
with the African Union and the Inter-Governmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) in seeking solutions
to end the conflicts in the affected regions. As the world
gathers in September for the United Nations summit to
adopt the post-2015 development agenda, the concept of
leaving no one behind must be applied to all countries
and regions in conflict.
Kenya applauds the launch of the “Children, Not
Soldiers” campaign by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and UNICEF for galvanizing the commitments of
eight concerned Governments to end and prevent the
recruitment and use of children in national security
forces by the end of 2016.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s call to the
Security Council to continue supporting the children
and armed conflict agenda by strengthening provisions
for the protection of children in all relevant mandates of
the United Nations peacekeeping, special political and
peacebuilding missions.
We recognize that the most effective way to
protect children is to prevent the outbreak of armed
conflicts and to prevent conflicts from escalating. In
that regard, Kenya is actively involved in seeking ways
to end conflicts and find sustainable peace through
cooperation with IGAD. Kenya has been at the forefront
of initiatives to negotiate for peace in the region. The
international community must also urgently and
collectively address effective ways to bring the existing
conflicts to an end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.

92/96

18/06/2015

Mr. Mendonça e Moura (Portugal): I would
like to thank the Malaysian presidency for convening
this open debate and thank today’s briefers for their
presentations.
I would like to offer a special word of thanks to
Ms. Leila Zerrougui for the work she has been doing to
protect children.
Back in 1998, the first ever debate held in the
Security Council on the issue of children in armed
conflict was promoted by Portugal. We were then
fully convinced, as we remain today, that this issue
has serious implications for international peace and
security.
It is appalling that the minimum standards in respect
for human right in times of war are systematically
ignored and violated by both Government forces and
non-State actors. When children, the most vulnerable
of the vulnerable, continue to be victims of armed
violence and are killed, injured, abused, abducted
and, in some cases, used as soldiers, that represents
the collapse of the collective value system of the
international community.
The international community must ensure the
application and observance of normative international
instruments such as the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocols, in particular the one
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, as
well as the Geneva Conventions.
The political and ethical role of the Security
Council is to send a clear message that abuse against
children is unacceptable and, through its action, to
combat the sense of impunity on the part of belligerents
responsible for the atrocities and abuses committed
against children.
As stated in the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2015/409), 2014 was one of the worst years with
respect to the effects of armed conflict on children.
Children have been disproportionately affected and are
often direct targets of extreme violence. Abduction in
particular has become a tactic of war used by extremist
non-State actors to terrorize and control communities,
and it is a first sign of alert for further human rights
abuses. Portugal condemns in the most vehement terms
the abduction of children and calls on all parties to
release all abducted children immediately. Portugal
welcomes today’s adoption of resolution 2225 (2015)
and the expansion of the list of triggers for listing

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

perpetrators in the Secretary-General’s annual report
to include abduction. The resolution represents a
further step in holding perpetrators accountable and
in investigating and prosecuting those responsible for
committing atrocities against children.
It is of the utmost importance to recognize the
importance of action to promote the physical and
psychological recovery and social reintegration of
child victims of conflict. Efforts should include
demobilization and the return of displaced and refugee
children. The international community must ensure that
adequate resources are devoted to child-rehabilitation
programmes and educational training as an integral part
of planning for post-conflict situations. In addition, any
plans for post-conflict peacebuilding should make the
needs of children a central focus. In that regard, Portugal
supports the inclusion of child-protection provisions
in the mandates of peace operations and mandatory
pre-deployment training on child protection for all
United Nations troop and police contingents. However,
before attempting to address the difficult challenge of
reintegration in society, it is fundamental that children
deprived of their liberty for their alleged association
with extremist groups should be recognized, in the first
instance, as victims of forcible recruitment who have
been exposed to extreme brutality.
The inadequate provision of education to children
in situations of armed conflict is also a serious problem
that will have consequences in the long term for the
countries concerned. Millions of children are denied
their right to education because of armed conflict.
In his latest report, the Secretary-General notes the
increasing trend towards the use of schools for military
purposes, as well as attacks on education. We are
gravely concerned about widespread and deliberate
attacks against schools, teachers and students as an
instrument of warfare. That is a totally unacceptable
situation that needs to be urgently redressed. My
country has regularly introduced a resolution on the
realization of the right to education in the Human
Rights Council that was at the origin of the mandate
of the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Education.
That resolution, which my delegation will again present
atthe current session of the Human Rights Council,
as well as related initiatives in the General Assembly,
such as the resolution on education in situations of
emergency, which my country also sponsored, are steps
in the right direction in order to guarantee what is not

S/PV.7466

only, in itself, a fundamental human right, but also an
important tool in the fulfilment of other basic rights.
Against that backdrop, Portugal also endorsed the
Safe Schools Declaration made public at the recent
Oslo conference and calls on the parties to adopt
concrete measures to deter the use of schools during
conflict, including though the use of tools of the Lucens
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict.
We cannot remain indifferent to the gross
violations of children’s rights that we are witnessing
everywhere. We thank the leadership of Malaysia for
its efforts to consolidate the mechanisms at the disposal
of the Council for addressing one of the most appalling
scourges of our time.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Thank you, Madam President,
for convening this important debate. I also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui for their efforts to give
prominence to the rights and protection of girls and
boys affected by armed conflict.
The profound interest we all share in protecting
the world’s most vulnerable citizens, our children, is
evidenced by the fact that the Convention on the Rights of
the Child is the most ratified international human rights
treaty in history. Yet still, in conflicts today, children
are consistently victimized and denied their most basic
protections. For example, in South Sudan, the future
of a generation of children is being jeopardized by
worsening fighting and severe food insecurity caused
by gross political self-interest. Through resolution 2206
(2015), the Security Council established a mechanism
to impose discipline on the peace talks through the use
of targeted sanctions.
But with no sign that either party is genuinely
committed to peace, the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) should
immediately list individuals and entities whose actions
target civilians in South Sudan, particularly children.
South Sudan is reliant on its children growing up safely
and with hope for the future.
We must do more to compel non-State actors
to live up to their obligations to protect children in
conflict situations. In their persistent targeting of
children, barbarous groups such as Daesh and Boko

15-1838093/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

Haram have demonstrated that their actions are bereft
of humanity. Both groups have engaged in systematic
child abduction — a heinous crime used to humiliate,
suppress and terrorize civilians. Abduction during
armed conflict is a serious breach of the rights of
children, and the consequences are dire. They can
amount to additional crimes: we know that thousands
of children have been snatched from their families and
forced to be soldiers, sold as sexual slaves, exploited as
human shields or as unwitting suicide bombers.
It is for those reasons that the Council has listed
child abduction among the six grave violations against
children during armed conflict. As we mark the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1612 (2005), we welcome
the Council’s decision today to include abductions as
a trigger for the inclusion of parties into the annexes
of the Secretary-General’s annual report (S/2015/409).
Australia commends the work of the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. We encourage the Group to engage directly
with peacekeeping mission leadership — as it did for the
first time last year with the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan — and to better understand contemporary
challenges on the ground.
In United Nations peacekeeping missions, there
must be situation-specific training for all peacekeeping
personnel, including military and police, to address the
full range of grave violations against children, including
abductions. The international community must do
more to prevent grave violations against children
and to end impunity. Condemnation is not enough.
Australia joins others in endorsing Malaysia’s Children
in Armed Conflict Accountability Framework as a
practical resource that can guide States in introducing
accountability measures at the local, national, regional
and international levels.
As the preamble to the United Nations Declaration
of the Rights of the Child states, “Mankind owes to
the children the best it has to give”. That is as true in
times of conflict as it is in times of peace. We welcome
the Security Council’s continued interest in this most
important issue.
The President: The representative of Israel has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give her the floor.
Ms. Shilo (Israel) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
Madam President, to make my statement in Arabic.

94/96

18/06/2015

I do not think this subject should have been debated,
but unfortunately there are many places in the world
where innocent children have become victims of war
and terrorism. It is possible that some of the Missions
that have attacked Israel today might have forgotten
the meaning of terrorism or perhaps they have become
included under this term. There are those who do not
know that Hamas is a terrorist organization. Regrettably,
however, some regional and Arab leaders have opted
to ignore the evils of terrorism and have focused on
condemning the State of Israel. Hamas, this terrorist
organization, has indiscriminately launched thousands
of missiles targeting kindergartens, schools, hospitals
and medical centres. However, these missiles have been
ignored totally in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/409). Hamas has opened fire from densely
populated areas with one, and only one, aim — to kill
innocent civilians, including children.
The Missions that have accused and attacked
Israel know for a fact that Israel accords importance
to protecting the lives of all persons, regardless of
their ethnicity, nationality or race. Israel focuses on
protecting lives; this has its roots in our traditions and
our history. We have not targeted the Palestinians. On
the contrary, we are sorry for all the harm they suffered
during the conflict in Gaza in 2014. It is regrettable,
however, that Hamas is sacrificing its people, including
its children, in order to tarnish the image of the State
of Israel. The Palestinian Authority should have
condemned Hamas for endangering the lives of the
citizens. However, instead of doing that, it launched
accusations against Israel. Instead of bringing life back
to normal in Gaza, it has chosen terrorism.
Let us pray for a time of peace where the children
in Ashdod and Gaza can play in the streets without
fear. But this will not be achieved unless Hamas and
other armed groups give up war and adopt the option
of peace.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has also asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Ms. Khvan (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In his statement, the representative of
Ukraine did not agree with information about the
loss of children’s lives in south-eastern Ukraine as a
result of firing by the Ukrainian military, and accused
Russia of having done that. In order to avoid the usual
accusations of propaganda, let us look at the report

15-18380

18/06/2015

Children and armed conflict

of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine. One
need only look at recent reports. The report of 6 June
talks about the mission’s visit to Telmanove, which was
shelled by artillery on 4 June. The mission looked at
13 shell traces; seven of them, they concluded, originated
from the west. They also visited the local hospital,
where the deputy head doctor said that the shelling
had killed a 4-year-old boy in his home. The report of
28 May talks about the artillery shelling of Horlivka
on 26 May. According to the mission’s assessment, in
this case the shells came from the north and north-west.
That is where territory is located that is under Kyiv’s
control. Not only adults but also an 11-year-old girl
died, and the monitors concluded that she died because
of the shelling. Furthermore, on that day two children
were injured, leading to their hospitalization. Mission
representatives spoke to the children’s mother, who was
also wounded. These two localities, Telmanove and
Horlivka, are located on territory that is not under the
control of the authorities in Kyiv. We do not think that
this information needs to be additionally commented
upon.
As regards the destruction, a United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
report stated that in the Luhansk region, which is not
under the control of the Ukrainian Government, about
60 per cent of schools were damaged and five schools
destroyed. Nonetheless, according to OCHA the local
authorities have managed to ensure that the children are
attending school and receiving food.
On the issue of abductions, the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2015/409) talks about the horrendous
abduction of hundreds of children by the Islamic State in
Iraq and Syria and Boko Haram, as well as the physical
violence against them, their sexual enslavement and the
ideological propaganda to which they are subjected.
Many of the participants in today’s meeting have spoken
about the importance of putting an end to those crimes.
If the delegation of the Ukraine does not see the
difference between these crimes and removing children
from an area of armed conflict for medical care, then
we have nothing more to say.
We are convinced that those children who were
seriously injured, or those who needed, for example,
dialysis, which is impossible to provide in many areas,
do not consider themselves to have been abducted.

S/PV.7466

It is also out of place to make such statements
against Russia as those made by the representative
of Georgia. The root of the problem, in that case, is
Georgia’s refusal to normalize relations with the newly
independent States of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
The President: The representative of Ukraine has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I give
him the floor.
Mr. Yaremenko (Ukraine): I just want to say a few
words. I do not want to, and I do not have to convince
everybody present about the fact that in Ukraine, we
have been facing Russian aggression for more than a
year and a half. There is so much evidence that it is
absolutely unnecessary to do so.
The only thing that I would like to say to the
Russian Federation is that if we were not forced to deal
with the Russian aggression, no Ukrainian children
would be harmed. So please, take all of your weapons
and money and all of the militias out of our territory
and everything will be absolutely fine.
The President: The representative of Georgia has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I give
him the floor.
Mr. Kvelashvili (Georgia): I thank the President
for allowing my delegation to take the floor for a second
time. I am responding to the statement by the Russian
Federation, in particular the part of the statement
regarding Georgia. I want to repeat the words just
spoken by my Ukrainian colleague. Russia just has to
do one thing, namely, get out of Georgia and Ukraine.
If it leaves our territories, then everything will be fine.
As for the so-called normalization of relations
with the occupation regime that Russia established
on Georgian soil in 2008, Russia engaged in a war of
aggression against Georgia — the same type of war that
we now see in Ukraine. After the war of aggression,
Russia established an occupation regime. So how can
we normalize relations with a regime that is part of a
bigger problem, namely, the Russian Federation itself?
Let me also go into more detail about the rights
of children under Russian occupation. The Georgian
children living under Russian occupation are being
prevented from exercising their fundamental rights. In
particular, a Russian curriculum is being imposed on the
Georgian schools in the occupied territories. Teachers
are promised a salary only if they teach according to
a curriculum approved by the Russian State. Teachers

15-1838095/96

S/PV.7466

Children and armed conflict

that disobey the foreign directives and instruct their
students in Georgian are subjected to harassment and
prosecution by the occupation regime. That is the
reality on the ground — at least part of the reality.

96/96

18/06/2015

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 7.35 p.m.

15-18380
