TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

8 OCTOBER

197 I

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. , . . . . . . , . ,. , . , . .. ,. . , . .. . . , ,,

1

. . . , , ,. , . . . . . . . . , . ,. . , , . ,. .. . . . . . . , . I.

1

Complaint
by Zambia:
Letter dated 6 October 197 1 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10352)
. . , , , . , , . , , , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . , , , , , , . . . , s. , . , .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1590)

Adoption

of the agenda

S/PV. 1590

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security. Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND NINETIETH

Held in New York on Friday, 8 October
President: Mr. Guillermo

SEVILLA SACASA (Nicaragua).

MEETING
1971, at3.30

p.m.

uriderstanding that they will be seated at the Council table
when they wish to speak.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. V, J. Mwaanga
(Zambia), took a place at the Council table; and Mr I,
Elinewinga (United Republic of Tanzania); Mr. 0. Ariko
(Nigeria); Mr. H. Muller, (South Africa); and Mr. J. OderoJowi (Kenya) took the placesreservedfor them.

Provisional agenda(S/Agenda/l 590)

‘4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):I call

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Complaint by Zambia:
Letter dated 4 October 1971 from the Permanent
Representative of Zambia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10352).

on the representative of Zambia to open the debate on this
item.
5. Mr, MWAANGA (Zambia): Mr, President, I wish, first

and foremost, to thank you most sincerely and, through
you, the members of the Security Council for having
speedily responded to our request contained in dpcument
S/10352, dated 6 October 1971, to convene urgently a
meeting of the Security Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agendawasadopted,
Complaintby Zambia
Letter dated 6 October 1971 from the PermanentRepresentative of Zambia to the United Nations addressed
to
the Presidentof the Security Council (S/10352)

I, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):I have
received letters from the Permanent Representatives of
Zambia, the United Republic of Tanzania, Nigeria, South
Africa and Kenya, in which they asked to be invited to
participate, without the right to vote, in the discussion of
the item on the agenda for this meeting. The letters of the
representatives of Zambia [S/10358], the United Republic
of Tanzania [S/103.57/, Nigeria [S/10359/ and South
Africa [S/10360] have been distributed. The letter af the
representative of Kenya will be distributed in due cburse.
2. In accordance with the provisional rules of procedure of
the Council and with past practice in such casesI shall, with
the consent of the Council, invite the representatives of
Zambia, the United Republic of Tanzania, Nigeria, South
Africa and Kenya to participate in our debate, without the
right to Vote.
3. Since the representative of Zambia is the first speaker
on my list, I invite him to be seated at the Council table. I
likewise invite the representatives of the United Republic of
Tanzania, Nigeria, South Africa and Kenya to take the
places reserved fbr them in the Council chambel, on the

6. I take this opportunity to register my delegation’s
sincere pleasure and satisfaction on your assumption of the
high office of President of the Security Council for this
month. I had the pleasure of working with you on the
Council for one year, and I can testify with confidence that
you will bring your Latin wisdom and wealth of experience
to bear on this Council. Apart from anything else, you
represent a country with which my country maintains the
best of relations. We regard you as a true friend of Zambia
and of Africa as a whole and, indeed, an apostle of freedom,
human equality, justice and peace; and that is why it gives
me added pleasure to pay you a fitting tribute.
7. This august Council is meeting

at our request to
consider a series of systematic and premeditated violations
of the sovereignty, airspace and territorial integrity of
Zambia by the armed forces of the fascist white minority
Government ‘of the Republic of South Africa. This is a
grave situation involving none other than the same axis of
the racist and fascist white minority r&$nes of southern
Africa which, in accordance with the dictates of their
unholy alliance, not only act in concert, but also-perhaps
for tactical reasons-alternate their criminal acts directed
against independent African States.
8. On 5 October 1971, at 1930 hours Zambian time, units
of the South African Army entered Zambia illegally at
Katima Mulilo in speedboats and helicopters, allegedly
pursuing invisible freedom fighters who, they assumed, had
entered the Caprivi Strip in the United Nations Territory of
Nambia, through Zambia. The South African armed forces
spent some time inside Zambia looking for those invisible

Ii
1i

(2) On 6 January 1970, a South African military aircraft
violated Zambian airspace by deliberately flying over
Zambian territory from the Caprivi Strip.

freedom fighters and, on satisfying themselves that they
were on a wild-goose chase, shamefully retreated to their
military base at the Caprivi Strip. Military experts call this
policy “hot pursuit”, or the “doctrine of anticipatory
counter-attack”,
or “carrying the war into enemy territory”, and so on. We have been aware of South Africa’s
aggressive designs from the time early in 1968 when
Mr, Vorster, the Prime Minister of South Africa, stated that
he would “hit Zambia so hard that she will never forget it”.

(3) On 11 January 1970, a South African military
aircraft violated Zambian airspace by flying from the
Caprivi Strip military base over Zambian territory up to
Sesheke District, Boma.
(4) On 15 January 1970, a South African military
aircraft violated Zambian airspace by flying over Zambian
territory at Katima Mulilo, inside Zambia.

9. The usually pro-Vorster and pro-apartheid newspapers
of South Africa have quoted Mr. Vorster as having told a
convention of the Transvaal organization of his ruling
Nationalist Party that the South African Government
would pursue freedom fighters “all the way to Lusaka”, the
Zambian capital, if necessary. His all-white audience is
reported to have warmly applauded Mr. Vorster’s dramatic
announcement, thus signalling their approval of his aggressive intentions, I have press dispatches from many news
agencies and newspapers representing all shades of opinion,
but I will refrain from quoting them because our case is not
based on mere press reports. It is a well-documented factual
account, which represents a true picture of the sad events
which have been taking place on our border with Namibia,
involving the occupation forces of the Pretoria regime. The
world press, with a few usual exceptions, has for the past
two days been reporting the bitter disagreements which
have arisen between Mr. Vorster and the South African
press over what he is supposed to have told his Nationalist
Party Convention in Transvaal. We could very well have
made use of some of the interesting editorials which
appeared yesterday, 7 October 1971, in the Rand Daily
Mail, the Cape Times, the Johannesburg Star, and so on,
accusing Mr. Vorster of double-talk. We are not interested
in seeking vantage points. We are not interested in scoring
propaganda victories. We are only interested in telling the
Security Council the truth as we know it.

(5) On 19 January 1970, a South African military
helicopter violated Zambia’s airspace by flying over Zam
bian territory around the Sesheke District bordering the
Caprivi Strip.
(6) On 21 February 1970, one red boat from the Caprivi
Strip with three South African soldiers illegally landed at
Katima Mulilo Pontoon harbour in Zambia.
(7) On 22 February 1970, a white South African in a red
police speed-boat came to the harbour at KatimaMulilo at
a point where both banks of the Zambezi River are in
Zambian territory.
(8) Two days later, on 24 February 1970, a South
African “WENELA”-marked
aircraft violated Zambian
airspace by flying over the Zambian Immigration and
Customs Office at Katima Mulilo. A few minutes later, a
South African military aircraft and a helicopter flew along
the border on patrol. I wish to point out that WENELA is a
South African agency which recruits cheap slave labour to
work in South Africa.
(9) On 27 February 1970, yet another South African
military helicopter violated Zambian airspace by hovering
on Katima Mulilo Government school, inside Zambian
territory.

10. Despite denials yesterday by Mr. Vorster, the South
African Prime Minister, and Mr. Lourens Muller, the South
African Police Minister, I have been authorized to state
categorically and truthfully that at a diplomatic briefing
which was held in Pretoria for a few selected ambassadors
of Western countries, Mr. Vorster specifically mentioned
Zambia as the country penetrated by South African armed
forces. This information was communicated to the Govemment of Zambia by one of the friendly Western countries
which were represented at the diplomatic briefing. The
name of this friendly Western country will not be disclosed
for the purpose of this debate; suffice it to say that this
country maintains diplomatic relations with both Zambia
and the Pretoria regime.

(10) A day later, on 28 February 1970, a South African
police speed-boat came into the Pontoon at Kasane on the
western bank of the Zambezi River inside Zambia,
(11) On 3 March 1970, a South African aircraft alsir
owned by the WENELA Company in the Caprivi Strip
violated Zambia’s airspace at Katima Mulilo by flying ow
Zambian territory from the Caprivi Strip.
(12) On 14 April 1970, a South African DC-3 aircraft
with WENELA markings violated Zambia’s airspace at
Sesheke. It had originated from the Caprivi Strip nlililarY
base.

11. This is not the first time that South Africa has
systematically and deliberately violated our territorial
integrity with impunity. I will now give the Security
Council a chronological list of some of South Africa’s
wanton violations of my country’s sovereignty, airspace and
territorial integrity:

(13) On the same day, 14 April 1970, two South African
soldiers in Land Rover Registration No. ECZ 18 crossed
into Zambia at the Zambia-Caprivi border at Katima Mdh
Still on the same day, two white South African armed
soldiers in a Vannet, Registration No. G.476, violated
Zambia’s territory at the Zambia-Caprivi border.

(1) On 26 October 1968, a Zambian national was
illegally arrested by the South African security forces near
the Caprivi Strip.

(14) On 28 April 1970, a South African military heli,
copter violated Zam.bian airspace by flying over the
2

immigration post of Katima Mulilo. The helicopter flew at a
very low altitude, thereby terrifying Zambian villagers.

(d) It firmly believes in the principle of the inalienable
right of the peoples of southern Africa and Guinea-Bissau
to seIf-determination and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV);

(15) On 23 June 1970, a South African aircraft with
WENELA markings violated Zambian airspace at Katima
M&lo at the border with the Caprivi Strip.

(e) It is firmly opposed to white supremacy;

(16) Two days later, on 25 June 1970, a South African
military aircraft flew over Sesheke, inside Zambia, from the
Caprivi Strip.

(f) It is a faithful Member of the United Nations and
strictly adheres to its obligations under Article 25 of the
United Nations Charter.

(17) On 7 July 1970, a South African DC-3 aircraft flew

13: This is the nature of the problem. It is obvious that
South Africa is feeling the pressure of the liberation
movements, and is now desperately trying to let off steam
on Zambia.

over Katima Mulilo residential compound which is inside
Zambian territory,
(18) On 26 July 1970, a high-altitude aircraft belonging

to the South African Air Force stationed in the Caprivi

14. I have been instructed to state in no uncertain terms
that the Government of Zambia accepts no responsibility
whatsoever for the activities of the Namibian freedom
fighters inside Namibia in their just struggle to resist South
Africa’s occupation and oppression, Today Zambia is in a
state of undeclared war with South Africa and other white
minority regimes which form the unholy alliance.

Strip violated Zambian airspace,
(19) On 8 August 1970, a South African military aircraft
flew twice over the Katima Mulilo residential compound
inside Zambian territory.
(20) On 4 March 1971, two South African soldiers
entered Zambia on foot at about 1600 hours at Katima
Mulilo. They interviewed Zambian nationals and inquired
about the movement of the Zambian paramilitary police.
One of them was arrested and prosecuted. His friend
managed to escape.

15. The root cause of our deep-seated differences with
South Africa is undoubtedly apartheid. Furthermore, we
have consistently opposed South Africa’s policy of creating
client States, of making Africa its own sphere of political
and economic domination. The white man in South Africa
has been preparing and continues to prepare for war and for
the continuation of his political policy by other means.

(21) Two days later, on 6 March 1971,12 South African
soldiers in uniform crossed into Zambia at Katima Mulilo in
the Sesheke District.

16. The military strategy of the racist regime falls into at
least two main categories. First, the rdgime has adopted a
military posture aimed at keeping the white-dominated
southern portion of Africa intact, while simultaneously
pushing the rigime’s military defence line far to the north,
thus creating a system of buffer States around itself.
Secondly, it has built a major military base in the Caprivi
Strip in the northernmost tip of Namibia, nearly ‘1,000
miles from its own borders with the international Territory
of Namibia, for the sole purpose of internal repression and
suppression in Namibia and of striking at neighbouring
independent African States opposed to its criminal policies.

(22) On 9 May 197 1, two South African soldiers crossed
into Zambia in a military Land-Rover at Katima Mulilo.
(23) On the same day, 9 May 1971, a South African
military boat, Registration No. VASBYT 305034, was
found on the Zambian side of Zambezi River near Sesheke.
South African army personnel later claimed it, saying that
they had run out of petrol during what they called

“patrols”.
(24) As already noted, on 5 October

1971, at about

1930 hours, Zambian time, units of the South African army

17. We believe that the Security Council, given its special
responsibility under the United Nations Charter to maintain
international peace and security, has an inescapable duty to
take appropriate, corrective and meaningful measures to
put an end to these violations which could well lead to a
full-scale war.

entered Zambia at Katima Mulilo using speed-boats and
helicopters allegedly pursuing freedom fighters whom they
assumed to have entered the Caprivi Strip through Zambia.
12. That is a sad catalogue of serious incidents conducted
by an occupation force across international frontiers against
Zambia-a small, peace-loving country whose only crime is

18. It will be recalled that on 20 March 1969 I informed
the Security Council about South Africa’s frequent violations of Zambia’s airspace and territorial integrity. [1464tk
meeting, para. 49.1 In addition to the violations I have
already tabulated, it is important for me to state that South
Africa has been interfering in our internal affairs by, among
other things, financing reactionary opposition parties inside
Zambia with a view to destroying the unity of the Zambian
people, However, having lamentably failed, it has now
embarked on a programme of direct military action against
Zambia in the hope that it can influence the policies of the
Government. I wish to state that our opposition to

that :
[ai Through no fauIt of its own, it happens to border the
international territory of Namibia, which is currently under
an illegal white minority regime based in Pretoria;
(bj

It believes in a policy of non-racialism;

(cl

It is uncompromisingly

opposed to the so-called

dialogue with South Africa and the so-called outwardlooking policy;
3

apartheid in all its manifestations is total and uncompromising.

our complaint affords the Security Council an opportunity
to prevent what is bound to be a racial war. This problem 1s
so important to us that we reject in advance any verbal and
meaningless statements of support from members of the
Council. We shall judge your friendship and belief in tl~e
principles of the United Nations Charter by the manner ia
which you finally cast your votes.

19. My country desires nothing but peace and stability on
its borders, and it is unrealistic to talk about peace with
South Africa until the major problems of apartheid and
race are resolved, Race and its twin sister, colour, threaten
the peace and stability of the African continent as a whole.
The spectre of a racial conflict on a global scale, and the
consequences for the world, cannot but be frightening for
all peace.loving nations. It is necessary to examine briefly
the nature of this conflict with South Africa.

23. We know that it has become fashionable for the
Security Council to send fact-finding missions for purposes
of “verification”, in order to satisfy the doubting Thomases
who have subsequently been unable, anyway, to support
the unanimous findings of its own fact-finding missions.
While these missions have performed a useful function, they
have cast serious doubts on the integrity of the Govern.
ments which have lodged the complaints. Nevertheless,
should the Council be thinking in terms of sending a visiting
mission to Zambia, I have been authorized by my Govera.
ment to state that Zambia would welcome it and accord it
all the necessary assistance, on the clear understanding-1
repeat, on the clear understanding-that it will also be given
uninhibited access to Namibia. For unless the visiting
mission visits both countries, namely, Zambia on the one
hand and the international Territory of Namibia on the
other, no balanced report would emerge, because the
mission would come back only with the Zarnbian side of
the problem,

20. In our view the conflict is, first, one of colour; and,
secondly, one of religious fanaticism based on certain
misconceptions about the nature of man, which became a
unifying force within the white community-a community
of the “chosen”, with a destiny which only white people
are privileged to have. Fear of competition from the black
majority felt by the poor whites of South Africa and
Namibia was the main reason for discrimination and
apartheid; but since then it has turned into a ruthless
struggle for the survival of the white race in southern
Africa. The result has been a chain reaction of fear breeding
fear, suspicion, prejudice, hatred; and then, as the screw of
apartheid is tightened, the inevitable racial war must surely
occur. Through a blind obsession the South African
authorities have flouted and suppressed all moral, legal and
scientific arguments to sanction white superiority. Apartheid is thus a dangerous rationalization of an ideology
which is protectionist in purpose but defeatist in fact, and
destructive in the final analysis.

24. In conclusion, let me make it quite clear that we have
confidence that the Security Council, the custodian of the
conscience of the international community, will take a
decision which will help assure and guarantee the freedom,
independence and security of small and weak States suchas
Zambia. We have not come here to ask favours, but onIy to
ask that justice be done, The Security Council’s decision
will go a long way towards resolving the crisis of confidence
from which this Organization is suffering, We are confident
that this will help bridge the wide gap between promise and
accomplishment.

21. As members of the Security Council, you have
assumed crucial positions of leadership in the international
community. You must have the courage to exercise not
only paramount but responsible authority over our affairs.
Leadership, to be worth exercising and asserting, must be
genuine, responsible, and in the interest of those over
whom it is being exercised. Your leadership, without wider
morality, is brutal leadership and is not worthy of the
human society. You, as leaders of our Organization, must
be toId in no uncertain terms that successful leadership
does not merely call for political ingenuity and clever
manipulation of awkward situations, nor the scoring of
diplomatic victories and the inflicting of defeats; it calls,
above all, for the mustering of all moral stamina, courage,
honesty, and a dedication to face the truth and to shape
and steer the ship of humanity perpetually on its proper
course to safety, stability and peace for the progress and
happiness of all. Never before in history have these qualities
of leadership been more in demand than today when the
world is so delicately balanced between survival and
destruction.

25. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I am
grateful to the representative of Zambia for his cordial
words about me. I take them as an expression of the
courtesy which is so characteristic of the noble people of
Zambia and of its worthy representative, who is held in

such high esteem by all of us.
26. I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter, dated 7 October 1971, signed by 44
representatives of African States, supporting Zambia’s
request for the convening of this meeting in connexion with
its complaint set forth in (document S/10352). The letter
in question will be distributed in due course.
27. The next speaker on the list is the Minister for Fore@
Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania. I invite him ta
be seated at the Council table and to make his statemant.

22. We have stated our case objectively and without any
emotion. Our country is the object of aggression committed
by the South African occupation authorities in Namibia.
We hope that in considering our complaint the Security
Council will draw a distinction between the aggressor and
the victim of aggression. In the past, the Security Council
has been rightly accused of taking action in the form of
arranging cease-fires between the countries already at war.
This is obviously a highly unsatisfactory state of affairs, and

28. Mr. ELINEWINGA
(United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, my delegation is grateful to you as well asIQ
the members of the Council for the opportunity afforded
us to address the Council on this grave and serious matli%
29. The Ambassador of Zambia, who preceded me, has
already presented in eloquent terms a detailed report
4

pertaining to the aggression committed against his country
by the South African racist regime. At the very outset I
,should like to make it quite clear that this cowardly attack
and provocation against Zambia is considered by my
Government as an attack not only against that sister
Republic but also against my own country and against the
entire African continent. Hence Zambia’s complaint is
Tanzania’s complaint. It is also and above all Africa’s
complaint,

them to untold miseries and systematic repression,can
hardly be expected to abide by international norms and
morality. The truth is that the regimein Pretoriahasmore
than distinguished itself as an outlaw thriving in the
constant violation of all the purposesand principles that
the United Nations standsfor. Mr. Vorster’sregimeandthe
Charter of our Organization have alwaysbeenknown to be
strangebedfellows,

This is not the first time that an African State has
complained to the Council, nor is it the first time that
Africa has come to appealto the Council to exerciseits
responsibilitiesas conferredon it by the Charter. Indeed, as
this Council is meetingto deliberateon the latest aggression
by South Africa againstthe Republic of Zambia,it already
has before it reports of its Mission to the Republic of
Guinea’ and of its Mission to Senegal2concerningPortugueseaggressionagainstthose two sisterAfrican Republics, Furthermore, the Council is still seized of the
consideration of the illegal occupation of Namibiaby the
South African minority regime.
30.

3 1, In his letter to the Presidentof the Security Council
[S/10352], the PermanentRepresentativeof Zambia has
already informed the Council of the numerousviolations of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of his country by
South African forces. In the statementhe hasjust made,
the Zambian representativehasgiven further elaborationof
this seriousmenaceto his country’s security and independence. It .is clear that these violations conform to a
well-calculated and co-ordinated plan by the racist regime
of South Africa and the colonial authorities in Lisbon
against the Republic of Zambia and independentAfrican
States, particularly thosebordering on the Territoriesunder
colonial and racist domination. In this connexion the
Council will not fail to take note of the fact that
harassment, provocation and seriousthreats to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of African Stateshave now
become the normal behaviour of the Pretoria andLisbon
authorities.

34. Thus, in analysingthe true nature of the obnoxious
systemof South African apartheid exemplifiedin the whole
scale of massive violations of the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of the non-white population in
South Africa itself, the illegal occupation of Namibia
coupled with the transplanting of the apartheid systemin
that international Territory, and the aggression
againstthe
people of Zimbabwe and Mozambique by South African
military forces operatingin those Territories, the aggression
against the Republic of Zambia is part of a continuous
process.It is clear that that processconfronts the international community, and more particularly this Council,with
a seriouschallenge.Failure to act swiftly and speedilynow
can only sharpenthe confrontation, with untold repercussionsnot only to the peaceand security of the region but
indeed to international peaceand security. For let therebe
no underestimation of the determination and the resolute
commitment of those who are now in the clutchesof racist
and colonial domination to free themselvesand attain
self-determination and human dignity. Let there be no
illusions as to the determination of free Africa to defend
jealously its freedom and independence and to support
unreservedlythe just causeof those of our brotherswho are
still languishing under inhuman oppressionand exploitation. Mr. Vorster and his fellows can attack Zambia, as
their security forces haveindeed already done.But it would
be the height of absurdity and self-delusionto imaginethat
such attacks can compromisethe iron will of the Zambian
people to defend their freedom and independence.
35. Zambia, like Tanzania, and indeed like many other
African States, may not be a powerful nation Our
resourcesmay be limited. But one thing which we have in
abundance is our unqualified love for our freedom and
independence, and our belief that this freedom is indi.
visible. It is important that those who cherishdreamsas
well as illusions of re-colonizing the African continent
should ponder this cardinal truth. Africa will defend its
honour and freedom, and in southern Africa we are
committed to support until final victory the struggleof our
suffering brethren.

32. Ultimatums againstZambia, the DemocraticRepublic
of the Congo, the People’sRepublic of the Congo,Guinea,
Senegal and the United Republic of Tanzania are issued
daily by these fascist authorities. A year or so ago the
international community must have been alarmedby the
arrogant threat made by Mr. Vorster againstthe Republic
of Zambia in particular.
33. By their latest armed incursion into the territory of
Zambia, the South African racistshave made good their
aggressiveand warlike threats againstthat sisterState. It is
indeed ironical that Mr, Vorster’s minority regimeshould
treat with contempt the sacredprinciple enshrinedin the
Charter of our Organization on the inviolability of the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of a Member State.
However, that should not come as a surprise to the
international community. For, after all, a regime which
ddlumanizes the majority of its own population, subjecting

36. The attack on Zambiais a challengeto Africa’s honour
and dignity, and needlessto say that continent’s unequivocal support of and solidarity with the Zambian people
and Government will find its expressionin concreteterms,
The question, however, is: what about the responsibilityof
this Council, in which the peoples of the world placetheir
hopes for the preservation of international peace and
security?
37. I referred earlier in my address to the sharpening
confrontation. The situation is both dangerousand explosive. Yet this is not the first time we have drawn the
attention of this Council, and that of the GeneralAssem-

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-sixth
Year, Special Supplement No. 4.
2 Ibid., Special Supplement No. 3.

5

bly, to the grave problems of southern Africa, Eminent
African Heads of State have repeatedly warned of the
impending serious conflagration unless the situation is
immediately checked. In response to those genuine and
realistic expressions of concern, we have been confronted
with an attitude of virtual apathy on the part of some of
the permanent members of this Council, allies and supporters of the racist and colonialist regimes in Africa.
38. Those major Powers have not only failed to live up to
their responsibilities as befitting permanent members of the
Security Council, but, through their diabolical policies of
fraternization with and their active military, economic,
political and diplomatic support for those very repressive
and aggressive regimes, have contributed in no small
measure to the further aggravation of the tension in the
area. And, adding insult to injury, Africa’s expressions of
grave concern at this serious threat directed against our
continent have been depicted, at best, as alarmist.
39. Let this despicable and cowardly incursion into
Zambian soil by South African security forces serve as an
eye-opener to those who profess complacency over the
explosive situation in southern Africa. Let it awaken the
conscience of those who were still in doubt as to South
Africa’s aggressive designs. But, above all, this situation
should provide a proper opportunity for the Security
Council to reexamine its position vis-&is southern Africa.

43. My Government wishes at this juncture to highlight
particularly our serious concern over the continued supply
of arms to those regimes. We have repeatedly pointed oat
not only that the arms sales to South Africa constitute a
violation of the arms embargo resolution adopted by this
Council [282 (1970)/ but, above all, that such sales
constitute direct assistance to the apartheid rkgime, enabling it to perfect its oppressive and repressive machinery
internally, as well as to launch aggression against independent African States. This Council is not unaware of the
ingenious explanations given by those who prefer to shy
away from their responsibilities and obligations in an
attempt to justify the continued sale of arms to South
Africa.
44. The falacious concept of arms for internal repression
as distinct from arms for external aggression is too well
known to the Council, and indeed I need not elaborate
further. We have consistently maintained that to sell arms
to South Africa is to increase its capability to commit
aggression both against its own people and against indepen.
dent African States, as in the caseof Zambia this time. The
attack against Zambia is an eloquent vindication of ow
position-if such a vindication were really needed, To
continue arming South Africa following this incident
against Zambia and then profess friendship for the Africans
would be the cruelest mockery of logic and reason.
45. The ruling circles of South Africa today are desperate
men. That desperation has been caused by their inability to
crush completely the mounting tide of resistance by the
oppressed people both in South Africa and in Namibia. For
no regime, no nation, however powerful or ruthless, can put
off for ever the quest for freedom, The South African
authorities are now beginning to reap the fruits of their
years of systematic inhuman subjugation of people.
Steadily but surely the Namibians are rising to the demands
of the hour. The people of South Africa of all shadesof
colour-blacks as well as whites-are resisting the regime.
Witness, for example, the current desperate persecution of
church leaders, as evidenced by the trial of the Anglican
Dean of Johannesburg.

40. Therefore, while taking appropriate measures to overcome effectively this latest challenge posed by the apertheid regime, the Council should also start to consider very
seriously the most effective ways to avoid the blood bath
now looming very large on that part of our continent,
There is no longer time for half-hearted measures, nor for
ambiguous resolutions which are subject to violation by the
very members whose primary responsibility it is to maintain
international peace and security.
41. Here we should like once again to launch a solemn
appeal to those allies of South Africa and the colonial
authorities in Lisbon to desist from their misguided policies
of aiding and abetting the aggressors.We urge them to opt
for freedom and human understanding, rather than collaborate in the enslavement of the African people. We urge
them to put principles before considerations of short-term
policy interests and profits. We urge them to be on the side
of justice.

46. Thus the problem is within Namibia and within South
Africa itself. The struggle is between the oppressed Namls
bians and the oppressed Africans in South Africa, on the
one hand, and the fascist regime of Pretoria, on the other.
TO divert attention from what is happening in its own
country, and also in the international Territory it illegally
and forcibly occupies, the South African regime is searching
for hypothetical external enemies. Currently Zambia would
seem to have suited its objective; hence the invasion of
Zambian territory, But desperate men of history have been
known to do desperate things, and Mr. Vorster and his
collaborators should not be regarded as exceptions. That is
why my Government is seriously concerned at this latest
attack on Zambia, and that is why we submit that this
Council will be failing its responsibilities under the Charter
and before world public opinion if it fails to condemn this
lates aggression of the South African authorities and to take
appropriate measures to avoid its recurrence in similar
incidents.

42.’ Our solemn appeal is addressed especially to the three
Western permanent members of the Council-the United
States, the United Kingdom and France-since they have
the unenviable privilege of being the principal supporters of
the Pretoria and Lisbon rBgimes by pumping economic and
other assistance to them, which without the slightest doubt
has enabled Mr. Vorster and Mr, Caetano not only to
pursue ruthlessly and efficiently their repressive and oppressive machinery against subjugated African people in South
Africa, Namibia, Angola, Guinea (Bissau) and Mozambique,
but also to indulge in such adventurous and dangerous
exercises as the naked aggression against the Republic of
Senegal and the latest aggression against the Republic of
Zambia.

47. The Security Council must not fail to draw the
appropriate conclusion concerning the bases from which
6

South Africa has mounted its invasion of Zambian territory. For it is no secret that the South African forces that
committed this attack against Zambia operated from
Namibia, an international Territory to which South Africa
forcibly clings despite the decisions of this Council and of
the General Assembly.
48. Thus the Security Council is faced with a clear
situation, a double crime: the continued illegal occupation
of an international Territory and the use of that Territory
by the South African minority regime to violate the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of a Member State of
this Organization. My delegation expects that, when the
Security Council concludes its deliberations on the question
of Namibia in the light of the Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the illegality of South
Africa’s presence in Namibia,3 it will take due account of
the dangerous way in which the international Territory is
currently being used by the South African racist usurpers
and will take decisive measures to end that occupation,
thereby eliminating the possibility of that Territory being
used for aggressive designs.
49, Suitable and effective measures are also urgently
required to eliminate the inhuman system of apartheid, and
also the Portuguese colonies and Portuguese warsin Africa.
Such measures would enable the nations and people of
Africa to live in their traditional peace and brotherhood.
50. One cannot fail to observe that South Africa has
chosen this moment, when the Security Council is discussing the continued illegal occupation of Namibia, to use
that Territory for its aggressivedesigns against Zambia. No
better demonstration of contempt for this Council could be
projected. Seldom has the international community witnessed a greater display of arrogance.
51. The Republic of Zambia, which is the victim of this
Iatest criminal act of the South African racists, not only is
entitled to the support and solidarity of the international
community but also and above all deservesour appreciation
and gratitude. For the people and Government of Zambia
have faithfully adhered to the decisions and resolutions of
both this august Council and the General Assembly of the
United Nations. Zambia not only is committed to the
protection of its independence and the dignity of its people
but has constantly opposed the inhuman policies of
apartheid and colonialism in southern Africa-policies in
regard to which both the Security Council and the United
Nations General Assembly have declared their opposition in
no unequivocal terms.
52. In the process, Zambia has had to make immense
sacrifices and constantly to resist policies of outright
intimidation,
political and economic blackmail and even
direct aggression perpetrated by the colonial and racist
r&me. Indeed, Zambia more than any other single African
country has to bear the great burden of Africa’s quest for
emancipation by preferring freedom to servitude, struggle
to appeasement, principles to capitulation.
3 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of
Soufh Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
Security Council resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion, I.C,J.

Reporrs 1971, p. 16.

53. Before this Council Tanzania pays a tribute to the
people and Government of Zambia, and before this
distinguished gathering we reaffirm our country’s resolute
and unshekable support for and solidarity with our brothers
of Zambia. And we urge the Security Council: the
minimum it can do-if only in recognition of Zambia’s loyal
services to the United Nations and to the world community
as a whole-is to demand that the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of that country be fully and scrupulously
respected.

54. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call
on the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, who
wishes to speak on a point of order,
55. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): Mr. President, I
wish to draw your attention to the fact that you referred to
a letter in support of Zambia’s complaint as having been
signed by 44 African States, That letter has not yet been
distributed, but I should like to note that five of the
signatories are non-African States, as well as my own. I
should like that to be clear,

56. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I am
informed by the Secretariat that the letter referred to by
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic is now being
distributed.
57. The next name on the list of speakers is that of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa. I invite him to
be seated at the Council table and to make his statement.
58. Mr. MULLER (South Africa): Mr. President, I should
like to thank you and the members of the Council for the
opportunity to participate in this debate. I shall confine
myself to the merits of the Zambian charges and shall
ignore the purely political attacks on my country, which
are clearly irrelevant.
59. The representative of Zambia alleaes that on Tuesdav.
5 October 1’971, South African forces illegally crossedin%
Zambian territory. Now, incidents did in fact occur in the
Caprivi Strip on that and the previous day. The following
are the basic facts.
60. On 4 October members of the South African police
force were patrolling near the border between the Eastern
Caprivi and Zambia when their vehicle was blown up by a
landmine. Four of the occupants were very seriously
injured. On the following day, when other members of the
police force were investigating the incident, another landmine exploded, killing one of the police officers concerned.
61. The trail of four persons was found leading from the
direction of the Zambian border to the location of the
landmines and back again in the direction of the Zambian
border,
62. My Prime Minister has repeatedly and publicly warned
in the past that the South African Government will not
tolerate attacks upon our people or the people of South
West Africa from across the borders of the Republic or of
the Territory. No country, he has pointed out, can permit
hostile persons or forces to attack with impunity its
territory or territories under its control.

I
,
j,
jj
:j
/~
i!

63. The Prime Minister of South Africa stated that steps
were therefore being taken to pursue the culprits, and that
the pursuers would defend themselves if they were to be
attacked.

Zambians to cross the Caprivi border freely, without
passports, for hospital treatment on the South West African
side of the border.
68. From what I have said, it will be clear that the charges
of the Zambian Government are entirely unfounded and,
indeed, frivolous.

64. In point of fact-and I am authorized so to inform the
Council-the South African police forces did not in the
event cross the Zambian border. They followed the trail left
by the four persons to where it disappeared within the area
of the Caprivi Strip and then returned to their stations. At
no time, therefore, was the Zambian border in any way
violated. A public statement issued by the responsible
South African Minister yesterday afternoon in this connexion reads as follows:

69. There are, however, other incidents which have OF
curred, incidents of a far more serious nature, which involve
the deliberate violation of the territorial integrity of South
West Africa. I refer to the infiltration of armed bands across
the border from Zambia into the Caprivi. They crossthe
border in order to cause death and destruction. Today’s
complaint involved just such an armed incursion. This year
alone, mines exploded on five occasions: on 22 May,
4 October, 5 October when two explosions occurred and
7 October.

“With regard to certain reports to the effect that the
border guards were still engaged in pursuing terrorists, I
wish to state clearly that all members of the police are at
their bases and carrying on with their normal duties.

70. At whose door is the responsibility for those incursions to be laid? The answer will be clear when I tell the
members of this Council that these armed bands operate
from camps situated in Zambia, that they shelter and are
given shelter on Zambian soil, that they receive the support
of the Zambian Government.

“After the landmine explosions, follow-up operations
were naturally carried out by the South African police;
but they did not in the process enter the territory of any
foreign State.”
I must therefore categorically reject the allegations of the
representative of Zambia. No proof whatsoever has been
advanced by him in support of his allegations. He has, in an
attempt to substantiate his allegations, referred to reports
in certain South African newspapers.My Prime Minister has
publicly stated that those reports, which appeared in both
Government and Opposition newspapers, placed unwarranted or unauthorized interpretations on remarks which he
had made, Those reports are therefore irrelevant to the
allegations, especially in circumstances in which the responsible Minister subsequently categorically denied that the
Zambian border had been violated.

71. There are several of these camps in Zambia, some of
them within striking distance of the Caprivi border. We
have asked Zambia to take ail steps necessary to prevent
armed incursions from Zambia into South West Africa. But,
as members will see, there has been little if any response
from Zambia. Is it any wonder, then, that my Prime
Minister felt called upon to issue the statement he made the
other day?
72. It is the policy of the Government of South Africa to
avoid border incidents and violations of the airspace of
neighbouring countries, I can assure the Council that every
reasonable precaution is taken to guard against occurrences
of this nature, But I must state clearly in this Council that
in the case of incursions of terrorists, we do not compromise. We have a duty to protect the inhabitants of South
Africa and South West Africa against acts of terrorism, and
we shall do everything in our power to prevent the
commission of such acts or to apprehend the culprits.

65. The representative of Zambia has also referred to
incidents which have occurred in the past, Instances of
unauthorized border crossings and trespassing on airspace
have indeed occurred in the area of the Zambian Eastern
Caprivi border; but both sides have been responsible, not
only South Africa, These crossings are unintentional,
caused by the twisting river boundary between Zambia and
the Caprivi Strip and the fact that the border is not always
in mid-stream, In the case of aircraft, they occur because
the planes, owing to the wind direction, have to crossthe
border in the course of normal take-off and landing
procedures, Indeed, this happens’frequently in the caseof
Zambian aircraft taking off from Sesheke in the direction
of Caprivi.

73, Mr. SIMBANANIYE

(Burundi) (inrelpretatiun

fraln

French): The situation created by the recent violation of

the national sovereignty of the Republic of Zambia by the
forces of Pretoria has added to a long series of attacks
directed against innocent and independent countries. The
gravity of that sad event, the active ,African solidarity, the
links which have always been cordial between the Republics
of Burundi and Zambia, the mandate given to the Ad HOC
Sub-Committee on Namibia-of
which our Permanent
Representative, Ambassador Terence, has twice been
elected Chairman-are reasons which compel us to make a
statement in the General Assembly at a later date so as to
concentrate on the urgent debate imposed by South Africa.

66. I may mention that in notes to the South African
Government of 23 October 1969 and 5 May 1970, Zambia
complained of eight violations of airspaceby South Africa.
On the other hand, Zambia, between November 1969 and
July 1971, violated South West African airspace on no
fewer than 12 occasions: on 19 November 1969,3,4,7,
13, 16, 22 and 31 December 1969, If January 1970,
5 February 1970,ll September 1970 and 27 July 1971.

74. Mr. Vorster’s threat against Zambia, a peaceful COUP
try, at the very time when the Security Council is seized of
the problem of Namibia, illustrates a boundless scorn for
the United Nations and its organs, What is worse, the

67. In spite of all the unauthorized crossings on the part
of Zambia, the South African authorities still allow
I .
8

regime which he governs gives evidence of its incorrigible
and obstinate determination to trample underfoot the
principles of the Charter, in particular Article 2. It is
therefore beyond doubt that the advocates of apartheid are
determined to add fuel to the flames, Whereas all United
Nations organs-from the General Assembly to the International Court of Justice through to the Security Councilhave agreed to condemn the inhuman acts perpetrated
against the non-white inhabitants of South Africa and
Namibia, as well as the attempts at annexation of that
international Territory, Pretoria merely lets its expansionist
appetite grow. Thus the surfeit of arrogance and effrontery
has led the racist Government to extend its fury to
sovereign States on our continent.
75. Reprimanded as it has been on all sides, both by its
enemies and by its friends, because of its impertinent
refusal to comply with international commitments, with
decisions and resolutions of the Security Council, which
call on it to evacuate a Territory which falls under
international jurisdiction, that regime is determined to
obfuscate the present situation. Furthermore, its delaying
tactics are intended to obstruct the progress of the
deliberations on Namibia. Mr. Vorster, drunk with military
power, allows himself to violate the sovereignty of an
independent country. In its profound delusion, the Govemment of Pretoria pretends and claims that the explosion in
which one policeman met his death and others were
wounded was caused by Namibians sheltered in Zambia.
This is yet another pretext for its annexationist appetite.
76. Namibians, whether refugees or fighting for freedom,
are fully entitled to recover their human rights, their
possessionsand their honour which have been despoiled by
the foreign occupiers. The liberators of their homeland of
Namibia do not operate exclusively from abroad. Despite
the tyranny imposed on their country, those valiant
champions of human dignity succeed in carrying out their
liberation action within the Territory itself. Resistance by
the citizens whose inalienable rights have been violated wills
continue and become more intense against the occupying’
Power as long as the violent illegal military occupation of
Namibia lasts. This legitimate resistance cannot in any case
be imputed to Zambia.
77. No doubt the Government of Pretoria, increasingly
overwhelmed by the synchronized initiatives of the protagonists of independence, hastens to vent its anger on a
scapegoat and thus disguise its powerlessness-which is
obvious-to muzzle a people seeking national sovereignty.
78. While South Africa, armed to the teeth, brandishing its
missles against independent African States, is none the less
incapable of annihilating the liberation movements, how
dare it pen&e Zambia, which has no call to become a
shield for Pretoria against those who are carrying on a
nationalist struggle?
79. On severa occasions members of the Security Council
have been seized of similar cases of acts of aggression
committed by South Africa. Today when we were nearing
agreement to implement the numerous resolutions of the
Security Council regarding Namibia, our attention is deliberately distracted by South Africa, because we are com-

pelled to examine the new situation created by South
African aggression against Zambia an independent country
which is an honour to Africa and to the international
community.
80. Once again South Africa has placed our Organization
back to the wall. We must close ranks to bring the people
out of the ghettoes. We must defend the noble principles of
freedom, liberty and justice, for which millions of human
beings have given their lives. Nor can we forget how we
fashioned crowns of glory for whites and non-whites alike
who fell side by side on the battlefield when freedom-loving
men rose up against nazism. Solidarity must be the same
now as in the past.
81. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fvom Spanish): I
should like to revert to the statement made a few minutes
ago by the representative of Syria, and to inform the
Council that the signatories of the letter include, in
addition to the African States, the following six countries:
Barbados, Guyana, Malaysia, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Yugoslavia and Trinidad and Tobago. The text of the letter
will be circulated as soon aspossible. I hope that this meets
the point raised by our colleague from Syria.
82. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): Yes, thank you,
Mr. President.
83. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker on the list is the representative of Kenya. I
invite him to be seated at the Council table and to make his
statement,
84. Mr. ODEROJOWI (Kenya): Mr. President, on behalf
of the Republic of Kenya, I take this opportunity to thank
you and the members of the Council for allowing me to
take part in the deliberations of this august Council on the
subject at hand, namely, South Africa’s aggression against
Zambia. Under your guidance and in the spirit and tradition
of justice, objectivity and impartiality for which you and
your country are known, I am confident that you will, as a
representative of a small country like mine, treat this
matter of aggression with the gravity it deserves. My
delegation can expect the Council, as the guardian of
international peace and security, to assist you fully in this
task.
85. Although this meeting of the Council was requested
by the representative of the Republic of Zambia to discuss
aggression by South Africa, Kenya views aggressionon any
African State as committed against itself,
86. On Tuesday, 5 October 1971, the South African racist
regime illegally crossed, with utter impunity, into Zambian
territory; tomorrow it may choose to do the same thing to
another African State. That is why Kenya feels so strongly
about this action and why it has taken the floor to
condemn this vile crime, and consequently requests the
Security Council to ‘take stern measures against the South
African r6gime.
87. The representative of Zambia has already informed the
Council that Mr. Vorster’s racist regime has committed no
less than 24 violations of the territorial integrity of Zambia,

somemembersof the Council. The racist rigime of South
Africa has rightly interpreted this asapproval,and will view
the Council’s inaction with contempt, regardingit as a
licencefor further aggression.

This is a clear manifestation of criminal provocation. It is a
clear case of naked aggression and utter disregard both for
the principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter and
for international law, to which South Africa purports to
subscribe.

95. Let this Council and the world know that a warning
hasbeen soundedmany a time here and in other international forums that tlie South African racist regimeposesthe
greatestthreat to the peaceand security not only of Africa
but of the whole world. Africans in South Africa may
seemhelplessin the face of the military powernow wielded
by the South African racists, but South African or any
other arms will not stem the tide of our people’ssurge
forward to independence.Our peoplewill moveforward to
win their dignity and self-determination. Let the South
African racistslearn the lessonsof Algeria and Kenya, It
fius my delegationwith agony to be awarethat the Africans
in South Africa will break the chainsof this vile dictatorship only after so many years of oppressionand possibly
after a blood bath,

88. Because of the pro-South African stand of certain
members of this Council, Kenya holds that thei share
without any doubt the responsibility for the continued
presence of South Africa in Namibia and South Africa’s
continued contempt for the personality, humanity and
independence of the African people. It is in this context
that the aggression against Zambia must be viewed,
89. By resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, the
General Assembly terminated South Africa’s mandate to
administer Namibia, and thenceforth Namibia came under
the direct responsibility of the United Nations. Therefore,
South Africa’s occupation of Namibia, as the International
Court of Justice has reiterated in its Advisory Opinion of
21 June 1971,4 is not only illegal but also invalid, and is an
affront to the authority of the United Nations, It must
therefore be noted that it is this state of illegal occupation
that has led to what appears to be an easily-calculated
aggression on a peace-loving Member of the United Nations,
namely, the sister Republic of Zambia.

96. I shouldlike to quote what my ForeignMinister said
lastweek when addressing
the GeneralAssembly:
‘I. . . we watch with shock and disbelief the rapidly
growing Anglo-French trade in armswith South Africa in
contravention of the United Nations position. Suchtrade
amounts to an endorsement of the evil system of
apartheid by the leading Western democracies.We hold
that any moveto bolster South Africa militarily isa move
to strangulateAfrican nationalismand self-determination,
and constitutes a threat to the security of Africa, These
armsare bound to be usedfor internal suppression
and
for mounting aggressionagainst the free independent
Statesto the North.“5

90. Kenya is therefore apprehensive that continued support of South Africa by some big Powers, some of them
members of this Council, and those that have been in the
vanguard of imperialism and colonization of Africa, constitutes a direct threat to the independence and sovereignty of
the African countries. It is not unlikely that collusion to
re-colonize Africa could be on hand. It is now up to the
international community, especially this Council, to stand
firm and vindicate the rights and dignity of the oppressed
peoples of southern Africa, Zambia, Namibia, and others.
The Council can do this by taking stern action against the
fascist r&me of South Africa.

97. The words of my Foreign Minister have now been
vindicated, We take no credit for crystal-gazing gifts,
becausethe arroganceof the apartheid regime,its built-in
aggressiveness
against black people, and the support it
continuesto receive from someof the big WesternPowers,
werebound to leadto this state of affairs.

91. This Council, by rendering itself impotent when faced
with issues and problems of aggression, is playing into the
dangerous hands of evil doctrines and forces likely to lead
the world into chaos and bloodshed.

98. My Government calls upon this Council to take the
following measures:

92. Only recently this Council was seized of an issue of
naked aggression; that is, the Portuguese aggression against
the African States of Guinea and Senegal.

(a) to censurein the strongestpossibletermsthe criminal
aggression
that hasbeen perpetratedby the racist regimeof
Pretoria againstthe peace-lovingpeople of Zambia;

93. It is clear that the Portuguese-Rhodesian-South African axis constitutes a serious threat to the dignity of our
brothers; it constitutes a serious threat to peace and
security in Africa and indeed it poses a threat to the
existence of this Organizationitself. Therefore, the United
Nations, through th.isCouncil, must put an immediateend
to aggressionby taking decisiveaction againstthe South
African r6gime.

(b) to demandan unequivocal apology from the aparIheid regimeof South Africa to Zambiathrough this COUIIC~~
for the criminalact of aggression;

94. The criminal activities of the fascist South African
regime are too well known to this Council and to the
international community to require elaboration. Yet it
continues to receive both material and moral supportfrom

99. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):I
highly appreciatethe kind words addressedto me by the
representativeof Kenya.

4 Ibid.

5 See Official Records of the General Assembly, TWenty4iXtb
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1949th meeting,
para.23.

(c) to demand that South Africa give a solemn and
unreservedundertaking that it will in future scrupulously
respect the territorial integrity of the sisterRepublicof
Zambia and of all other sovereign independent African
Statesin southernAfrica.

10

100. The next speaker on the list is the representative of
Nigeria. I invite him to be seated at the Council table and to
make his statement.

101. Mr. ARIKPO (Nigeria): Mr. President, I am grateful
to you for allowing me to participate in this debate. Your
readiness to entertain this complaint and to make provision
for the debate is another indication of your commitment to
world peace and the protection of minorities. I take this
opportunity to express special thanks to you.
102, It has become imperative for me to intervene once
again, for the second time within a week, in your
proceedings. When I had the honour to speak last week,
/15’87th meeting] it was on the question of South Africa’s
refusal to withdraw from Namibia. Today we are confronted with another aspect of this same problem, but a
more serious aspect in that South Africa has perpetrated an
aggression openly from the territory of Namibia against the
territory of a sovereign State, the Republic of Zambia. Mr.
Muller, the South African Foreign Minister, only a few
minutes ago confirmed the reports carried by both Government and Opposition papers in South Africa, to the effect
that the Prime Minister of South Africa had announced that
South African military forces had been ordered by him to
penetrate into Zatnbian territory, allegedly in pursuit of
Namibian freedom fighters operating in the Caprivi Strip,
He went on to say that if the pursuers were attacked on
Zambian territory they would defend themselves, adding
that South African soldiers would, if necessary,penetrate
all the way to Lusaka, the capital.
103. Mr, Muller did imply that this statement had been
made, although he said that the interpretation put on it by
both Government and Opposition papers wasirresponsible.
Of course, it is very typical of him to applaud the press
when it says things favourable to his Government and to
condemn it when it speaks the truth. But before this august
Council Mr. Muller has confirmed that this is in fact the
policy of his Government: that on any occasion when
freedom fighters within Namibia take refuge in a neighbowing African territory, it is the intention of his Government
to carry the internal war in Namibia into that neighbouring
African territory.
104. It is significant to note that the statement in question
was made only two days ago by a man who for the last nine
months has been busy trying to persuade his friends, to
persuade Africans, to persuade the world that he has nc
aggressive designs against his independent African neigh.
bours; a man who claims that he respects the sovereignty of
independent African countries and desires nothing but
dialogue with them,
105. The South African authorities have no evidence, and
Mr. Muller produced none, to show that Zambia had
anything to do with the laying of landmines by the victims
of their wicked, oppressive administration, an administration which they have been labouring these last seven days
to make the Council believe is progressive and selflessin the
interest of the indigenous people of Namibia.
106. This minor incident of a few landmines placed by the
dispossessed but courageous nationalist people of Namibia

has been used as a pretext for terrorizing the civilian
population of Zambia, in the hope that the Governments of
Zambia ancl other independent African countries will be
forced to turn a blind eye to the barbarities that are being
perpetrated against the indigenous people of Namibia in the
name of Western civilization.
107. Contrary to Mr. Muller’s assertion that this incident
is irrelevant to the Namibia debate, I submit that in fact it
underlines the whole issue. The General Assembly and the
Security Council have time and again declared that South
Africa’s presence in Namibia is illegal, that the denial of the
right to self-determination of the people of Namibia is
morally wrong, Hence, even assuming that the Government
of Zambia-a neighbouring African country-gives refuge to
the nationalists who carried out this incident, is Zambia to
be terrorized because it is doing what the United Nations
says is right? I submit that this incident is most relevant to
the Security Council’s decision on the question of Namibia,
now before it.
108. Those of us who are deeply concerned with the
problem of southern Africa have emphasized over and over
again the dangers posed to international peace and security
by the continuation of the open defiance of the Government of South Africa and other minority regimes in that
part of the continent. We have stressed time and again the
need for the United Nations, particularly the Security
Council, to nip in the bud a situation which potentially
may erupt into a full-scale blood bath in that part of our
continent. We have repeatedly stressed the threat which
South Africa and its proteges pose to independent African
countries in that region. What has been the reaction of
those in this Council on whom lies the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security?
109. We are told a little while ago that the situation in
southern Africa does not in fact constitute a threat to
international peace and security, We were told that there is
no need for direct, positive action to be taken by the
Council under the appropriate provisions of the United
Nations Charter, So, South Africa becomes more and more
emboldened by such declarations on the part of the
powerful members of the Council and the apartheidregime
feels no restraint in committing open aggression against the
territorial integrity of a United Nations Member State. I
cannot believe that the most effective way to ensure peace
is to condone evil. Black African States may be militarily
weak today, but no one should regard that situation as
permanent. The time will come when black African States
will fight back, and at that time the world will not escape
the effects of that tight.
110. The aggression by South African forces against the
Republic of Zambia raises once again severa questions
which lie within the power of this Council to answer.First,
it brings into focus, at a time when the Security Councilis
still in the process of considering the Advisory Opinion of
the International Court of Justice, one of the consequences
of the continued occupation of Namibia by South Africa.
The Caprivi Strip is not part of the territory of the
Republic of South Africa, nor does South Africa claim that
it is; it is part of Namibia. If South Africa were not

occupying Namibia illegally, there could have been no
question of a South African officer being killed and four
South African policemen being injured in a landmine
explosion in the Caprivi Strip.

aggression committed by Portugal on the territory of the
Republic of Guinea. The Security Council, on the basis of
eye-witness reports by some of its members, came to the
conclusion that Portugal did invade Guinea, causing exten.
sive loss in lives and property before the heroic resistance of
the Guinean people turned back the aggressors.Only last
week the Council received another report concerning
aggression by Portugal against the Republic of Senegal,
Today the Council has received from the Ambassador of
Zambia a report of South African aggression against this
country. If these incidents do not constitute grave threats
to international peace and security, then perhaps the words
“peace” and “security” have lost their meaning,

111. However, since South Africa continues to occupy
Namibia illegally, with the connivance of powerful members of the Council which shelter behind legal technicalities
in order to shirk their responsibilities, it is clear that the
people of Namibia have been left no choice hut to turn to
armed struggle in order to secure their liberty. South Africa
ought to realize that, for all its inhuman policies and all its
repressive measures, it cannot completely kill the human
yearning for freedom, and that the Namibians will continue, as long as the situation remains, to show in such
positive ways that they are being illegally governed by the
apartheid regime. And may I say that as long as there
remains a single patriotic African on that continent, South
Africa will enjoy no peace until the downtrodden, humiliated people in its wicked grip are freed. The Security
Council, which is responsible for promoting peace throughout the world, not only in the white half but throughout
the whole world-1 repeat, the whole world-has a duty to
curb the excessesof the present South African regime.

115. It is incumbent upon the Council to act decisively to
safeguard the territorial integrity of all United Nations
Member States, great or small, This incident is a further
reason for the immediate removal of the South African
administration from the Territory of Namibia, which the
apartheid regime is now using to commit aggressionagainst
sovereign African States.
116. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish); I
am most grateful for the generous references to me made
by the representative of Nigeria. They are characteristic of
hisgenerosity.

112. As I said earlier, South Africa’s aggression against
Zambia raises the vital issue of the security and territorial
integrity of independent African countries in central and
eastern Africa. Because of the financial and military
support which South Africa enjoys from some Western
Powers, that country has come to pose a serious and
immediate military threat to those countries in the region
that cannot reconcile their own policies of individual
liberty at home with support for repression abroad. Thus,
unless the Council takes seriously its responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, South
Africa, by its present policies, is likely to precipitate a
catastrophic global racial war.

117. I have been informed that two other non-African
States have become signatories of the letter I referred to
earlier. They are Jamaica and India.
118. Mr. PRATT (Sierra Leone): We have listened with
rapt attention to the complaint made by Zambia, and have
also heard the explanation given by South Africa. The
explanation given by Mr, Muller of South Africa is that,
while not admitting that on the occasion in question South
Africa violated Zambian sovereignty and territorial integrity, it is true nevertheless that South Africa on previous
occasions violated Zambian sovereignty and territorial
integrity, but that those were necessary violations due ta
the way the border lines run and to take-off and landing
requirements for aircraft in the Caprivi Strip.

113. The sister Republic of Zambia, since assuming
independence and membership of this Organization, has
shown its devotion to all the ideals of the United Nations.
Its esteemed leader, President Kenneth Kaunda, is widely
acclaimed as a humanist and a man devoted to the causeof
peace, freedom and justice. His stand on the South African
issue has all along been based strictly on the provisions of
the United Nations Charter and on the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, which was reaffirmed again in the General Assembly [resolution
2449 (XXV)]. If the apartheid regime,
therefore, is threatening-as it is-the peace-loving State of
Zambia on account of its support of Namibians, it is in fact
declaring war on the most cherished principles upon which
this Organization is based. The truth that must be faced by
the Council is that in southern Africa, as well asin Guinea
(Bissau), there is open and continued denial of the
principles of human equality and national self-determine
tion which are enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations,

119. Mr. Muller went on to say that it wasnecessaryto
take action that might infringe upon the sovereignty of
neighbouring States for the defence of the people of
Namibia-which he called South West Africa-and for the
defence of South Africa. Then he talked about putting
down terrorists.
120. It is necessary for us to pause a while and determine
who those terrorists are. Mr. Muller did not suggest that
they were Zambians. If anything, he left us with the
impression that they were Namibians. I shall revert to this
in a moment.
121. He went on to say that certain articles or reports
appearing in the South African press had been denied,
thereby giving us the impression that he wanted us to
believe that the mass media inside South Africa were
unreliable and that those outside South Africa, such asrile
New York Times or The Times of London, from whichhe
is in the habit of quoting, were much more reliable, Now,
what can we conclude from that explanation? For my Part,
I have come to the following conclusions.

114. It is significant that in the past few months the
incidence of open aggression by the colonial and racist
regimes clinging on to Territories in Africa has become
frequent. We were all living witnesses to the naked
12

122, First, South Africa has admitted acts of violation of
the territorial integrity of Zambia. We have a complaint; we
have a reply. It is up to us to decide whom to believe,
Zambia says that South Africa has committed violations on
a number of occasions, culminating in the incident of
5 October. South Africa says: “Yes, I have been violating;
but not on 5 October.” It is up to us to decide whom to
believe.

West Africa and Zambia on the Caprivi Strip. Who laid
them? To my delegation the answer is clear: the South
Africans themselves laid them-not terrorists; not zanbians. There is a common pattern, developing all over
Africa, in the acts of fascist regimes which want to retain
their hold over Territories of which they ought not to be in
control. It seems clear that this is a question of being
stewed in one’s own juice.

123. Secondly, South Africa has admitted that those
“necessary” violations resulted from the fact that terrorists
had been operating in South West Africa. I use its own
words,

130. The next Point in Mr. Muller’s statement which needs
clarification, and which in any case leaves us with no
delusions whatever, is that there were footprints of four
people. It would have been a good thing if we had been
given some information about those footprints, In the first
place, is the area of the Caprivi Strip sandy desert? Is it
muddy waste? The information I have is that that area is
hard soil. Now, this is not the rainy season in that part of
the world. If it were the rainy season, one might expect to
fmd mud, which would retain footprints. This, however, is
not the rainy season there; and it is hard-soil area, an area in
which, according to Mr, Muller himself, the South African
police were operating vehicles before the explosion took
Place.

124. NOW, when we hear about terrorists and we get
admissions of violations of territorial sovereignty and we
further get disclaimers, not about what Mr. Vorster said,
but about the interpretation given to what he said, and
when those statements concern an independent sovereign
State, can we have any doubt whatever in our minds that
those violations are indeed a threat to international peace
and security within the meaning of Article 24 of the
Charter? I am satisfied that they are-even on South
Africa’s explanation.

131. How, then, in dealing with such an area, should we
expect anyone to start telling us about four footprints, or
footprints of four persons-even to the extent of saying the
footprints were seen coming from one direction, and the
same footprints were seen going in another direction? I
presume there were footprint microscopical analysers in the
South African team, but we have not been able to get any
further information about that.

125, Those violations constitute interference in the affairs
of independent States and, as we have heard in the Zambian
complaint, if such violations and threats to international
peace and security were to continue, Zambia would be
perfectly ready to retaliate.
126. If we examine Mr. Muller’s explanation even very
briefly, we find that it is completely incredible, completely
devoid of substance. Although I do not yet have the
verbatim record of what he said, I shall examine a few of
the allegations he made, which he wanted us to believe.

132. Now, even if there were footprints, there is the
second problem to be faced: were the footprints side-byside, ,to decide that there were four? Is it the practice, if
bombs are laid by terrorists, for the terrorists to walk four
abreast in one direction, so that their footprints would be
seen; and then to walk four abreast in another direction?
This is what one might call, to use a Churchillian phrase, “a
terminological inexactitude” in the statement we have
heard fram South africa.

127. Let us take the question of the mines. It seemsfrom
Mr, Muller’s statement that there were two mines: one
which exploded on the 4th and one which exploded on the
5th. He left us with the impression that there were two, and
only two, mines. It would have ‘been helpful to us if he had
given us the true position. Was there only one mine
explosion on the 4th and only one mine explosion on the
5th? It appears from the reports which one seesin the
press-although they are not before us here-that there was
not only one mine explosion on the 4th, nor wasthere only
one on the 5th. Indeed, Mr. Muller himself said that as a
result of the explosion on the 4th the South African
Government had to send members of the police force to
make some further investigations-and at that time one of
them appears, unfortunately, to have lost his life.

133, Next, still on the question of the footprints, we have
been told nothing about the distance of the area from the
Zambian border. Was it a question of only a few yards, was
it a question of a few kilometres, or was it a question of a
few miles-for the South African authorities to have come
to the conclusion, following the trail of those four-abreast
footprints, that it was leading towards Zambia? We have no
information on the distance between the place where the
mines exploded and the Zambian border. Yet we are asked
to believe that the footprints were going towards the
Zambian border.

128. Now, was there only one mine? Did the South
African expeditionary force find other mines? What was
the origin of those mines? Who made them? Were they
made by the terrorists? Were they made in Zambia?

134. As I have said, we have one person making a
complaint and another trying to reply; and it is clear from
the latter that the reply is without substance. Further, in
that reply it is said that on 4 October one mine exploded
and that on the next day, 5 October, another mine
exploded: two separate days. Did Mr. Muller want us to
believe that one set of mines was laid on 4 October and
then, on the night of 4 October or the morning of
5 October, another set was laid? If so, could he tell us a

129. And when I say all this, we must not forget that not
so long ago we had the complaint of Senegal that Portugal,
a NATO country, had laid mines on Senegalese soil,
blowing up Senegalese citizens. We now hear, from the
mouth of the South African representative, about land
mines which had been laid on the border between South
13

little more about the extent of the patrol the South African
police conducts in this area, which the South Africans
themselves have admitted is a trouble-spot?

141. The Security Council should, then, draw its own
conclusion as to whom to believe. When a Prime Minister
attacks the integrity of his own loyal press, can we doubt
that he will attack the territorial integrity of States that
have attacked his favourite policy of apartheid?

135. The other day Mr. Muller tried to give us the
impression that the Namibians were happy with South
African rule. Today he admits to us for the first time that
there are Namibian terrorists. I suppose that those Namibian terrorists are not Namibians, and they are satisfied and
happy with South African rule. If that is not so, how can
we try to reconcile the obviously irreconcilable?

142. The PRESIDENT: (interpretation from Spanish): I
am informed that Botswana is also a signatory of the letter
to which I referred earlier.
143. I have also received a letter from the representative
of Guinea in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote. In accordance
with our rules of procedure and with past practice, and
with the consent of the Council, I invite him to take the
place reserved for him in the Council chamber, on the
understanding that he will be seated at this table when he is
called upon to participate in the debate.

136. Next, Mr. Muller and his friends have argued that the
South West African question-or the question of Namibiais not a threat to the peace. Now, we hear him telling us
that the policy of the South African Government is, in so
many words, a policy of violence and of the annihilation of
terrorists and others who threaten the peace of South
Africa and South West Africa. In effect, he admits that the
situation in that area is a threat to international peace and
security.

At the invitation of the President,Mr. A. Tour.?{Guinea),
took the place reservedfor him.

144. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My delegation has in various
forums of the United Nations repeatedly emphasized that
the racial policies pursued by South Africa and the
measures it has taken to implement them present a great
obstacle to the fulfilment of the purposes of the United
Nations in the neighbouring colonial Territories in southern
Africa, and constitute a direct threat to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of independent African States and to
the peace and security of the whole region.

137. But that is not the only reason why I perhaps
welcome Mr. Muller’s statement. For what purpose has
South Africa come to reply to the Zambian complaint and
to participate in this debate? South AMca has all along
been saying that the United Nations has no jurisdiction over
Namibia. South Africa has all along been saying that it has
undisputed control and rights of administration over
Namibia. South Africa has all along been saying that the
United Nations-and that includes South Africa’s,friends at
the United Nations-and its organs have no call at all to
interfere in the South African mandate. It is heartening to
see that South Africa has at last sent its Foreign Minister to
a United Nations organ to say that South Africa expects the
United Nations to take a certain course of action in the
matter of Namibia, a certain course of action asa result of
Zambia’s complaint, a certain course of action which by
implication means that South Africa is coming round to
accepting that the United Nations at last has some control
over Namibia.

145. My delegation has always viewed the problems of
southern Africa as being closely interrelated, and has always
felt that tile United Nations should deal with them by a
co-ordinated programme of action.
14G. It would not be out of context to consider the
complaint of the Government of Zambia against South
Africa concerning violations of Zambia’s sovereignty ar?d
territorial integrity by South African armed forces against
the background of a message which the Secretary-General
addressed to the Third Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity held in
Addis Ababa from 5 to 9 November 1966. Referring to the
situation in southern Africa, the Secretary-General said:

138. The Security Council should accept the South
African challenge and tell South Africa to desist immediately from violating the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Zambia, even with aircraft that want to land. After all,
not so long ago there wassome dispute between the United
Kingdom and Spain over Gibraltar. The corridor for aircraft
was very narrow indeed, but so far as we know at no time
did the United Kingdom utilize the ‘narrowness of that
corridor to violate the territorial integrity of Spain. South
Africa should follow that worthy example.

“I see in all these problems, as I have said on previous
occasions, common factors not only of geography but
also of substance. Basically, they all challenge us to find
ways of removing artificial, archaic and inequitable
restraints that have been imposed by the few uponthe
many at the expense of political and human rights
recognized and cherished almost everywherein the world.
The motives may differ. The present inequities may be
inspired by fear of change in some hearts, by attitudes of
outright racism in others, But the results are the same.
The minority arrogates to itself the authority to prevent
the expression by the majority of their right of selfdetermination and their enjoyment of fundamental freedoms, It achieves this position by purely artificial and
arbitrary means, and increasingly by the threat or use of
the modern instruments of force to which it alonehas
ready access;and in doing so it inescapably . , . setsrace

139. The Security Council should also tell South Africa
that for the maintenance of international peace and
security it should remove its presence from Namibia,
140. This is a grave matter requiring urgent and immediate
attention. We see the South African Premier, Mr. Vorster,
instructing his Foreign Secretary, Mr, Muller, not to deny
statements he allegedly made, but to deny the interpretation given those statements by his own internal press.He
has not denied that he made the statements,
14

’

against race, and builds up the tension, the mistrust and

151. Before looking further into the question, naturally
we must ask ourselves, where is the Cap&i Strip? It is a
long piece of land linking Namibia with the Zambezi River,
and passes between Angola and Zambia to the north and
Botswana to the south. The mines that exploded, causing
casualties to the South African paramilitary police, are said
to have been planted at a point about five miles from
Katima Mulilo and well within Namibian territory.

the hostility that are the ingredients of violence.
“I can think of no greater contribution which the States
of Africa and their leaders can make in the immediate
future to the peace, not only of their continent but also
of the world, than to consider these problems and their
common underlying causes in their totality, to look for
solutions which no doubt have to be radical but which
will also have to be peaceful, and to give to the
international community as a whole a strong, clear
guidance which it will need in order to bring universal
support to these solutions.”

152. A question which legitimately springs to my mind is
this: what were South African paramilitary units doing on a
Territory over which South Africa has no legal control, and
which is in fact an international Territory of the United
Nations? According to reports, the police involved in the
‘incident belonged to a column 3,000 strong, and the
build-up of the South African armed units in Namibia,
particularly at this strategic point, is for the purpose of
destroying the nationalistic activities of Namibian liberation
forces and of sealing the frontiers so that none might escape
into neighbouring areas.

147. The solutions to the southern African problems
which the leaders of Africa were urged to make were
eventually formulated and incorporated in the Lusaka
Manifesto on Southern Africa,6 a Manifesto which was
adopted by the Organization of African Unity and endorsed
by the United Nations General Assembly.
148. That document attempted to explain to the international community, in as concise and lucid a manner as
possible, the attitude of African nations towards the
inhuman problems of apartheid and the injustice of
minority rule, and towards those who deny self-determination to subject peoples which seek it. These policies and
practices, which clearly run counter to the Charter of the
United Nations and to the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, have long been condemned by this Organization. As
we all know, South Africa rejected the Manifesto as a
starting-point for the solution of the interrelated problems
of southern Africa. And so the southern Africa situation
continues to deteriorate. We find in each of the explosive
situations in southern Africa a consequence of the application of one or more of South Africa’s pernicious policies.

1.53. For some years now South Africa has made no secret
of the fact that it has been building up a large police and
military presence in Namibia and employing weapons,
aircraft and other military equipment supplied to it by
Member States of this Organization, despite the imposition
of an arms embargo by the Security Council, Time and
again my delegation, in concert with other African and
Asian States, has called attention to the dangerous situation
that is developing in southern Africa and the need for
resolute measures to contain and eliminate the threat.
154. Over the past three years this Council has adopted six
resolutions, all affirming the illegality of South Africa’s
continued presence in Namibia. The latest one, resolution
283 (1970), went a step further than others in that it called
upon all States to take specific actions that would
emphasize the illegality of South Africa’s presence and
assert the authority of the United Nations. This Organization is already committed, by its own decision, to an
irrevocable course of action. Namibia is now a direct
responsibility of the United Nations and all States are
obliged to assistthe people of the Territory in shaping their
own destiny, Indeed, most of the resolutions adopted by
the Security Council and by the GeneralAssembly affirm
the inalienable rights of the people of Namibia to selfdetermination.

149. Against this background, my delegation would like to
express briefly its views on the complaint of the Government of Zambia and on some of the related issues, The
charges are that on 5 October units of South African armed
forces violated the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Zambia by entering the territory in speed-boats and
helicopters, allegedly in pursuit of Namibian nationalists.
The complaint states that these forces spent some time
inside Zambian territory and then retreated to their
military base at the Caprivi Strip.
150. News of this illegal incursion by South African forces

155. But the illegal presence of South Africa in the

was reported widely in the international pressthe following

Territory constitutes a real obstacle to the achievement of

day. All pointed to the fact that the forces crossed the
border on direct orders from Mr. Vorster who, according to
me Timesof London “dramatically interrupted the opening session of his National Party Congress in Pretoria” on
the afternoon of 5 October to announce the move. The
Times of London goes on to quote Mr. Vorster as saying:
“It will be remembered that I said at this Congresslast year
that if terrorists came in our territory and attacked our
people we reserve the right to pursue them wherever they
might be.”

that goal. Since such an illegal presence has been denounced
by the United Nations, and since the United Nations has
already approved the initiation of certain actions on the
political, diplomatic and economic level against this illegality, then the fact must also be recognized and accepted
that action taken by the people of Namibia themselves to
resist that illegal occupation is legitimate.

6 Ibid.,

Twenty-fourth

ment A/7754.

Session,

Annexes,

156. Allow me, Mr.President, to return to the particular
incident of 5 October, when South African armed forces
were operating from a base in Namibia on which they had
no right to be in the first place. It is somewhat strange that
the incident, which has been extensively described in the
world press, including that of South Africa, should now be

agenda item 106, docu-

15

i’

162. My delegation trusts that the debate on Namibia, of
which the Security Council has been seized for the past 10
days, will resolve the first two questions. The third question
will no doubt be brought to the attention of the Council at
a later date when the debates on apartheid, the Portuguese
Territories, and Southern Rhodesia are resumed. As for the
last question, it is the view of my delegation that this
Council should, in a clear and concise manner, draw
attention to the principle that violations of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of a State are contrary to the
Charter of the United Nations, that the violations corn.
mitted by South Africa against the sovereignty and teritory of Zambia are to be condemned, and that South Africa
must desist from committing any further violations.

denied by the South African Government. But even if
doubt is cast on the credibility of the world press singing in
chorus the guilt of South Africa, we have the testimony of
the aggrieved State, Zambia, which confirms the violation
of its airspace, its sovereignty and its territorial integrity by
the armed forces of South Africa.
157. The statement of the representative of Zambia points
to possible motives behind the long series of violations
which his Government complains have been committed by
South Africa, It is widely known that the liberal and
enlightened policies pursued by the Government of Zambia
under the leadership of President Kaunda are diametrically
opposed to the imperialistic and racist policies of the
Pretoria rbgime. This Organization is aware of the threats
that have been made against Zambia in the past by the
South African rBgime and of its unsuccessful bid to win
over the people and Government of Zambia to its point of
view.

163. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): Since this is the
first time, Sir, that I have spoken since you assumed the
high office of President of the Security Council, I should
like to extend my congratulations to you. With your long
experience in the field of diplomacy and international
affairs, we feel sure that the grave historic problems with
which we are dealing now will find their just solution under
your wise guidance.

158. The Special Committee on Apnrtheid, together with
the Special Committee on Decolonization, have issued
many reports in recent years all pointing to the dangerous
situation that is developing in the region. The oppressed
non-white people of South Africa have begun to organize
themselves effectively into militant units against the racist
regime; the people of Namibia, encouraged by the support
and sympathy of the international community, have now
entered the militant phase of their struggle. Today they are
better organized, better trained and better armed. No
wonder the South African authorities are fearful; no
wonder they are frustrated by the success of the Namibian
liberation movement against their illegal presence in Namibia. Mr. Muller, in his statement, described these valiant
people as terrorists, To us at the United Nations they are
our wards.

164. I wish also to thank and to express our appreciation
to the outgoing President, the representative of Japan, for
the wisdom, courtesy and perseverance with which he
conducted the business of the Security Council. He did a
wonderful job,
165. The Council has heard today the complaint of
Zambia, a former member of the Security Council as put
forward by its representative, Ambassador Mwaanga, with
whom we have enjoyed wonderfully
constructive cooperation. We have also heard the Foreign Ministers of
Tanzania and Burundi, the Permanent Representative of
Kenya, the Foreign Ministers of Nigeria and Sierra Leone
and the Permanent Representative of Somalia. We have
been informed of a letter in support of Zambia’s complaint,
signed by 38 African Member States and six non-African
Member States. All of this indicates the great interest and
importance which all these co-signatories and speakers
attach to the complaint of Zambia.

159. Zambia, evidently, is being made the scapegoat for
tie failure of the South African forces and for the failure of
South African policies. Zambia is being singled out by
South Africa as the object for potential punitive action,
because it happens to be the most influential and richest
African State in the region which can withstand South
African pressure tactics,

166. In this complaint we are not dealing with a separate
phenomenon; we are dealing with an indivisible phenomcnon-that is, the phenomenon of imperialism and colonialism, already repeatedly condemned by the General
Assembly and the Security Council. Therefore, when the
South African speaker, Mr. Muller, rises in the Security
Council to answerthe representativeof Zambia andbegins
by sayingthat we should set asidethe political aspectand
direct our attention to the complaint itself, he has already
perpetrated the first fallacy. why? Becausewe are dealing
with a political situation which cannot be divorced from
the ideologicalbasis,the legal basis,or the moral basisof
that political situation or complaint. Therefore, by recognizing that Mr. Muller’s very starting-point is a fallacy, we
must realize that all his other argumentscollapsebecause
they are fallaciousand basedon a fallacy.

160, Equally, Zambia is being subjected by pressure to
change its position on a principle by which Zambia and all
of us here have gained our independence and sovereigntythe principle of the right to self-determination.
161. The questions to which we should address ourselves
in this debate are these: First, in what manner can this
Council best secure the effective and speedy withdrawal of
South Africa from Namibia? Second, in what manner can
this Organization best discharge its responsibilities to the
people of Namibia, and how can it assist those people
effectively in their struggle against South African armed
repression? Third, in what manner can South Africa be
induced to abandon its racist and imperialistic designs on
southern Africa? Fourth, and last, in what manner can this
Organization assist a Member State such as Zambia, which
falls victim to the aggressive policies of the South African
rkgime?

167. I need not go into great detail to showthis fallacy,
becausethe speakerswho precededme have already,each
and every one of them, referred to it, This is, to put it very
16

briefly, the rCgime of apartheid, condemned by the
Security Council and the General Assembly, and the illegal
presence of South Africa in Namibia, already declared
illegal by the Advisory Opinion of the. International Court
of Justice. Therefore, whatever the representative of South
Africa wants to build upon as a rebuttal or reply to the
representative of Zambia has no foundation whatsoever,
because those very grounds have already been refuted,
demolished and rejected by the Security Council itself, by
the General Assembly and by the International Court of
Justice.

172. However, I wish to draw particular attention to point
(20) of the complaint of the Ambassadorof Zambia, in
which he says:
“On 4 March 1971, two South African soldiersentered
Zambia on foot at about 1600 hours at Katima Mr&lo.
They I . . inquired about the movement of the Zambian
paramilitary police. One of them was arrested and
prosecuted.His friend managedto escape.”
That is an undeniable fact. Could Mr. Muller deny that
fact?

168, This illegal foundation on which the speaker for
South Africa has based his defence represents an unholy
alliance and a phenomenon which manifests itself in various
forms: it is apartheid in South Africa; it is an illegal rule in
Namibia; it is a coalition or collusion with Southern
Rhodesia, with Portugal in its Territory-and
all of them
without exception at one time or another have been
condemned by this very Council for their rule of tyranny,
oppression and denial of human rights. Therefore the
Council is called upon to put teeth into its own resolutions
so as to give meaning to the Charter and confidence to the
peoples of the world when they turn, as small or weak
States, to the Security Council or the General Assembly in
order to find justice.

173. Then point (23) states:
“On the same day, 9 May 1971, a South African
military boat , . . VASBYT 305034, was found on the
Zambian side of the Zambezi River near Sesheke.South
African army personnellater claimedit, sayingthat they
had run out of petrol during what they called ‘patrols’.”
That is very clear-cutproof of the confessionof guilt by the
South African authorities themselves,not to speakof the
confessionof guilt aswe heard it from Mr. Muller.
174. The representativeof Zambia, AmbassadorMwaanga,
in closing his complaint, made a very adequate,valid and
moving appeal which ought to be rememberedby the
membersof the Security Council. Elesaid:

169. The Foreign Minister of Sierra Leone has dealt at
length with Mr. Muller’s answer on behalf of the South
African regime. However, in addition to what has already
been said,I should like to point out that we shouldnot for
one moment forget or losesight of the fact that the Prime
Minister in whose namehe speaksis at best an unrepentant
Nazi, This is his record, and such a record shouldnot be
forgotten.
170. In fact, while hc was speakingI could not help but
feel amused at what he was saying. For example, he
mentionedinstances of unauthorized border crossingsof
South African boats due to the twisting river boundaries,
andsaidthat South African aircraft violated the airspaceof
Zambiabecauseof adversewinds. In the usualmanner of
peoplewho are afraid of liberation movementsandfreedom
fighters, he used-as we have heard severaltimes in this
Council-the word “terrorists” in referring to the freedom
fighters who are trying to uphold human rights and the
principlesof the Charter. But I should like to make one
point clear: that those “terrorists”, accordingto Mr. Muller,
those freedom fighters, according to us, are actually
fighting the battle of the United Nations;becauseaccording
to the Advisory Opinion of the International Court of
Justicein which the illegality of South Africa’s presencein
Namibiahasbeen confirmed and in which, in paragraphs52
and 53, the right to self-determination has also been
confirmed, those “terrorists” are not terrorists. They are
actually fighting the war of the United Nations when the
United Nationsitself is unableto fight that war.

“AS members of the Security Council, you have
assumedcrucia1 positions of leadership in the international community, You must have the courage to
exercise not only paramount but responsibleauthority
over our affairs. Leadership, to be worth exercisingand
asserting,must be genuine,responsible,and in the interest
of those over whom it is being exercised,Your leadership,
without wider morality, is brutal leadershipand is not
worthy of the humansociety.”
I believe that those words are in full harmony with the
Charter of the United Nations and that they place the
Security Council face to face with its responsibility in this
grave situation.
175. In responseto that call, the delegationsof Burundi,
Sierra Leone, Somalia and Syria, my own delegationhave
formulated and are submitting to the Council a draft
resolution [S/10365] which I have the honour to present
on their behalf. Like all resolutions it has preambular
paragraphs,which are factual. The preambularparagraphs
read asfollows:
“Having received the letter of the representativeof
Zambia contained in document S/10352 and also the
letter from forty-six Member States contained in document S/10364,
“Taking note of the statement made by the representative of Zambia at its 1590th meeting, concerning
violations of the sovereignty, airspace and territorial
integrity of Zambia by South Africa,

171. It has become not unusual in international affairs,
especially in recent years, to hear of fabricated or prefabricated incidents, later proved completely false, in
variousparts of the world, in Asia, and in Africa, upon the
assumptionof which have beenperpetratedan escalationof
war or warsor pre-emptive attacks; and there is now quite a
largevocabulary to describesuchactions.

‘Mindful that violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a State constitute a threat to international peaceand security,
17

.

Republic of South Africa and Portugal, when yet another
urgent question, which the Government of Zambia has been
obliged to submit to the Council, appears on the agenda,
This concerns a number of serious incidents and violations
of the sovereignty, airspace and territorial integrity of an
independent, sovereign African State, Zambia, by the
armed forces of the Government of South Africa,

‘LGravely concertied that violations of this nature
seriously undermine the independence, peace and stability of neighbouring independent African States,
“Co?zscious of its responsibility under Article 24,
paragraphs 1 and 2, of the Charter of the United Nations”.

So in these preambular paragraphs we have statements of
fact concerning a complaint that has been submitted to the
Security Council and supported by a large number of
States. This complaint has as its subject the violations
which have been perpetrated against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of a Member State of the United
Nations, violations which certainly should cause grave
concern among the members of the Council and remind the
Council of its responsibility under the Charter.

180. In his clear and convincing statement at this meeting
of the Security Council the representative of Zambia,
Ambassador Mwaanga, cited a long list of incontrovertible
facts demonstrating the continuation of acts of aggression
by the South African racists against Zambia and its people,
It is common knowledge that the most recent of these acts
of aggression was committed a few days ago, on 5 October,
when South African armed forces invaded Zambian territory in the neighbourhood of the Caprivi Strip, situated in
Namibia. Thus a young, independent African State, the
Republic of Zambia, has yet again been the victim of
aggression by the racist colonialist Pretoria regime. This
invasion of the territory of the Republic of Zambia by the
armed forces of the Republic of South Africa is not denied,
but is in fact admitted by Prime Minister Vorster of the
Republic of South Africa himself, as many earlier speakers
at this meeting have already pointed out. At the same time,
the rulers of South Africa are dredging up the pretext,
much resorted to by provocateurs of all kinds, of alleged
infntration by certain terrorists. The aggressor cynically
assertsthat if the invading armed forces are attacked, they
will “defend themselves”. In order words, an aggressorwho
has invaded the territory of another State insolently
declares that he will “defend himself’ if the owners of the
territory, the Zambians, attempt to offer him the resistance
he deserves.

176. These violations having been ascertained and confirmed, we proceed to the operative paragraphs of the draft
resolution, as follows:
“1. Condemns the violations of the sovereignty, airspace and territorial integrity of Zambia by South Africa;
“2. Declares that such violations are contrary to the
Charter of the United Nations;

“3. Culls upon South. Africa to respect fully the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Zambia and desist
forthwith from any violation thereof;
“4. Further declares that in the event of a refusal by
South Africa to comply with this resolution, the Security
Council will meet again to consider further appropriate
steps or measures in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter.”

181. Even more outrageous in its insolence is the aggres.
sor’s declaration that those mythical terrorists wil1 be
pursued, if necessary, to the capital of Zambia, to Lusaka
itself.

These operative paragraphs follow logically from the
preambular paragraphs. The required condemnation, the
declaration that these violations are contrary to the
Charter, the call upon South Africa to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of another Member State: all
are in full harmony with the Charter. And operative
paragraph 4 constitutes a warning, adequate and valid, to
South Africa not to repeat its actions,

182. It has already been pointed out here that, while the
Security Council is considering ways and means of implementing earlier United Nations decisions adopted by the
General Assembly and the Security Council on the liberation of Namibia in the light of the Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice, the South African racists are
using that international Territory as a base for aggression
against the independent African State of Zambia, This
demonstrates once more the importance and urgency of the
request of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government
of the Organization of African Unity at its eighth ordinary
session7 for the convening of an emergency session of the
Security Council.

177. This draft resolution has already been handed to the
Secretariat and will be circulated. It is also the desire of the
co-sponsors that a vote on this draft resolution should be
taken at the next meeting of the Security Council.
178. The PRESIDENT {interpretation from Spanish): I
am grateful to the representative of Syria for the kind
words he addressed to me regarding my conduct of the
Presidency. I am particularly appreciative because these
words were spoken by a distinguished diplomat and a
chivalrous friend whom I esteem very highly.

183. Recent facts and events have shown that imperialism
and colonialism, whose vanguard on the African continent
are South Africa, Portugal and Southern Rhodesia, do not
stop short of direct acts of aggression against African
countries. In addition to the acts of aggression against
Senegal and the Republic of Guinea, against the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the People’s Republic of the
Congo and against Tanzania and Zambia which lie on their

179. Mr. ISSRAELYAN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The Security Council
has not yet had time to complete its consideration of a
whole series of questions concerning the situation on the
African continent brought about by the policy of the

7 Held in Addis Ababa from 21 to 23 June 1971.

18

guilty consciences, the colonialists are continuing their war
of attrition against the African peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau). The non-white population of
South Africa and Southern Rhodesia is in the grip of
slavery and racial discrimination. The Republic of South
Africa is illegally occupying the territory of Namibia and
using it for acts of aggression against other States. It is in
the Caprivi region in north-eastern Namibia, on the Zambian border, that South Africa has established a military
base with airstrips and a ground-to-ground rocket system.
184. From these bases the South Africans carry out
reconnaissance flights over Zambia and over another African
country, Tanzania. At those same bases decisions are taken
on diversionary operations which, according to press
reports, are organized by the South Africans in Zambia for
the purpose of intimidation.
185, Hardly anybody can be unaware of South Africa’s
role as an intermediary in supplying Rhodesia’s army and
air forces. In addition to the arms which it receives from
NATO, Portugal is also supplied with arms through South
Africa. There is every evidence of a most diabolical union
between the three coIonia1 Powers, backed by the major
partner of this alliance, the Western Powers, especially the
member States of NATO.
186. There is no doubt that, despite its impressive
economic and military strength, South Africa would nevertheless be unable to defy the Security Council, the United
Nations as a whole and the demands of all progressive
mankind if it was genuinely isolated and received no
outside aid.
187. There is hardly any need to cite further facts and
figures about the interests of Western monopolies in the
Republic of South Africa and in Namibia, since they are
well known throughout the world and were produced fairly
recently at a meeting of the Security Council. As Mr. Elinewinga, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tanzania, quite
rightly pointed out in his statement, those permanent
members of the Security Council which continue to
co-operate on a large scale with South Africa must
discontinue all support for the aggressor, the racist colonialist regime of Pretoria.

Soviet Union advocates the full implementation of the
decisions of the United Nations concerning the elimination
of the remaining colonial regimes, and that all manifestations of racism and apartheid call for universal condemnation and boycott,
190. The Soviet Union whole-heartedly supports the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council on the problems of southern Africa, and implements them consistently. The task is to ensure that these
resolutions are impIemented by alI States, that they are put
into practice and that they become a reality.
191, In the opinion of the Soviet delegation, the Security
Council must make serious efforts to solve the problem of
aggression by the Republic of South Africa against Zambia.
It is in the interests of peace and security and of respect for
the United Nations Charter that the aggressor should be
condemned, that he should be duly punished for his crimes,
and that effective steps should be taken to prevent the
recurrence of similar acts of aggression.
192. Only such an approach on the part of the Security
Council will be consistent with the performance by this
high authority of the fundamental task entrusted to it by
the peoples: the maintenance of international peace and
security.
193. Mr. President, we have listened with great attention
to the statement of the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic, Ambassador Tomeh, and have studied the draft
resolution submitted by four members of the Security
Council: Burundi, Sierra Leone, Somalia and Syria; and I
am pleased to announce that the Soviet delegation supports
this draft resolution and the proposal that it should be
voted upon at the time suggested by the Ambassador of
Syria.
194. Mr.

KU$AGA
(Poland) (interpretation
from
Before taking up the item on our agenda, I should
like, Mr.President, briefly but cordially to offer you the
congratulations of my delegation on your accession to the
post of President of the Security Council, Two years of
co.operation with you and, during those two years, three
months under your chairmanship, enable me to expressthe
certainty that under your guidance the Security Council
will be able to settle the problems before it successfully,
and that you will preside over our meetings with the
distinction that is characteristic of you.
I+ench):

188. We fully agree with the statements made by representatives of African States at recent meetings of the
Security Council urging the Council to require the major
partners of the Republic of South Africa to comply strictly
with the decisions of the United Nations and the Security
Council on the question of southern Africa, in order to
deprive the racist regime of the Republic of South Africa of
au support.

195. I also wish to congratulate our colleague from Japan,
who so ably presided over the Council during the month of
September,
196. Turning now to the item on our agenda for today,,
with the complaint of Zambia a new page has been added
to the history of colonialist and racist misdeeds in Africa:
violation of the territory of Zambia by the armed forces of
South Africa.

189, The Soviet Union is pursuing an unswerving course of
supporting the liberation of all peoples from colonial rule
and the total elimination of colonialism and racism, The
General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, L. I. Brezhnev, setting
forth the programme of the Party’s and the country’s fight
for peace and international co-operation at a recent
Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
announced on behalf of the entire Soviet people that the

197. For some time past the Council has had on its agenda
a series of items listed by the African States, All of them
have factors in common.
19

198. The first of these is the continuing aggressiveness of
the colonialist and racist forces in Africa. We have not yet
completed our study of the situation in Namibia, where the
culprit, South Africa, clings to its stubborn, illegal attitude
of defiance of the United Nations and of the political
decisions and legal pronouncements of the world community as contained in the Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice; we have barely undertaken
an examination of two other cases of colonialist aggression
and a study of the reports of special missions of the
Security Council sent to Senegal and the Republic of
Guinea, when a new act of aggression intervenes and the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of an independent
African State is once again violated, in this case Zambia.
For those who had already been pondering the practical
measures to be taken so as finally to implement the moral
and legal principles and political decisions for the liberation
of Namibia, that the Republic of South Africa should have
brought us, first, a categorical denial in the statement made
by the Foreign Minister early in the week [I589th
meeting/ and, today, a characteristic reply by saying that
under an alleged right of hot pursuit the South African
forces will defend themselves if attacked, is really the last
straw. By virtue of a right which is not a right-for it is
simply an aggressive notion of hot pursuit, which is
universally rejected-the South African armed forces will
use force in a sovereign State whose sovereignty they have
violated, should that State take measures to defend itself
against external aggression! Such a theory can in no way
be accepted by us, and must be resolutely rejected and
condemned.

202. The fifth factor is the encouragement and assistance
which colonialism and racism receive from a number of
Western States: economic, military and political assistance.
I have had occasion in the past to point out that these
States provide colonialism and racism with the weapons
they systematically use against the national liberation
movements and now, in an equally systematic manner,
against the independent African States; they further provide a shield to protect colonialism and racism so that no
effective action can be taken against such criminal systems,
The statements made here today, particularly that of
Ambassador Mwaanga of Zambia, prove that this argument
is still valid.
203. We have carefully listened to all the statements made
during the debate today. In particular we heard the sober
statement made by Ambassador Mwaanga, a long-time
friend for whom I have the greatest respect.
204. The position which my delegation takes will be
consistent with the policy we have adopted with regard to
the peoples struggling for liberation and the independent
African States fighting colonialism and aggression, and in
support of the victims of these evils.
205. We will support any measure in the Council to put an
end to these aggressive acts, and any decision of the Council
to liberate Namibia and all the African States which are still
under the domination of colonialism and racism. We are in
favour of concrete, effective and immediate measures in
this matter,
206. The PRESIDENT iinterpretation from Spnnish): I
am very grateful to Ambassador Ku,laga for his kind words
in regard to myself. He knows how much I appreciate his
confidence in me, and I am honoured by his words, They
come from a most respected Ambassador and a highly
esteemed friend.

199. The second factor is the systematic nature of these
attacks. We know the facts of the problem: systematic acts
of aggression on the part of Portugal against its neighbours,
We have heard today the statement made by the representative of Zambia, Ambassador Mwaanga. These new acts
of aggression which he has emphasized, whose intensity,
frequency and gravity increase in terms of the hesitation of
the Council towards the aggressor-a hesitation due to the
attitude of certain Members of the Council-give fresh
proof of this truth,

207. The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Zambia, on whom I now call,
208. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): I apologize for having to
speak at such a late hour, but I thought that in the light of
the statement made by the South African Foreign Minister
I should make a few observations which are relevant to the
case now under consideration.

200. The third common factor is the extension of that
policy of systematic aggression against independent African
States. The logic of colonialism requires that it should
extend to independent States its policy of aggression
against people under colonial occupation. That dangerous,
inadmissible logic is unacceptable, and we have denounced
it repeatedly in the Council. What is particularly inadmissible is that these acts of aggression are launched from
Territories which are themselves a pray to racism and
colonialism. I am thinking now of Namibia, in the issue
under discussion, and of Guinea (Bissau), in the case of the
other two iteins on our agenda.

209. My delegation listened with great interest and attention to what the champion of apartheid, Mr. Muller, had to
say in his role of “His Master’s Voice”. When we made our
factual charges in a properly-documented manner, we
would have been surprised had the Foreign Minister of
South Africa admitted his country’s guilt for the criminal
acts committed by its occupation forces in the intemationa1
Territory of Namibia. Mr. Muller’s statement has, if anything, served to confirm our charges and also goes to SIiow
that South Africa has aggressive intentions against our
country. I thank Mr. Muller for this unsolicited support.

201, The fourth common factor is the threat to peace and
security which these systematic acts of aggression constitute for Africa and therefore for the world. After the
statements made by all our colleagues at this table, and
particularly those of the Foreign Ministers of Sierra Leone
and Nigeria, I do not think it necessary to add to what has
been said on the subject.

210. My country has no air base anywhere near its border
with the international Territory of Namibia. There is no
war between the people of Zambia and the people of
Namibia. On the contrary, we have maintained traditionally
20

good relations with them over the years. The problem is,
and has always been, the South African occupation forces
which Mr. Muller is respresenting here.

213. I stated that South Africa’s violations have included
helicopters, and it is indeed laughable that South African
helicopters have been violating Zambia’s territorial integrity
merely as the result of what Mr. Muller described as “the
twisting river boundary”.

211, We have refugee camps in Zambia for people who are
running away from the oppression and tyranny of the
South African regime. We have an obligation under international law to receive refugees who leave their countries
because of persecution, be it political or otherwise. We
therefore have a duty to the international community in
this regard, and we shall continue to discharge this
responsibility religiously.

214. We therefore reject Mr, Muller’s entire statement as
cheap and unworthy of any serious consideration. It is
obviously intended for domestic consumption inside South
Africa. We further reject most firmly Mr, Muller’s rejection
of our statement. We hope that the Council will dismiss
Mr. Muller’s statement with the contempt it more than
deserves.

212. The South African Foreign Minister conveniently
omitted to answer the specific charges I made in my
statement, and we have taken note of that. Mr.Muller
admitted that South African aircraft have violated Zambia’s
territorial integrity, He further stated: “In the case of
aircraft, [the violations] occur because the planes, owing to
the wind direction, have to cross the border in the course of
normal take-off and landing procedures.”

215. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanish):
There are no further names on the list of speakers.
Accordingly, it is my intention to adjourn this meeting and,
with the consent of the Council, to convene the next
meeting for Monday at 4 p.m., to continue the consideration of the complaint by Zambia.
The meeting rose at 7.15 p.m.

21
