IX

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SECOND
COMMITTEE
quired by the General Assembly to carry on the
functions instituted" by resolution 200 (III),
Having decided, in resolution 200 (III), "to
appropriate the funds necessary to enable the
Secretary-General to perform" certain functions
set out in that resolution,

304 (IV). Expanded programme of
technical assistance for economic
development of under-developed
countries
The General Assembly,

1. Agrees with the recommendations of the
Economic and Social Council that the activities
under resolution 200 (III) should be expanded
in 1950 in accordance with the Secretary-General's proposals, that increased appropriations
should be provided therefor and that the regular
budget of the United Nations should continue
to provide for the activities authorized by that
resolution;
2. Notes with approval that the SecretaryGeneral has included an amount for these services
in the budget of the United Nations for the year
1950.4

Having considered the Economic and Social
Council's resolution 222 (IX) A 1 of 15 August
1949 on an expanded programme of technical
assistance for economic development,
1. Approves the observations and guiding principles set out in annex I of that resolution and
the arrangemen.ts made by the Council for the
administration of the programme ;
2. Notes the decision of the Council to call a
Technical Assistance Conference to be convened
by the Secretary-General in accordance with the
terms of paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Council
resolution;

242nd plenary meeting,
16 November 1949.

3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to set up
a special account for technical assistance for economic development, to be available to those organizations which participate in the expanded programme of technical assistance and which accept
the observations and guiding principles set out in
annex I of the Council resolution and the arrangements made by the Council for the administration
of the programme ;

306 (IV). Economic development of
under-developed countries
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report 5 presented by the
Economic and Social Council in accordance with
the provisions of General Assembly resolution
198 (III) 6 of 4 December 1948,

4. Approves the recommendations of the Council to Governments participatin~ in the Technical
Assistance Conference regardmg financial arrangements for administering contributions, and
authorizes the Secretary-General to fulfil the
responsibilities assigned to him in this connexion;

1. Notes the measures already devised by the
Council, its commissions and the specialized agencies regarding the economic development of underdeveloped countries and regions, especially those
in the field of technical assistance for economic
development ;

5. Invites all Governments 1<) ,uake as large
voluntary contributions a• ,-,c1ss1ble to the special
account for technical assistance.

2. Takes note of the arrangements made by
the Council to give detailed consideration at an
early session to other questions related to the
economic development of under-developed countries and regions ;

242nd plenary meeting,
16 November 194 9.

305 (IV). Technical assistance for eco•
nomic development under General
Assembly resolution 200 (III)

3. Looks forward specifically to receiving the
Council's studies of and recommendations for
international action concerning the urgent problems of the financing, in all its aspects, of economic development in under-developed countries ;

The General Assembly,
Having considered the Economic and Social
Council's recommendation,2 in accordance with
paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 200
(IIl) 3 of 4 December 1948, including its recommendations concerning "budgetary action .re-

4. Recommends that the Economic and Social
Council:
(a) Continue to give urgent attention to the
problems of economic development of under-

1 See Official Records of the Economic and Social
Council, Fourth Year, Ninth Session, Resolutions, page 4.
2 See Official Records of the fourth session of the General Assembly, Supplement No. 3, page 1S.
8 See Official Records of the third session of the General Assembly, Part I, Resolutions, page 38.

• See Official Records of the fourth session of the General Assembl:,, Suppleiwet No. S, pa&"C 234.
ff Ibid., Supplement No. 3, page 14.
6 Sec Official Records of the third session of the General Assembly, Part I, Resolutions, page 37.

Z1

developed countries, g1vmg due consideration to
questions of a social nature which directly condition econpmic development ;

( b) Stimulate its commissions and the specialized agencies to give similar urgent attention
to these problems;
( c) Include in its annual report to each reg_ular session of the General Assembly a special
chapter on the measures being taken to promote
economic development, together with the recommendations for the further improvement, if necessary, of such measures.

242nd plenary meeting,
16 November 1949.

307 (IV). Economic development and
international economic and commercial policy
The General Assembly,
Considering that the tasks hitherto entrusted to
the Economic and Social Council, the SecretaryGeneral and the specialized agencies in connexion
with the economic development of under-developed countries have been concentrated especially
on the study of problems connected with technical assistance and with the financing of economic
development,
Considering that experience has shown that
many aspects of international economic and commercial policy exercise a powerful influence on
the economic development of under-developed
countries,
Recommends that, in the Economic and Social
Council's forthcoming work and studies on economic development, further attention should be
paid to such questions of international economic
and commercial policy as may influence the process of development of the economies of underdeveloped countries, with a view to making recommendations to the General Assembly.
242nd plenary meeting,
16 November 1949.

308 (IV). Full employment
The General Assembly
1. Notes the discussions which have taken place
at the ninth session of the Economic and Social
Council on problems of employment and economic
stability, and the adoption of resolution 221
(IX)E 7 of the Council on 11 August 1949 and
the resolution 8 on unemployment adopted by the
International Labour Conference on 1 July 1949;

2. Approves the action of the Secretary-Gen,eral in inviting a group of experts to report on
national and international measures required to
achieve and maintain full employment;

employment in accordance with Articles 55 and
56 of the Charter, is a basic requirement for the
achievement of a stable and expanding world
economy;
4. That, in addition, action is needed to overcome unemployment and under-employment such
as that arising, particularly in under-developed
countries, among large numbers of people e!1gaged
in agricultural pursuits; and that, to this end,
it is necessary, inter alia, to stimulate the economic development oi under-developed countries;
5. That the objectives of international agreements for the furtherance of the production and
consumption of, and the expansion of international trade in, goods on as free as possible
a basis would be seriously impaired by failure to
take, or by delay in taking, action designed to
maintain full and productive employment especially in those countries which have an important
share in world trade; and
6. That a high and stable level of international
investment, particularly in the under-developed
areas of the world, would contribute materially
to the realization of those objectives;
N ates with satisfaction :

7. Declarations of various Governments of their
intention to deal promptly with unemployment,
an<l their recognition of the contribution which
such steps will make towards the maintenance of
world-wide economic stability; and that the measures they have already put into effect, or have
under study, for increasing purchasing power
and for promoting full employment include such
measures as the extension of unemployment insurance, the expansion of social services generally, public works programmes including low-cost
housing and natural resources development projects, measures affecting the level and methods
of taxation, incentives for the encouragement of
private capital investment; and
8. The intention of the Economic and Social
Council to study further the related questions of
measures to achieve full employment and to encourage international investment;

9. Recommends that each Government consider, as a matter of urgency, its international
responsibility under Articles 55 and 56 of the
Charter to take action, as the need arises, designed to promote and maintain full and productive employment, through measures appropriate to its political, economic and social institutions;
10. Requests the Economic and Social Council,
during its consideration of full employment and
economic development, to give attention to unemployment and under-employment, especially in
under-developed countries and particularly in
such critical fields as agriculture;

11. Decides that the world economic situation
be reviewed again at the next regular session of
tl1e General Assembly in the light of Articles 55
and 56 of the Charter.

Believes:
3. That national an<l international action by
Members, designed to promote ;md maintain full
1

256th plenary meeting,
75 ,\'o,•c111hcr fQf9.

See Official Records of the Economic and Social

8

Council, Fourth Year, Ninth Session, Resolutions, page 2.

See International Labour Office, Industry and l,abour,

voltm1c II. No. 3, page 168.

28
