United Nations

330th

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING·
Friday, 18 May 1951, at 10.80 a.m.

FIFTH SESSION
Flushing Meadow, New York

Official Records
CONTENTS

Page

Tribute to the memory of Dr. Philadelpho de Barros e Azevedo, member of the
International Court of Justice
731
0 , • ••

Aid for the victims of the earthquake in El Salvador

'.' . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 732

Intervention of the Central l?eople's Government of the People's Republic of
China in Korea: report of the First Committee (A/1802)
733
President: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEzAM (Iran).
Tribute to the memory of Dr. PhtiIadelpho de
Barros e Azevedo, member of the International
Court of Justice
1. The PRESIDENT (translated f"om French) : Before we take up the agenda I should like, on behalf of
the General Assembly, to P2Y a tribute to the memory
of Dr. Philadelpho de Barros e Azevedo. I ask you to
rise and to observe one minute of silence.
The representatives rose and observed one minute's
silence.
, 2. Mr.LACOSTE (France) (translated.fromFrench) :
It is with a. feeling of deep grief that the countless
French friends of Dr. Philadelpho de Barros e Azevedo
have learned of the passing of that eminent jurist whose
whole life and work were elevoted to the most noble,
generous and lofty of causes-the defence and practical
application of the law of nations, of what the centuries'old French language!, whi-:h he employed with such
consummate skill, stiH calls the droit des gens.
3. For a man to select public international law as his
life's work he must combine, with an outstanding
intelligence and an analytical mind, a great interest in.
philosophy, not only the philosophy of history and law,
but philosophy in the purest and most absolute sense of
the wOJ:d-the love of wisdom which is, undoubtedly,
the most precious gift that a man can receive. To all
these qualities, which he possessed in the highest degree, Dr. de Azevedo added yet another, th~ love of
his fellow-man, which to my mind is just as necessary
as those I have mentioned and is~ moreover, their most
practical manifestation. No man can deal constructively
with the laws that govern international society unless
he is inspired by a great love of nations, or, in other
'words: a great love of mankind. All those who kney;
Dr. de Azevedo well, and foremost among them I wish
to mention my illustrious fellow-countryman, Professor
Jules Basdevant, President of the International Court

. : •. ';~~':-_.' ..

of Justice, who was his colleague and life~long friend,
recognized his great heart and lofty soul.
4. With his passing, Brazil has suffered a grievous
loss. On behalf of my country, I should like to express
to the r-epresentative of Brazil in this chamber, Mr.
Muniz, our profound sympathy for the Brazilian Government and people at this hour. It would be neither
unreasonable nor untrue to say that Brazil's grief is
also the grief of all Latin America, which has given to
the world al'hIagnificent school of jurists; as far as my
own country is concerned, Dr. de Azevedo's death is a
cruel and keenly felt loss.
.
5. Mr. ARANGO (Colombia) (translated from
Spanish) : Speaking on behalf of my Government and
of the Colombian delegation, I wish to express my deep
sorrow at the death of Dr. de Azevec.o, an illustrious
judge of the International Court of Justice, and to
address this expression of grief to the Government and
people of his country and to the delegation of Brazil of
which Mr. Muniz is the Chairman.
6. It can be said without any exaggeration that, from the
day when the University of Rio de Janeiro gave him the
degree of Doctor of Law until the hour of his death,
the career of Judge de Azevedo' was onc of t! le most
brilliant in this hemisphere. He was a professor of
philosophy and civil law, Dean of the Faculty of Law
and Vice-Rector of the Univers~ty of Brazil, Chairman
of his country's Institute of Advocates, a member of
various international legal associations, a renowned
architect of the civil law of his country-which is one
of the highest expressiuns of that country's culturethe renowned author of many books and monographs
amI, finally, a judge of the International Court of
Justice. In all these manifold activities, we see the·
enduring signs of his many talents, of his capacity for
research and of his creative work for the legal organization of society not only on the national, but also on the
international level, vast and complex as it is.

731
A/PV.330

782

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

7. But I think it was in his work as a judge of the
. International Court of Justice that the personality of Dr.
Philadelpho de Azevedo reached the greatest eminence.
His name, as a judge, transcends the limits of frontiers
. and his ideas on law are praised by men of many races
and tongues, of various political and sociai systems.
8. I shall not stop to analyse his admirable work because all the representatives here are well acquainted
with it. They know the breadth of vision which characterized his theories, the strict logic of his reasoning,
the impecr.able clarity of his style and, above all, the
burning passion for justice which animated all his work
and which will give it lasting harmony and consistency.
Often, in our debates, many points have been clarified
thanks to the ideas of Judge de Azevedo and thanks to
his re! itude, his experience and his wisdom in dealing
with the difficult and controversial questions submitted
to his judgment. His many works will remain valuable
sources of teaching and guidance.
9. Judge Philadelpho de Azevedo was distinguished
also by a strong sense for contemporary realities, and for
that reason he aiways sought in his doctrines to provide
a legal channel for the currents which move modern life.
10. In a world tormented by the growing threat of a
gigantic conflict, and at the same time avid for peace
and justice, it is our duty to praise men who, like
Dr. Philadelpho de Azevedo, dedicated their lives to
strengthening and keeping alive the ideals without
which man's destiny on this e.arth would be wretched.
11. The Colombian delegation expresses its admiration and respect for the memory of Dr. de Azevedo; a
man of lofty virtue, he was an honour and a glory to
his country and to the International Court of Justice.
12. Mahmoud FA\VZI Bey (Egypt): In"'the name of
my delegation and my Government, I wish to express
to the Brazilian delegation and the Brazilian Government the condolences of Egypt. The loss which the
United Nations has sustained by the demise of Dr. de
Azevedo is a great loss indeed. It is a great loss in that
we have lost both a great man and a pillar of one of
the basic ideas and concepts of the United Nations,
namely, the rule of law in international relations. I
wish, therefore, to associate myself with the eloquent
speeches which the previous speakers have made in this
regard a,nd to reiterate to the Brazilian delegation an,d
the Brazilian Government our sincere condolence.
13. Mr. MUNIZ (Brazil) : On behalf of the Brazilian
Government and of the family of the deceased, I wish
to express our deep gratitude for the high tribute which
the General Assembly has paid to the memory of Dr.
. de Azevedo and in particular to the moving praise of
his work expressed by the representatives of France,
Colombia and Egypt. The Brazilian people mourn the
loss of one of our greatest jurists who, in a short but
significant life, rendered a great service to his country
and to the world.
14. As a professor of philosophy and of law, as a
lawyer and a member of the highest r.ourt of Bra2~i1 and
the International Court of J ustic , Dr. de A~~evedo
displayed his brilliant qualities or .c:.ind and heart at
every stage of his professional life He combined a
profound knowledge of the law with a deep concern
for the well-being and advancement of mankind. His

judgments, both in the national and international sphere,
were characterized by a constant effort to depart from
the abstractness of the law in order to take human
requirements into consideration. He was always eager
to bring about necessary changes for the sake of improving justice and ameliorating the condition of man.
15. The annals of the Supreme Court of Brazil and
the International Court of Justice contain concrete
evidence of his great learning, of his wisdom and of his
constant endeavours or behalf of mankind. His influenc.e
will long be felt in th(. legal institutions of my counery
and in the jurisprudence of the International Court of
Justice.

Aid for the victims of the earthquake in
El Salvador
16. Mr. RODRIGUEZ FABREGAT (Uruguay)
(translated from Spanish): I would like to raise a
different question, for the particular consideration of the
President, and I want to put it in such a way that it
will fall within the rules of procedure which govern
our debates. But first I wish to add a few brief words,
but words inspired by deep emotion, with regard to the
tribute which the Assembly has just paid to the memory
of the illustrious Brazilian jurist, Dr. de Azevedo. His
death means the loss not only of a great jurist, but also
of a great Brazilian and a great friend, a man of remarkable qualities, whom I had the signal honour to
know and whose friendship I enjoyed. He was a man
who, as I knew, always served the law in the clearest
sense in which law is understood in the heart of man.
17. And now that I have associated my delegation in
the tribute that has just been paid, I should like to
refer to another question which I am subP1itting for
the consideration and opinion of the President.
18. An American sister nation, the Republic of El Salvador, has just suffered a severe trial. A dreadful earthquake has devastated some of its provinces, has brought
great grief to its people, and has claimed a very large
number of unfortunate victims.
19. My delegation, speaking on behalf of the Government of Uruguay, has often maintained that one of the
immediate aims of an international organization like
this should be precisely to bring a message of solidarity
and to give aid to a peC'ple and a country which are
suffering, especially when, as in the case of El Salvador,
the people and the country are an integral part of the
United Nations.
20. I should like to make a concrete proposal. It may
be that the rules of procedure will not allow a decision
to be taken this morning. Nor would I wish a question
of this kind, which is so clearly defined in the minds and
hearts of all, to take up much time in our proceedings.
For that reason I venture to make a definite suggestion:
that the President, if he thinks it fitting and in accordance with our rules, should draw the attention of the
various or~ans of the United Nations which are competent in tnis matter so that they may bring their help
and sympat!~y to the Government and people of the Republic of El Salvador in this hour of grief and crisis.
21. I therefore take the liberty, on behalf of my
Government, of making this snggestion for the kind
consideration of the President.

1

330th Meeting-IS May 1951
22. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We all share the feelings of sympathy expressed by the
representative of Uruguay and we convey them to the
people of El Salvador.
23. Certain steps have already been ta!cen. The competent organs of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies will certainly extend to El Salvador all the assistance required. l\tl uch, I understand, has already be~n
done, and if the representative of Uruguay speaks to the
Secretary-General after the meeting, he will learn from'
him what steps have already been taken and what is
planned for the future.
24. Mr. RODRIGUEZ FABREGAT (Uruguay)
(translated from Spanish): I should like to add that
I am aware of the action which has been taken by some
organs of the United Nations and that my own delegation has sent a telegram to the Executive Director of
the United Nations International Chiidren's Emergency Fund offering him its help in any action
UNICEF may take for the victim's· of the earthquake.
Furthermore, my Government has taken direct action
in this case and at this moment the Uruguayan
Parliament is voting aid for the people of El Salvador.
But I should like the Assembly itself, through its President, to give every encouragement to any action which
may be taken in favour of this Member State of the
Unite~ Nations which is undergoing such a tragic
expenence.
Intervention of the Central People's Government
of the People's R~puhlic of China in Korea:
Report of the First Committee (Aj1802)

[Agenda item 76]
25. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Before calling on the Rapporteur to submit his report,
I shall ask the Assembly, in accordance with rule 67
of the rules of procedure, whether it wishes to discuss
the question.
I t was decided not to discuss the report.
Mr. Thors (Iceland), Rapporteur, presented the
report of the First· Committee and the accompanying
draft resolution (Aj1802).
26. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
shall now call upon those repre~entatives who wish to
explain their votes.
27. Mr. QUEVEDO (Ecuador) (translate.d fi'0111.
Spanish) : In conformity with the instructions lJI my
Government I wish to say that the question whether
the Assembly is competent to approve recommendations of this kind was discussed at length during the
debat€;s which took place in this Assembly on the resolution, "Uniting fer peace" ,[resolution 377 (V)]. I
shall therefore now merely state that my delegation
considers that this organ of the United Nations is not
exceeding its powers in approving the draft resolution
before it in the present circumstances, for tbe reasons
which I shall now enumerate.
28. What we are concerned with now is to hasten
the end of the fighting in Korea, and the question of
Korea has already been discussed in the Security Council.
We can therefote conclude that, even if this draft resolution is to be considered as one which comes under the

733

last part of paragraph 2 of Article 11 of the Charter,
the provisions of that article have already been observed.
29. The Chinese intervention and aggression in Korea
are only one aspect of the aggression committed by the
North Korean Communists against the Republic of
Korea. The Security Council dealt with that aggression,
and it is because the Council did not succeed in taking
t~e..new steps which its position of primary responslblhty required, that my Government and five other
members of the Council several months ago asked the
Assembly to deal with the Chinese intervention in
Korea by yirtue of its statutory powers. 1 The Security
Council's basic resolution on the subject was that of
27 June 1950, which recommended "that the Members
of the United Nations furnish such assistance to the
Republic of Korea as may be necessary to repel the
armed attack and to restore international peace and
security in the area". 2
30. .Inasmuch as contribution has already been made,
in the form of armed assistance, to the defence of the
independence of the Republic of Korea and the repulse
of the aggression committed against it, I cannot see
what assistance could be more effective than an embargo
on armaments and strategic materials, to en.sure that
such materials. did not benefit the aggressors. In other
words, in view of what has already happened, the draft
under consideration is legally valid, even apart from the
resolution of 27 June. That resolution, however, reinforces the legality of the draft before us and removes
all possible reason for criticizing it.
31. Since, on 27 June, the Security Council adopted
a resolution, and since the relevant item was subsequently removed from the Council's agenda,S the General Assembly, in proceeding to exercise its duties for
the maintenance of security and the restoration of
peace, was obviously-given the circumstances-taking
steps which were strictly within its own competence.
It was acting within its powers because, even assuming
that the condition stipulated in paragraph 2 of. Article
11 of the Charter must be met, the fact is that it has
already been met; the item has been withdrawn from
the Council's agenda, in accordance with Article 12.
Moreover, the draft resolution under discussion is really
in some sort an application or a consequence of the
resolution of 27 June.
32. In my opinion, the fact that ~he Charter confers
certain powers on the Security Council, and the fact
that lack of unanimity among the permanent members
may in some cases prevent the Council from exercising
those powers, does not mean that the broad powers
conferred on the General Assembly under Chapter IV
of the Charter are thereby nullified. If that were the
case, those powers would be illusory, because the General Assembly would not be able to make any recommendation, either on a particular subject with which
the Council was dealing, or on a subject with which
the Council had not dealt or was not dealing. It could
not have been intended at the San Francisco Conference
to give the Assembly powers which it could not use

a

1 See Offidal Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item 76; General CommUte". 74th meeting, and Plenary Meetings, 319th meeting.'
2 See Official Records of the Security Council, fifth year,
No. 16.
8 Ibid., sixth year, 531st meeting.

734

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

and which would have to remain a dead letter in the
text of the Charter.
33. We therefore maintain that the Security Council
declared that there had been aggression against the
Republic of Korea and asked the Member States of the
United Nations to help to repel that aggression. The
Council .subsequently removed the qllestion from its
agenda. The General Assembly then placed the question
on its agenda, being fully competent to do so. Later, on
1 Fehruary 1951, the Assembly adopted a resolution
[resolution 498 (V)] which it was also competent to
do under the Charter. My delegation theref~re believes
that the present draft resolution is of undoubted legal
validity and that the recommendations it makes are of
great moral value.
34. Unfortunately, the draft resolution has become
necessary again precisely because the authorities of
North Korea and Peking h&.ve rejected the persistent
efforts' of the United K .tions to bring about a peaceful
solution of 1;he conflict in order to ensure peace in that
part of the Far East. The draft resolution is intended
to secure the unification of Korea and guarantees that
country tr11e independence and its peoplc~ the right'
freely to choose their political regime.
35. .My Government believes that the draft resolution
in no way infringes the right of any government to
decide in good faith to what exports the embargo applies, to take the necessary measures of control within
the framework of its responsibilities and its laws, or to
attempt to prevent people, so far as it can, from setting
aside the failure of control measureR taken by other
States. My delegation likewise believes that the States
whence the exported materials, come cannot be held
responsible for infractions of the embargo abroad if the
country of origin was assured that the export was not
to a forbidden destination.
36. My delegation :10pes that the Good Offices Committee-which is the expression of our sincere desire
for peace--may succeed in putting an end to hostilities
and in achieving the pacific aims which the United
Nations has set for it, so that the AdditIonal Measures
Committee may not be called upon to consider further
steps.
,'"
37. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet S0dalist Republics) (translated from Russian) : The U ~SR delegation
stated in the First Committee on 17 M~f that the Gene!'al Assembly was not '.:ompetent to discuss the question
of an embargo or any other question entailmg action of
the kind contemp~ated in Chapter VII of the Charter. Article 11, paragraph 2, of the Charter lays down that such
questions £211 wi~hin t.he exclusive competence of the
Security Council. It was on tht'~se grounds that the
USSR delegation abstained both from taking part in the
discussion of this question in the First Committee and
fro111 voting on it.
38. In spite of this flagrant violation of the United
Nations Charter and the glaring illegality of any discussion of the question of nn embargo, the First Committee, under pressure from the United States and with the
support of the aggressor bloc in the United Nations,
approved the United States dra.ft resolution [A/1799].
It is significant that not a single member of that bloc,
when speaking in favour of the United States draft resolution, even attempted to base his arguments 011 the

Charter. The supporters of the United States draft resolution all ignored the Charter and refrained from any
mention of its fundamental provisions on the maintenance of international peace and security.
~j9. This forgetfulness on the part of the henchmen of
the United States is fully understandable, since the
United States draft resolution is incompatible with the
United Nations Charter. Not only can it not be justified
by the Charter, but it als{iJ constitutes a glaring example
of a flagrant violation of·the Charter, an evideJ;lt contradiction of the Charter of the United Nations. The adoption of such a decision is such an obvious and glaring
violation of the United Nations Charter that, apart
from the United States deleg(i.tion.. which submitted this
illegal draft resolution, not a single delegation so much
af. atte..t11pted, in the First Committee, to challenge the
~rguments advanced by the USSR delegation and other
delegations which, proceeding from the provisions of
the Charter, demonstr£\.ted that the First Committee
and the General Assembly had ne legal right to consider
the question of an embargo or to adopt any decision
on it.
40, Article 24 of the Charter places on the Security
Council the p:l. -<nary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and securitv. Paragraph 2 of that
Article states that the specific powers granted to the
Security Council for the discharge of its duties i:.... the
maintenance of peace and secu:ity are laid down in
Chapters VI, VII, VIII and XII of the Charter. The
whole question of an embargo comes under Chapter
VII of the Charter. The thirteen AIticles of Chapt~r
VII of the Charter fllention only the S~curity Council.
The Ge!1eral Assembly is not mentioned once. This
is an unchallengeable and fundamental provision of the
Charter, and however hard the United States representatives try to get out of the difficulty, they will no1:
succeed in proving that the United States draft resolution is' compatible with the Charter for that is impossible to prove.
41. As for the United States repr~sentative's attempt
to assert that Article 11 of the Charter g:ves the General Ass'embly the right to take decisions on such questions as the adoption of economic sanctions, it does not
bear scrutiny and is the crudest of falsifications. Paragraph 2 of Article 11 of the Charter actually reads
as follows:
"The General Assembly ~n::<y discuss any questions
relating tu the maintenance (': internr.tional peace and
security . . . and . . . may make recommendations
with regard to any such questions . . . Any such
question on which action :3 necessary shall be referred to the Security Council by the General Assembly either before or after discussion."
42. Such a question is to be referred to the Security
Council for action because the General Assembly has
no power'to take any action whatsoever. The Assembly
may make recommendations but is not authOrIzed to
take action: action is for the Security Council, and is
its pre:ogativ~. That is the fundamental provision of
the Umted Nations Charter, and no attempt to controvert it ("an sncceel. That is what is laid down in Article
11 of the Charter. It must be clear to everyone that the
application of economic sanctions against 'any country,
ot the imposition {,)f an embargo, involves action. In

330th Meeting-18 May 1951
accordance with the clear and indisputable provisions of
paragraph 2 of Article 11 of the Charter, such a question must be referred to the Security Council for its
decision. The General Assembly is not entitled to decide on questions of this kind.
43. The conduct of the United States, and that of the
aggressor bloc in the United Nations which does its
bidding, has made it sufficiently clear that the United
States scorns the United Nations Charter and is making
a mockery of the fundamental purposes and principles
of our Organization. The United States has in fact
made the United Nations into an instrument of its
aggressive policy.
44. ] oseph Stalin, the Head of the USSR Government, recently declared: "The United Nations, which
was established as a bulwark of peace, is being transtormed into an instrument of war, a means of unleashing a new world war".
45. In order to achieve its aggressive aims, the United
States has pushed through the General Assembly and
the Security Council a number of illegal and shameful
resolutions which are contrary to the Charter. After
launching its aggression on 26 ] une 1950 against the
Korean people and China-a fact which has now become officially established as a result of General Marshall's testimony and the interview given by Admiral
Martin, Commander of the'Seventh Fleet-the United
States, on 27 June 1950, forced its illegal resolution
on the United Nations post factum and is attempting
to use it as a screen. The reference which the representative of Ecuador made to that resolution was absurd and unwarranted. The representative of Ecuador
was unable to base his argument on the Charter or its
provisions; that is why he was obliged to appeal to that
illegal resolution.
46. Subsequently the United States pushed through
yet another illegal resolution, this time on the General
Assembly. That resolution was hypocritically and demagogically entitled by the United States aggressors
"Uniting for peace" [resolution 377 (V)], but its real
title should have been, "Uniting for the benefit of
United States aggression", for that was its real purpose. The shameful United States draft resolution which
was subsequently adopted, declaring the People's ~e­
public of China the aggressor, and this new U11lted
States draft resolution calling for an embargo, fully confirm the fact that such was indeed the purpose and intention of that resolution.
47. The United States representative is now trying
to use that resolution as a shield, but however much he
twists and turns he will not succeed. In their feverish
efforts to find some cloak and justification for t~eir
aggression in Korea and against China, the Umt.ed
States aggressors have been compelled not only to VI~­
late the Charter themselves, but also to force theIr
"Marshallized" allies to follow suit on every occasion.
48. In the eleven months during which the sanguinary
war in Korea has been raging, the infamous "Mars~1all
Plan" has already thrice been used by the U11lted
States as a "Marshall whip" to spur the "Marshallized"
countries, particularly the United King-d(;1l11 and !,rance,
to vote in favour of United States resolutIons whIch promote aggression.'

735

49. As recently as 9 April, Sir Gladwyn ]ebb, the
United Kingdom representative to the United Nations,
expressed hilllself categorically against the United
States proposal for an embargo directed against the
People's Republic of China; he considered that that
would be a dangerous action and a two-edged weapon.
50. On 14 May, however, after the United States Senate
had cracked the Marshall whip at the United Kingdom,
the same Sir Gladwyn Jebb said that the United Kingdom Government "whole-heartedly" supported this
shameful and illegal United States proposal. Truly, not
much effort by the United States Senate is needed towin the whole-hearted support of the United Kingdom
Labour Government. It would seem, incidentally, that
the odour of Iranian oil was "<l.lso a factor in this
decision.
51. United States representatives adduce the illegal
decision to which I have referred, a decision which was
incompatible with the Charter, as a reason for forcing
through new decisions which are in flagrant violation
of, and obviously contrary to, the 01arter. That is
precisely the case also with the United States draft resolution concerning an embargo, which is now before the
General Assembly. The United States is urging the
General Assembly to commit a flagrant violation of the
United Nations Charter, to adopt an illegal and shameful resolution. It is forcing the General Assembly to
embark on what is in fact the liquidation of the Security
Council as the United Nations organ which, under the
Charter, bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, and which
hinders the United States aggressors in the execution
of their sanguinary misdeeds.
52. The ruling circles of the United States have
adopted a policy which will lead to the collapse of the
structure of the United Nations. The responsibility for
this incipient disintegration of the United Nations rests
primarily on the United States, whose plans for aggression are thwarted by the Organization as it was
established at San Francisco, and for which the Charter
has become nothing more than a strait-jacket to restrain
raving aggressors. But the responsibility for the collapse of the United Nations will also be shared by the
niembers of the aggressor bloc in the United Nations;
as allies of the United States in various military and
aggressive blocs and alliances, they are daily undermining the foundations of the Organization.
53. The political purposes of the draft resolution concerning an embargo which the United States is endeavouring to push through the General Assembly, in
violation of the Charter and without reference to the
Security Council, are clear. The purpose of the resolution is not to tem11nate the war in Korea and arrive
at a peaceful settlement of the Korean confli~t, bu~ to
continue and extend the war. Those are the mtenbons
of the ruling circles of the United States.
54. The fairy tale passed round by the United States
representative and his fellow-travellers, that the purpose of this draft resolution is the "peacefyl settl~ment
of the dispute", dos not hold water and WIll deceIve no
one.
55. The USSR delegation draws the attention of the
General Assembly to the fact that the question before
us is fully and entirely within the competence of the

..
736

General Assembly

Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

Security Council. In conformity with Article 1\ parara h 2, of the Charter, the Gen~ral .Assembly as no
~o!er to discuss this question, whIch Involves measures
that are to be taken under the terms of Chapter VII
of the Charter.
56 For the foregoing reasons the deleg~tion ?f the
So'viet Union did not participate ~n the disc~sslOn or
the vote on this question in the !trst .COlnmlttee, and
is not taking part in the present~sc?sslOn and(or vote.
This non-participation will not slgmfy abstent~on fr?m
the vote. It means non-pa.rticip~tion in the d1~cusslOn
and voting because of the l11egaltty of the questIOn and
because the General Assembly has no power to consider it.
57, Mr. BARRINGTON (Burma): I wish t? e~­
plain my delegation's abstention in the vote whIch IS
about to be taken.
58. At the outset I should like to make it clear that
the resolution will have no practical effect so far as my
country is concerned. Burma's tr~de ~i~h ~hina is not
appreciable and n~ne of the matenals Its.ted 111 the draft
resolution enters 111tO such trade as eXIsts.
59. This draft resolution flows directly fro~l resolution 498 (V) of 1 February 1951. My delegatIOn was
opposed to that resolution because it believed that a
lasting settlement in the Far East could be brought
about only by negotiation and because it felt that that
resolution would seriously impede the efforts then under way to effect a negotiated settlement. We adhere to
this. view and are consequently unable to support the·
present proposal which, in the opinion of my delegation,
would serve only to make more difficult a situation
which is already extremely difficult.
60. Mr. KHALIDY (Iraq): Yesterday, in the First
Committee [443rd meeting], I had occasion to make
a formal reservation in connexion with sub-paragraph
(d) of paragraph 1 of the present draft resolution. It is
my duty to make the same reservation today.
61. Sub-paragraph (d) calls upon States Members
to co-operate with other States in carrying out the purposes of this embargo. Owing to the present political
position now prevailing in the Middle East, my Government is unable to co-operate with one particular
State in that region. Any consultation or co-operation
with that State is out of the question for many reasons,
but one obvious reason is that no relations whatsoever
exist between my Government and that State, We cannot, therefore, be under any obligation, under sub-paragraph Cd), to institute any co-operation with that State.
It is with this reservation that my delegation will accept
sub-paragraph (d) of paragraph 1 of the draft resolution.

62. Mr. LOURIE (Israel) : The delegation of Israel
had an opportunity at yesterday's meeting of the First
Committee to express its view with regard to the draft
res?lutio? now ~efore the General Assembly, My delegation WIll vote 111 favour of that draft resolution.
63, On behalf of my delegation, I wish formally to
place ?n record an expression 6f regret at the statement JUs~ made hy the representative of Iraq, a statement wInch reflects, as do the current military actions
of .tJ:e G~vemment of Iraq, reported in today's Press, a
SPI~lt ql1lte .contrary to the ideals and purposes of the
United NatIons and of the Charter.

..-

64. Mr. DEMCHENKO (Ukra,inian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (trall~lated fr~m Rus.S1al~) : The. draft resolution approved 111 the. Fust Comn1ltte~ on 17 May, at
the behest of the Ul1lted ,States, p!ac1l1g a,n embargo
on shipments to th~ People s. Repu~ltc of Chula and the
People's Democratic Repubhc of h.orea, and now submitted to the General Assembly for approval, cannot
and will not have any le~al force ~nd merely marks yet
another shameful page 111 the l1lstory of the United
Nations. Trampling upon all the principles and provisions of the Charter, the aggressive bloc in the United
Nations, led by the United State~, is imposing upon the
General Assembly yet another Illegal resolution, with
the object of prolonging the war and extending the
scope of United States aggression in the Far East.

if an
to th
legal.
byal
in th
of th
Char
The:
Secre
the P
San:
Artic
the rl
Sectl!

65. It is a well-known fact that the imposition of an

tion
whicl
aware
Char1
that t
publil
unoPI
tions
to de
actior
or m:
of \Vi

embargo is one of the actions which, under Chapter VII
and in accordance with Article 11, paragraph 2, of th~
Charter, lie within the exclusive competence of the Security Council. The General Assembly is not competent
therefore, to adopt decisions on such questions as th~
imposition of an embargo on shipments to a State. The
United States, however, despite these dear and unambiguous provisions of the Charter, and using an obedient voting machine, has decided to push its draft resolution, which is designed to promote aggression, through
the General Assembly, thus circumventing the Security
Council.
66. There is no doubt that the United States con·
siders it advisable to commit this new and shameful
violation of the Charter in order to cloak the fresh acts
of aggression it is planning against the Korean and
Chinese peoples with the flag of the United Nations,

67. Nevertheless, despite all the efforts of the ruling
circles in the Unitecl States to cover their plans for aggression with the mantle of the United Nations, the
peace-loving peoples of the world know that the United
States is wholly responsible for the aggression committed in Korea and against China, Those peoples will do
everything within their power to ensure that the
United States resolution and the criminal designs of the
United States aggressors, ,vhich are linked with it,
are doomed to utter failure.
68. In conclusion, the delegation of the Ukrainian
SSR states that, under the provisions of the United
Nations Charter, the General Assembly is not competent to consider the question raised by the Uni~ed
States draft resolution. For this reason the delegatIOn
of the Ukrainian SSR will not take part in the voting
on this question.
69. Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): The draft resolution which has been submitted to the General Assembly for adoption envisages sanctions of an economic
nature to be directed against the Government of Korea
as well as against the 'Central People's Government of
China. Action of such kind is envi~mged in Article 41
of the Charter, where it is reserved exclusively to the
Security Council. No provision whatsoever under
. Chapter VII of the Charter lllnkes it possible for any
organ other than the Security Council to take any action directed against threats -to the peace, breaches of
the peace or acts of aggression.

70.. Article 41 reserves to the Security Council exclUSIVely the power to deal with such matters; therefore,

71.

72-

templ
and '
actior
withil
tory I
draft
of thi
in La
and 0
extor
cede

73.

furthl
of th(
else a

74.

by so
legali
tion I
is leg
A leg
ening
awan

75,

to cm
the al
into I
furth

76.

of th(
barba
and j
other
Orga

77.

of th<

330th Meeting-18 May 1951
"
if any other organ deals with them, that is contrary
to the Charter and such action must be considered illegal. That legal argument has been fully elaborated
by all leading commentators on the Charter, as well as
in the discussions in the Foreign Relations Committee
of the United States Senate during its debate on the
Charter, as I stated yesterday in the First Committee.
The position was also made quite clear by the former
Secretary of State, Edward Stettinius, in his report to
the President of the United States on the results of the
San Francisco Conference. It is further emphasized by
Article 11, paragraph 2, of the Charter, which makes
the reservation that any action must be referred to the
Security Council either before or ai~?r discussion.
71. The majority which is trying to sec'are the adoption of this draft resolution, and thf~ United States,
which is forcing it upon the United Nations, are fully
aware that in so doing they are acting contrary to the
Charter. It is quite clear from this morning's Press
that they are endeavouring to conceal tIlis illegality from
public opinion by reporting the action as if it were
unopposed and without explaining that certain delegations consider it to be illegal. This is another attempt
to deceive public opinion and to bring the aggressive
actions of the United States to the world under the flag
or mask or cover of the United Nations in the hope
of winning some kind of support.
72. My delegation considers that the entire action contemplated under the present draft resolution is illegal
and constitutes another link in the series of illegal
actions which have been promoted by the United States
within the United Nations. All members know the history of these actions. \Ve also know the history of the
draft resolution now before the Assembly. \'le know
of the many visits of the United States Ambassadors
in London and Paris, of the discussions in Washington
and of the pressure and threats which the United States
extortioners have used to force cert:l.in States to accede to their demands.
73. This draft resolution is the expression of a
further violation of the sovereignty of :Member States
of the United Nations, a violation achieved by the exercise of economic, political and military pressure.
74. This action is illegal, and the argument advanced
by some representatives, namely, that it strengthens the
legality of previous actions, supports fuliy the contention that the action is illegal, because an action which
is legal does not need to have its legality strengthened.
A legal action is legal in itself. What does need strengt'.lening is the illegality which the United States is fUlly
aware it is committin~·.
75. This draft resoluticni is illegal, and its pu!:pose is
to carry out the intention of the United Stab~s to extend
the area of the war, to ~xtend its agzressior. from Korea
into China and into the whole con'jnent ut Asia as a
further step in the preparation of the ~hirl world war.
76. This draft resolution is an expression of the desire
of the United States to extend the responsibility for the
barbarous war crimes, for the criminal bombardment
and for the cruelty committed in Korea, by involving
other Members of the United Nations as well as the
Organization as a whole"
77. This draft resolution is an expression of the fear
of the United States GoverIL-nent that a peacefld settle-

737

ment in Korea could be achieved. Action is therefore
proposed which w0uld make such a settlement difficult,
if not impossible.
78. This draft resolution is also an expression of the
failure of the United States in its attempt to suppress
the freedom of the Korean people and to suppress the
Chinese People's Republic. The United States is seeking new allies and new methods for a third world war
in order to achieve those criminal ends.
79. This draft resolution is an expression of contempt
for the United Nations, because the United States
Senate, while paying lip seJvice to peaceful purposes
at its recent hearings, has made completely cleal to
everyone the real intentions of the United States. Never
in its history has the world witnessed such an orgy of
war-mongering, such an orgy of publicizing plans for
war, plans for aggression and plans for world domination.
80. This draft resolution also shows a complete contempt for the General Assembly. It confirms the hypocrisy of the United States which, in voting for paragrr,phs of resolutions which we opposed, SPOK~ of the
p{acef1.ll settlement of certain problems. The hl~arings
in the United States Senate have made it clea.r that
it was never the intention of the United States to carry
out one letter of the resolutions for which it vot~d.
81. This draft resolution falls within the framework of
the illegal and infa:nous Acheson plan. The aim of this
draft resolution is not a peaceful settlement; its aim is
the extension of the present conflict and 'ihe broadening
and the deepening of the danger of war.
82. This resolution cannot lead to anything but the
extension of the area of the war, and it will darken the
prospect of a peaceful settlement. It can only further the
purposes of the aggressive circles in the United States.
83. l\1y delegation considers that the General Assembly is not competent to deal with this question. It considers that the question is entirely within the competence of the Security Council and that, if the United
States had had any intention of proceeding with it
legally, it would have submitted it to the Security Council. Such contempt for the Security Council-that unimportant organ, as the Secretary of State said at his
Press conference on 16 May-is a further violation of
thl~ Charter.
84. My delegation considers the entire action illegaX,
a.nd the draft resolution illegal, and it will not participate in the vote as it did not participate in the debatt~
or in the vote in the First Committee.
85. Mr. NOSEK (Czechoslovakia): Yesterday, during the 443rd meeting of the First Committee, the
Czechoslovak delegation stated that it would not take
part in the discussion of the draft resolution contained
in the report of the Additional Measures Committee
[A/1799]. In addition, the Czechoslovak delegation did
not participate in the vote on that draft resolution, the
authors of which are the ruling circles of the United
States.
86. The aim of th3.t draft resolution was the further
spreading of aggression by the United States against
Korea. The United States, using the United N:ltions
as an instrument of its aggressive plans, is attempting,
by meail:3 of sanctions, to change its aggression in

738

. General As~embly-Fifth Se~~ion-Plenary Meeiing~

Kore~ }nto an ~pen aggressive war against the People's

Repuollc of Chma.
87. It is an undeniable fact, that the fliling circles of
the United States use the United Nations to conceal
their f.Lggressive and imperialistic plans. The United
. State's ruling circles have been persistently trying to use
the Unittd Nations to cover up the aggressive intentions of their capitalist monopolies. The illegal resolution~ adopted by the Security Council on 25 and 27
June and 7 July 1950,4 the illegal General Assembly
resolution 377 (V) of 3 November 1950 and the illegal and li~fario~s General Assembly resolution
498 (V) of 1 February 1951, werte all adopted under
an unprecedented pressure on the part of the United
States and contr2,ry to the Charter of the United Nations, which fact;:) all serve to prove my contention.
The United States ruling circles, with their hypocntical
and' false statements about their willingness to settle
the Korean question peacefully, are deliberately trying
to deceive world public opinion and to hide from the
peace-loving nations and peoples of b~e world the fa~t
that, step by step, they clrc carrying their 3.ggression
" doser and closer to the stage which leads to a war.
88. The draft resolution [Aj1802] which has now
been submitted by the majority of the First Committee
to the General Assembly is another proof of the falsehood and hypocrisy of the United States ruling circles,
which are trying today again to use the United Nations
as 'their instrument to enforce sanctions against the
People's Republic of China and against the Korean
People's Democratic Republic, while the United States
aggressors in Korea have already employed bacteriological weapons against the heroic people of Korea.
89. The draft resolution now before the ,General Assembly is another attempt 'to violate the Charter of the
United Nations. This draft resolution is the most violent
and, in. its consequences, the most dangerous attack on
the jurisdiction of the Security Council, which is clearly
defined in the Chartl;r of the United Nations. The dra.ft
resolution prepared by the United States and submitted.
today to the General Assembly by the First Committee
is obviously illegal, because what it involves is not the
application of the general principles of Article 2, paragraph 5, of the Charter, hut the ~ctual imposition of
sanctions under Article 41 of the Charter, which states
that the authority of the Security CQuncil is beyond
dispute. The draft resolution now before the General
Assembly is a flagrant violation of Article 11 of the
Charter, according to which the General Assembly is
not entitled to undertake any concrete action and cannot therefore make any so-called recommendations of
this nature and cannot make any specific provisions for
their implementation.
.
90. In the light of the statements which I have made
concerning the fact that the General Assembly is not
entitled to discuss this draft resolution, the Czechoslovak delegation declares that it will not take part in
the illegal consideration in the General Assembly of
this draft resolution lnd will therefore not participate
in the vote.
91. Sir Benegal RAU (India): I explained the position of my Government with res-ped to this draft reso4: See Official Records of the Secur'Uy Council, fifth year,
Nos. 15, 16 and 18.

lution yesterday in the First' Committee. For the pur-pose of the record I should like to repeat it briefly.
92. The dra.ft resolution before us is based upon the
resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 1 February. lVly delegation opposed that resolution, and we
c~n!lot therefore be a.party t~ the present one or to any
sltmlar recommendatIOn flowmg from that resolution.
93. From the speechES made in the course of the
discussion of this draft resolution, it appe~ -,'s that the
embargoes which are now recommerided are already in
operation by the States principally concerned. Consequently, the adoption of the draft resolution will not
mean any material cutting off of supplies and cannot be
e:xpected to hasten the ~nd of the fighting. We feel, on
the other hand, that it may add to the difficulties of an
honourable settlement by c~eating another psychological '
hurdle. We cannot, therefore, possibly be a party to
the draft resolution.
.
94. The embargoes proposed do not, however, concern
I!ldia, for there is.no question of our sending war mateflals t? any £ore~gn country and my Government is
not gomg to do so. Our present trade with China is
limited to certain barter arrangements for rice or other
food grains. These do not involve any war materials
and are unaffected by the recommendations contained in
the draft resolution. My delegation will therefore abstain
from voting.
95. I shDuld like to add one final word. Within the
last fortnight we have been reminded by high military
authority that in modern war, because of its immense
destructiveness, there can be no such thing as victory
for any side; both sides lose; it is suicide for both. We
have also been told by the same high authority that it
is defeatism to think that war is. inevitable. What it
comes to, then,is that even at this stage war can be
avoided-I am spealdng of. global war-and it must be
avoided if we 'are not to permit race suicide.
96. An awful responsibility, therefore, rests upon all
of us here to do all we can to see that the Korean conflict does not spread and is brought to an end at the
'
earliest possible moment.
97. Some time ago there appeared a report in the
Press that our Unified Command would regard it as a
tremendous victory for the United Nations if the United
Nati0D:s forces suceeded in keeping South Korea clear
of the mvader-or words to that effect. Would it not be
possible for the United Nations to consider this subject
an~ make ,an early pronouncement upon it in approp~late terms? Such a pronouncement might serve to
dispel any unwarranted doubts or misunderstandings
about the military objectives of the United Nations,
and might thus be a useful step.
98. Faris EL-KHOURI Bey (Syria) : I desire to explain the vote which I shall cast on the draft resolution
now before the General Assembly. I wish to recall the
a~itude of my Government with regard to th~ resolu~
bon of 1 February 1951, branding the Central People's
Government of the People's Republic of China as an
aggressor, and the explanation which I then gave of
Syria's vote [327th meeting]. In pursuance of that attitude, my delegation will abstain from voting on the
provisions for an embargo which are embodied in the
draft resolution before us.
'

I

330th Meeting-18 May 1951
99. At the same time, Syria considers t.hat the adoption of the draft resolution by the majority of the members of the General Assembly would make it the d'uty
of the Member States to abide by the recommendation
issued by the General Assemhly. Consequently my
country, which has not recognized the Central People's
Government of the People's Republic of China, will
respect this principle in fulfilling its duties as a Member
of the United Nations, and will continue strictly to refrain from sending to the said Republic, and to North
Korea, any of the articles referred to ~n the draft
resolution.
100. Mr. AZKOUL (Lebanon) (translated from
French): I wish to make the same reservation as was
made by the representative of Iraq with regard to subparagraph (d) of paragraph 1 of the operative part of
the draft resolution. I made the same reservation yesterday in the First Committee [444th meeting]. I do so
because that sub-paragraph, which mentions the dnty of
Gvery Member State to co-operate·with other States in
carrying out the purposes of the embargo, cannot be
construed as seeking to modify the status quo as regards
the fundamental relations which, for reasons alien to
the objectives of the present draft resolution, mayor
may not exist between various States.
101. Mr. SHVETSOV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) (translated from Russian) : The delegacion of the Byelorussian SSR has already stated its
views on the United States draft resolution providing
for the impusition of an embargo on the shipment of
goods to the Chinese People's Republic and the People's
Democratic Repub!ic of Korea; it stated those views at
yesterday's meeting of the First Committee. My delegation took no part in the discussion of this new and
shameful draft resolution because, quite apart from the
fact that it is designed to promote aggression, its very
consideration by the General Assembly constitutes a
gross violation of the United Nat~ons Charter.
102. The measures proposed in the United States draft
resolution come under the action provided for in
Chapter VII of the Charter. But under Article 11,
paragraph 2, of the Charter, action of this kind lies
within the exclusive competence of the Security Council. The General Assembly is therefore not competent
to pass on such questions as the imposition of an
embargo on shipments to any Stat(e.
103. The discussion of this draft· resolution-if what
took place yesterday in the First Committee can ce
called a discussion-showed how far the United States
and the aggressive bloc in the U:.llted Nations have
gone in flouting the Charter and thl ~ basic principles of
the United Nations, how far they have gone in their
endeavours to convert the Organizatl.')n into the instrument of their aggressive policy.
104. It is significant that although the Soviet Union
representative and the rf>presentatives of several other
countries drew the First Committee's attention to the
fact that the question of imposing an embargo was a
matter with which the Security Council alone was
competent to deal, and although they demonstrated the
utter illegality of any discussion of that draft resolution
by the General Assembly, since any such discussion
would constitute a gross violation of the Charter, not
one of the members of the aggressive bloc ventured to

739

quote the Charter in justification of hi:, attitude towards
this shameful text. It was only after the draft resolution
had been voted upon that the United St?tes representative made an unsuccessful attempt to base his argument
on the Charter; he endeavoured to justify this new
illegal act, tIns fresh violation of the Charter, by
adducing an equally illegal resolution of the General
Assembly-in other words, by referrjng to a previous .
violation of the Charter.
105. The United States draft resolution is not Qnly
illegal but also, in view of its content, shameful ::md
criminal. It is illegal because it was imposed upon the
Committee in violation of the Charter; it is shameful
because it is directed against peace-loving States which
are fighting for their freedom against aggression, and
is designed to further the interests of the aggressors; it
is criminal because its object is to extend the war in the
Far East, to prevent any peaceful settlement of Far
Eastern problems and to in~rease the general international tension for the purpose of preparing a new war.
106. By adopting a draft resolution of this kind, the
General Assembly will be taking yet another step in the
direction in which it is being pushed so assiduously by
the United States, which is seeking to transform this
Organization from an instrument of peace and security
into one of war and anarchy.
107. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR deems it
essential to point Out once again that, under Article 11,
paragraph 2, of the Charter, the General Assembly is
not competent to consider the question of an embargo
or any other question entailing action under Chapter
VII of the Charter.
108. For these reasons the delegation of the Byelorussian SSR will not take part in the voti~g on the
draft resolution submitted to the Assembly.
109. Mr. GROSS (United States of America) : I wish
to deal with the Soviet Union argument and the argument advanced by the associates of the Soviet Union
representative that this draft resolution is beyond the
competence of the General Assembly. They, say that
recommendations of the .sort contained in the draft
resolution may be made by the Security Council, and
only by the Security Council, under Chapter VII of the
Charter, in particular, under Article 41. It seems to me
to be very late for my USSR colleague to question
whether Article 10 of the Charter means what it says.
I shall read Article 10:
"The General Assembly may discuss any questions
or any matters within the .scope of the present
Charter or relating to the powers and functions of
any organs provided for in the present Charter, and,
except as provided in ArtiCle 12, may make recommendation to the Members of the United Nations or
to the Security Council or to both on any such
questions or matters."
110. The sole exception in Article 10 to the competence of the General Assembly, therefore, is contained
in Article 12. Artic1e 12 is not involved in this situation,
and it has not been referred to in this regard by the
representative of the Soviet Union or by his associates.
Of course, the Security Council is not dealing with this
questiorl. at the present time. It is not doing so because
the matter has been removed from the agenda of the

740

Gent.'ral Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

Security Council. rhe representative of the USSR
voted for the removal of the matter from the agenda of
the Security Council; I should like to point out in
passing that he made the following statement-I quote
from the record of the Security Council meeting of
31 January 1951: 5
"Moreover, the delegation of the Soviet Union
considers it necessary to affirm the illegality of all
decisions adopted on this matter by the Security
Council under pressure by the United States."
111. The USSR representative now wishes this matter
to be referred to the Security Coun.dl~ whe:re he has
taken a position that the Security Council may not
validly deal with the subject. It is part of the history of
the Charter that the Soviet Union sough',: at San
Francisco to limit Article 10, which I have just quoted,
so that a veto in the Security Council couJ,d bring the
United Nations to the end of the road in a particular
case, but the Soviet Union effort failed. In the case of
Korea, the Security Council was prevented by the
USSR veto from making an order under Article 41 of
the Charter and from taking any action, as that term i!:i
used in the Charter, under Article 11. But although the
Soviet Union, by abusing the veto, may frustrate the
Security Council, it cannot paralyse the United Nations.
On the contrary, the responsibility of the General Assembly becomes all the greater in the essential peacemaking functions of the United Nations.
112. The argument of the Soviet group lacks consistency as well as logic. Today> we heard the representative of Poland-I think I quote his words accuratelysay tb::t.t sanctions of an economic nature, as he described
the matter, are reserved entirely to the Security Council.
He went on to say that no provisions in the Charter
permit any action with respect to breaches of the peace
or threats to the peace and that such matters can be
dealt with only by the Security Council, not by any
other organ. That is what the representative of Poland
said today. On 1 November 1946, the Polish delegation
put before the General Assembly a draft resolution"
which, among other things, recommended that each
Member of the United Nations should "terminate, forthwith, diplomatic relations with the Franco regime". 6 If
tbis is not a measure of the sort described by the
representative of Poland, I am at a loss to know to
what measures or actions he referred.
113. The representative of the Byelorussian SSR who,
as I heard his words, said that the General Assembly
was not empowered to take any action such as the
imposition of an economic embargo, took the following
action on 4 November 1946. The delegation of the
Byelorussian SSR at that time submitted an amendment
to the Polish draft resolution, to which I have just
referred, recommending that each Member of the
United Nations should "terminate diplomatic and economic relations with Franco Spain, such action to
include the suspension of communications by rail, sea,
air, post and telegraph".'l'
114. Did the representative of the Soviet Union at
that time question the competence' of the General
5 Ibid.,

sixth year, 531st meeting.
See Official Record~ at the General Assembly, second part
of the first session, First Committee, annex Ha.
'7 Ibid., annex He.
6

Assembly to consider this draft resolution and the
amendment of the Byelorussian SSR to which I have
referred? No. I should like to quote from the Official
Records of the General Assembly, second part of the
first session, First Committee, page 267. Mr. Gromyko
said that:
"It had been claimed in the Security Council that
the General Assembly should take action, but now it
was being statr-d in the General Assembly that the
matter was within the competence of the Security
Council. The General Assembly had the power and
right to consider and take a decision on this problem,
and a policy of inaction would have grave consequences."
Those were the views of Mr. Gromyko, the representative of ~he USSR, in regard to this demand for economic
sanctions against Spain.

115. It is not without significance that the delegation
of the Soviet Union and its associates have refrained
from raising at this meeting, as they did yesterday in
the First Committee, a formal point on this matter so
that a vote might be taken upon it and the General
Assemlly might formally express itself on the question.
They obviously knew what the sense of the General
Assembly would be; they knew that there would be
unanimity except for their own votes. Perhaps they
would have refrained from participating in that vote
as well.
It is possible, that there may be genuine differences
of opinion from time to time among the Members of the
United Nations as to what is within. the competence of
the General Assembly. Here again, how has the USSR
delegation itself suggested that s11ch a question should
be determined when it is raised? Let me recall what
Mr. Vyshinsky said in. the General Assembly on
14 November 1947. Again, I shall read from the
Official Records of the General Assembly, oS8cond
session, Plenary Meetings, volume 11, page 882. ~!{r.
Vyshinsky said:

116.

"I would remind you of the opinion expressed by
the experts of the Preparatory Commission at San
Francisco, to the effect that when an organ has to
apply the Charter, it must also ir:.tprpi'et it. In this
connexion it is easy to understand why the Charter
does not say that the International Court of Justice
may interpret the Charter".
117. Has the delegation of the Soviet Union proposed
that this General Assembly should determine its powers
under the Charter in this regard? It has not. It has
rested on rhetoric, on appeals to feal s, to division, to
disunity. It has used blackmail, it has used frustration.
It has not used logic; it lacks logic.
118. In summary, the entire argument on the competence of the General Assembly is old ground being
ploughed again. Each organ of the United Nations can
be the judge, in the first instance, of its own competence,
and I believ~ the principle is inherent in the Charter
that when a majority of the meinbers of that organ vote
in favour of a resolution, that vote can be considered as a
determination by that bcdy of the competence p{ the
organ concerned in accordance with the principles of
the Charter.

741
---------------------

330th Meeting-IS May 1951
119. In closing, I should like to refer to the moving
and eloqu€lnt words spoken sincerely, as he always
speaks, by the representative of India. It is certainly
true, as he says, that, modern war being what it is, there
is no victory. For precisely the same reasons there is no
standing aside. I should like to read the conclusion of a
statement on the Korean question made by Mr. Austin
in the Fil:st Committee on 24 January 1951 :
"I ~,sk my colleagues to give some thought to the
issue of collective security. Collective security is not
merely a phrase. The views of the people of the United
States on this matter were developed through a
g'~neration of vigorous debate and are linked with
t~\1e sacrifices of the peoples of the world during the
Second Wodd War, which had to be made because
the world had not been able to· >establish a system of
collective security to meet nazi aggression.
"We do recognize that there are honest differences
on the question before us, in the, .points of view of the
governments represented round this table. Some are
renlote from the scene of conflict and hope somehow
to avoid inv,...l v p.ment. Some are concerned lest the
strength of tne United Nations should be so committed in Korea as not to be available for their own
defence. Others take differing views about the nature
of developments in the Far East and what these mean
to the rest of the world. But on one point we are all
agreed: if anyone of us were attacked, each of us
would in that situation desperately ask the United
Nations to provide the unified support of eve:y other
government in the world to meet the attack. How
can we bring that about for our own country? Only
by a determination to take united action to support
each other faithfully and vigorously when an act of
aggression occurs."s
120. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The representatives of the Soviet Union and Poland
have asked to speak. I hCJpe that they will be brief. If
they are not, it will amount to reversing the Assembly's
decision not to discuss this question.
121. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from RUJsian) : I shall try to be
brief. I wish to make only a couple of remgrks.
122. I ask the United States represe.ntative to take the
trouble to read the last sentence of Article 11,. paragraph 2, of the Charter. In the light of that sentence,
all his arguments and references to Article 10 collapse
like a house of cards.
)23. "~'he reference to Franco Spain was characteristic
of the methods of United States diplomacy; it was an
attempt to distort history in order thereby to cloak the
aggression committed by the United States, to cloak
its plans for and intentions' of aggression. The General
Assembly and all the Members of the United Nations
made it absolutely clear, at San Francisco and in
London, at the first session of the General Assembly,
that they regarded Spain as a member of the fascist bloc
and as a State which had assisted Hitler's sanguinary
fascism in its struggle against the allied and united
Powers. This explains the attitude of the whole world8 The summary of this statement appears in the Official
Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, First Committee, 430th meeting.

of all the peoples who fought against the fascist plaguetowards Fr~nco Spain. This also explains the attitude
of the United Nations towards Franco Spain. Hence
th,~ attempt which is now being made to use the attitude
of the United Nations towards Franco Spain as all
argument to justify the efforts of the United States
aggressors to disguise their aggression in Korea, their
aggression against China and their plans for extending
theit" :A.ggression in the Far East and dragging the world
into another war. involves the 'kossest distortion of
history and i~ :::. shameful development which cannot be
countenuIY.:ed in the United Nations.
124. The references made by the United States representative to Franco Spain-that member of the fasciBt
bloc which the United States is now seeking to include
in its aggressive bloc in order to use it against the
peace-loving peoples-merely show, therefore, that the
United States is at a loss for other arguments, because
neither the Charter, nor the past activities of the United
Nations, nor the General Assembly, nor the Security
Souncil provide the United States with any justification
whatsoever for forcing this shameful resolution on the
United Nations.
125. Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland) : Having accepted·
the decision that there should be no debate on the
matter in the General Assembly, I do not intend. to enter
into any debate. However, the representative of the
United States, in explaining the vote of his delegation,
touched upon certain points and even tried to explain
my vote or my non-participation. I ther.~fore feel
obliged to offer an additional explanation and I am grateful to the President for allov:ing me to speak.
126. The United States representative gave all ex::UnpIe, at yesterday's meeting of the First Committee, of
his curious habit of choosing a time to speak when-he hopes-no reply can be made. This is a well-known
habit of the representative of the United States an'l
resembles the tactics of the young man on trial on
a charge of falsifying signatures on checks, who feverishly explains to th~ judge that he has never raped
a minor.
127. The representative of the United States could
have found many other Articles in the Charter. in which
no limitation of the powers of the General Assembly is
given. Why did he refer to Article 10? He could have
referred to Article 26, Article 89, or Article 90. There
is nothing said in those Articles concerning the limitation
of the powers of the General Assembly. Why did he
not refer. to Article 11, which is the Article relevant in
this case and which should be interpreted in the light of
Chapter VII of the Charter? He referred to Article 10
because it suited his convenience. With regard to the
func'doTls and powers of the General Assembly, the San
Franci.sco Conference found it necessary to establish
Articles 10 and 11. Article 11 refers in particular to
questions relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security, including the principles governing
disarmament. This is the Article which is relevant in
this case, and no other.
128. As I said, I can nnd several other Articles in
which no reference is made to a limitation of the powers
of the General Assembly with regard to action concerning breaches of the peace and acts of aggression. The
relevant Article in this situation is Article 11, para...

742

General Assemhly-:Fifth Session-Plenmoy Meetings

graph 2, the last sentence of w~ich the representative
of the United States prefers to overlook. The last
sentence of that paragraph reads as follows: H Any such
question on which action is necessary shall be referred
to the Security Council by the General Assembly either
before or after discussion." That provision is binding
on the General Assembly and makes it clear that the
:l.ctiou of th~ United States is illegal, and I am quite
Siure tha:~ the representative of the United States is well
aware of the illegality of this action.
Jl29. My delegation did not press for a vote concerning
<:ompetence hecause it believes that this is a matter
which cannot be decided by a vote. We cannot decide
by means of a vote to suspend Article 11 or to suspend
Chapter VII. The representative of the United States
would like to create certain precedents. On the next
occasion he might put forward a proposal that the
Chapter should be replaced by certain rules of procedure
of the Committee on Un-American Activities. The
lrepresentative of the United States knows that he has
lrlothing to be proud of in the fact that, if the question
of competence were submitted, the required majo:ity
would be found to support his view. This is something
which gives no cause for pride. Many who would vote
with him would blush as they did so. It shows only the
immoral methods of United States foreign policy-the
Iconstant violation of the national sovereignty of many
Member States and the illegal methods of pressure
which are being used.
130. Also in an attempt to divert attention from, and
to distort, the present situation, reference has been
:made to the action contemplated in the draft resolution
Iconr.:erning relations with Franco Spain which Poland
st-bmitted in 1946. This, again, is an attempt to distort
the picture and to divert the attention of the General
Assembly and of public opinion from relevant to
irrelevant facts. In the first place, the action against
Franco Spain was taken under special conditions which
lexisted and on the basis of binding international agreements. It was taken on the basis of the Yalta, Potsdam
ani Moscow agreements which existed and which were
binding, since we all adhered to the principle pacta sunt
servanda, even if the United States found it w1se and
necessary for its aggressive policy to violate each and
every provision of those international agreements with
regard to relations between the United Nations and
Fr?nco Spain.
131. But the action against Franco Spain was not
being taken under Chapter VII of the Charter. It was
not an action with respect to a breach of peace lJ" 2.n
act of aggression, and it was not an action envisa6"i=d
under Article 41. It was an action which could be ('onsidered as falling under the provisions for a peaceful
adjustment of a situation, and one which could be
considered to come within the competence of the General
Assembly. I still ~aintain, therefore, that the whole
argument with regard to Franco Spain was invalid, and
I am quite sure that it will not deceive anyone as to the
fact that the United States is attempting to cover up its
aggression in the Far East by phrases representing that
aggression as a United Nations action. That argument
has failed to· deceive the peace-loving nations, and the
latest argument of the United States representative will
Printed "in U.S.A.

likewise fail to deceive anyone inside or outside this
General Assembly.
132. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):·
The discussion is closed and we shall now proceed to
vote on the draft resolution submitted by the First
Committee [Aj1802]. A roll-call vote has been requested.
133. Mr. BEBLER (Yugosalvia) : I request separate
votes on the preamble and the operative part of the draft
resolution.
.
134. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I shall therefore put the preamble to the vote first; I am
sure the representative of Yugoslavia was not asking
for a roll-call vote on the preamble.
The preamble was adopted by 44 votes to none, with
10 abstentions.
135. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I shall now put the operative part of the draft resolution
to the vote.
The operative part was adopted by 46 votes to none,
with 8 abstflntions.
136. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I shall now put t4e .draft resolution to the vote as a
whole, by roll-call.·
A vote was ta:~en by roll-call.
The United States of America, having been drawn by
lot by the President, was called upon to vote first.
In favour: United States of America, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Argentina, Australia,
Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Greece,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Iran, Iraq, Israel,
Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Thailand, Turkey,
Union of South Africa, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
Against: None.
Abstaining: Afghanistan, Burma, Egypt, India,
Indonesia, Pakistan, Sweden, Syria.
The Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia, Poland, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics did not
participate in the voting.
137. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Before announcing the results of the voting, I wish to
give an explanation. My ruling generally is to count
those delegations which do not participate in the vote as
abstai'ing. In this special case, however, in view of the
importance of thif resolution and in view of the fact
that the First Committee followed a different procedure,
I shall allow an exception and I shall mention separately
those which abstained and those which declared that
they did not wish to participate in the vote.
138. The result of the voting is as follows: 47 delegations voted in favour, none against, 8 abstained and 5
delegations dec1ared that they did not wish to participate
in the vote. Consequently the draft resolution is adopted.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.
A-40464-June 1951-3,600
