TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

St

MEETING: 14 JUNE 1967
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l36 1) . . . . . L . . . . . . . . / . . . 0 * . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

1

,,...

Is ..,.,

..,...................

....

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902) . . . . . . \
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907) . . . , . . . . . . . . .
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/73 10) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . + . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

’

Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military action by Israel and
withdrawal of the Israel forces from those parts of the territory of the United
Arab Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the result of an
aggression” (S/7967) . , + , . . + . I , . . . . . . , . . , . . , . . . . . . s . . . . . . . . .

S/PV. 361

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutionsand Decisionsof the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED AND SIXTY-FIRST

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 14 June 1967, at 5.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Hans R. TABOR (Denmark).

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910)

Present: The representatives of the following States: Argentina Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia,
France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America.

Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Repro
sentative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military action
by Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces from those
parts of the territory of the United Arab Republic,
Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the result of
an aggression” (S/7967)

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l361)
1.

Adoption of the agenda.

2.

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).

’ 3.

Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).

4.

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/79 10).

5.

Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military
action by Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces
from those parts of the territory of the United Arab
Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as
the result of an aggression” (S/7967).

1. The PRESIDENT’: In accordance with the decisions
previousljr taken by the Council, I shall now, with the
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Israel,
the United Arab Republic, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Jordan to take places at the Council tables and the
representatives of Lebanon, Iraq, Morocco, Saudi Arabia,
Kuwait, Tunisia, Libya and Pakistan to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber, in
order to participate without vote in the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr, M. Kidron (Israel),
Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr. G.
J. Tomeh (Syria) and Mr. &L H. El-Farra (Jordan) took
places at the Council table, and Mr. S. Chammas (Lebanon),
Mr. K. Khalaf (Iraq), Mr. A. T. Benhima (Morocco), Mr. J.
M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. R. Al-Rashid (Kuwait),
Mr. M. Mestiri (Tunisia), Mr, W. El Bouri (Libya) and
Mr. A. Shahi (Pakistan) took the places reserved for them

2. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now continue its
consideration of the four items on its agenda. The first
speaker on my list is the representative of Argentina who, I
understand, wishes to introduce the three-Power draft
resolution contained in document S/7968/Rev.2. I now call
on him.

Adoption of the agenda
I

3. Mr, RUDA (Argentina) (translated from Spanish):
While it is true that the Security Council is a strictly
political body which concerns itself mainly with the major
problems of war and peace, it cannot for this reason
overlook the tragic reality of the scars left by armed
conflict on a region where hostilities have taken place. Our
delegation has associated itself with those of Brazil and
Ethiopia, and on behalf of all those delegations it is
introducing the draft resolution contained in document
S/7968/Rev.2, in which the Security Council would recommend to the Governments concerned the scrupulous respect
of the humanitarian principles applicable in time of war.

The agenda was adopted.

j Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902)
Complaint
of the Representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security” (S/7907)’
1

8. Mr. KEITA (Mali) (translatedfrom French): My delaga.
tion appreciates very much the understanding shownby the
three sponsors of the draft resolution with respect to our
proposed amendment. I should like merely to draw the
attention of the Argentine representative to what is
probably an error in translation. In the amendment which1
presented this morning [1360th meeting] the adjective
“effective” appears before the word “implementation”. 1
think it would be preferable to retain this wording,

This draft resolution reflects the general concern 0f all
delegations, as is clear from many of the statements made
in the Security Council.
4. These obligations, which we should like to bring to the
attention of the parties, are the result of a long tradition
and of the considerable progress which has been made since
ancient times in giving formal legal expression to principles
based on respect for mankind.
5. First of all, we are deeply concerned at the fate of the
civilian population whose persons and possessions are
suffering from the consequences of war. A minimum
standard of rights must be guaranteed to those who are not
taking any active part in hostilities. We believe that these
persons must be treated in a humane manner under all
circumstances, that their family and residence rights, their
religious convictions and practices and their habits and
customs must be protected and, above all, that they must
not be subject to any act of physical or moral coercion.

9. I will now repeat the text of my amendment as1
presented it this morning:
“Requests the Secretary-General to follow the effective
implementation of this resolution and to report to the
Security Council”.
10. Mr. RUDA (Argentina) (translated from Spanish):
Unfortunately, I do not know English well enough to
translate the French text accurately into English. If the text
had been in Spanish, that would, of course, have been quite
another matter. The text was translated for me unofficially
by the Secretariat, and in the translation the word
“effective” is omitted since I am informed that it is not
required in English.

6. In our draft resolution this appeal is addressed specifically to the Government of Israel, since in present
circumstances it is that Government which will be largely
responsible for applying these humanitarian principles. We
believe that the experience in the Middle East has been a
melancholy one; and, as so often has been said here, the
problems which confront us are due to a large extent to the
fact that countless refugees have been left without land or
shelter. The Jordanian delegation has told us of its concern
at this situation, and many other delegations have in the
Council expressed similar views, We must learn from this
experience and try thereby to avoid any recurrence or, at
least, any aggravation of conditions existing at the present
time. We trust that, in this hour of uncertainty, the people
affected by the war will not have to suffer its consequences
any longer. In this connexion, my delegation was particularly interested in the statement made yesterday by the
Israel representative. He said: “However, there has since
taken place a large-scale return movement from the east
bank to the west bank. And the Israel authorities are doing
nothing to prevent this.” [135&h meeting, para. 224.1 My
Government hopes that this policy will be maintained in
the futul;e and that the people who crossed the Jordan will
be able to return to their homes.

11. I would suggest that the representative of Mali should
submit his proposal formally in French, and that we leaveit
to the Secretariat to produce an exact translation later.’ We
accept, in any case, the French text originally proposed by
the representative of Mali.
12. The PRESIDENT: I understand that the representative
of Mali accepts the suggestion of the representative of
Argentina.
13. The next speaker on my list is the representativeof
India, to whom I now give the floor,
14. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): We have, in the pas1
few days, in this Council, spoken about various aspects01
the problems which face the international community ir.
the Middle East. Now we find ourselves in a situation
where, though war has been contained, tensions are still
high and peace has not been restored. Though the cea&ra
has been insisted upon and at last made really operative by
the Council, withdrawals have not yet been ordered. This
has resulted in an intruding army finding itself in control Of
large chunks of land and large masses of population
rightfully belonging to countries which are the victims of
aggression.

7. The same humanitarian considerations also apply to the
treatment of prisoners of war. As we understand it, this is a
case where, apart from the strictly legal problems, the
principles embodied in the Geneva Conventions of 12
August 1949 relative to the treatment of prisoners of war
are applicable to all parties. In co-sponsoring this draft
resolution, my delegation is following one of the traditions
of our country, which is always ready to defend humanitarian causes. Furthermore, my delegation, speaking also on
behalf of the other two sponsors, would like to inform the
Council that we accept the amendment proposed at this
morning’s meeting by the representative of Mali to the
effect-as we understand it-that a third paragraph should
be added to our draft resolution. The English translation of
the original French text of this paragraph is as follows:

15. This unhappy situation brings to the fore the human
problem of the population of the occupied territories whlclt
was mentioned, in the most poignant terms by the
representative of Jordan, at the 1355th meeting on 10 Juas
1967, and also subsequently. We note with appreciation the
sympathetic comments made by the representatives of the
United Kingdom, Bulgaria, Canada, Ethiopia, Japan and the
United States of America. I, myself, at the 1352nd meet@
on 9 June only briefly touched upon the subject because

“3. Requests the Secretary-General to follow the
implementation
of this resolution and to report to the
Security Council thereon”.

1 The full text of the revised draft resolution was late1 &ulaied
asdocument S/7968/Rev.3.

2

we were even then daring to allow ourselves to hope that
the cease-fire would be followed by an immediate withdrawal. We dared to be so optimistic because we believed,
and continue to believe, that all the great Powers, and not
merely one or two of them, consider it their solemn duty to
insist on withdrawals.

humanitarian
concern with the plight of thousands of
unfortunate people does not in any way reflect on or
prejudice their right to remain in the place of abode which
they occupied prior to the outbreak of hostilities. I want to
make that quite clear.
21. Let us turn, on this understanding, to the search for a
just, healing and lasting peace in the Near East, and in so
doing, in the view of my delegation, it would be highly
appropriate in recognition of this agonizing human problem
and the need of all nations to find a way to meet that
desperate problem that we join in unanimous support of
the draft resolution offered by the representatives of
Argentina, Brazil and Ethiopia.

16, Unfortunately,
this has not happened. Hence the
urgent need for the draft resolution [S’/7968/Rev.Z] which
has just now been introduced in such moving terms by my
colleague and friend, the representative of Argentina. We
must pay a tribute to our colleagues of Brazil, Argentina
and Ethiopia for their initiative, because every day that
passes without the Security Council taking any action itself
or laying down any course of action to be taken by the one
Government which holds large areas of alien soil, and
controls large numbers of people who are citizens of other
lands, brings fresh items of disturbing news. These news
items present grim details of the suffering of both civilians
and armed forces that have been cut off. Reports appearing
in the world press-including the press of countries which
have not been all that friendly to the Arabs recently-tell of
hapless Arab soldiers and civilians wandering in the midst of
the Sinai desert, with neither food nor water to sustain
them. There are also reports of people-civilians, men,
women and children-who were pushed out of their home
and hearth in Jerusalem and other towns of Jordan, on the
west bank of the Jordan River.

22, Mr. SEYDOUX (France) (translated fkom French): In
supporting the proposal that we recommend the Governments concerned strictly to respect the humanitarian
principles as set forth in the Geneva Conventions of
I2 August 1949,’ my delegation feels that it is fulfilling a
duty which is in keeping with its most immutable traditions
and is stretlgthened by the role which France, together with
several other countries, has played when moral obligations
recognized by the civilized world have had to be established
as rules of law. That is why we reiterate our keen
satisfaction at the initiative taken by Argentina, Brazil and
Ethiopia.
23. In submitting draft resolution S/7968/Rev.2 for the
consideration of the Council, the representatives of those
three countries have translated into objective terms matters
of concern to which none of us can remain indifferent. In
particular, they were right to insist that the safety of people
caught in the military cross-fire should be ensured so far as
possible in conditions similar to those which existed before
the outbreak of hostilities. It is absolutely imperative that
every effort should be made-1 repeat, every effort-to
enable those who have fled from the fighting to return to
their homes, their villages or their towns without delay.

17, Our Secretary-General, U Thant, whose passion for
peace and humanity is well known, has already taken
prompt action in making his recommendations to the
Government of Israel, in his letter of 13 June (see
S/793O/Add. 6, par-a. S] addressed to the Permanent Representative of Israel.
18. In the circumstances, the present draft resolution is, to
my mind, a necessay guide-line and a reminder to the Israel
authorities to act with humanity. The draft resolution
before us, which we support, is an anxious expression of
the universal conscience which rebels against these palpable
and obvious results of the scourge of war. Flesh and blood
are cheap in war, but we should urge, plead and appeal in
the name of our common humanity for the humane
treatment qf those who are victims of the conflict, ensuring
their safety and welfare.

24. The Governments involved in this conflict cannot
evade their obligations towards prisoners of war. We should
like to think that the first exchange of prisoners will take
place on the basis of criteria inspired more by generosity
than by mere reciprocity.
25. My delegation has paid particular attention to the
letters dated 12 June /S/7974 and S/797.5] from the
representatives of Tunisia and Jordan, as well as to the
statements made by those two representatives in the
Council, concerning the fate ;I’ the population living on the
west bank of the Jordan, including the Palestine refugees
living in United Nations Relief and Works Agency
(UNRWA) camps. If reports are confirmed, and if it should
appear that expulsion has been decided upon and organized, the Council would find itself confronted with a
particularly serious situation. In the past the refugee
problem has cast so dark a cloud over peace and stability in
the Middle East that the Government of Israel should
endeavour by every available means not to exacerbate it or
allow it to assume proportions which wouId prevent any
hope of an equitable settlement.

19. Mr. IGNATIEFF
(Canada): The representative of
India has just mentioned that I had occasion to refer to the
need to start on the long path of dealing with the grievous
wounds of war that have been inflicted on countless men
and women in the area of hostilities. As an immediate and
necessary humanitarian measure, Canada welcomes the
initiative taken by Argentina, Brazil and Ethiopia, which
would focus our attention on the safety, welfare and
security of the inhabitants of the area where military
operations have taken place.
20. Speaking in the Canadian House of Commons last
week, the Secretary of State for External Affairs,
Mr. Martin, stressed that it is the collective responsibility of
all nations, including those primarily involved, to meet the
gigantic problem of dislocated families and peoples. In this
connexion, I wish to make it clear that our immediate

2 Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 for the protection of
war victims.
3

26. Taking into account these observations, my delegation
would favour an immediate investigation by UNRWA into
the situation of refugees in areas where military operations
have taken place. By adopting such a measure, the Council
would also demonstrate clearly to the Governments concerned that they cannot disregard their responsibilities towards
those who have come under their jurisdiction as a result of
the fighting. This measure would strengthen the appeal
made by the Secretary-General to the Permanent Representative of Israel on 13 June. The text of that appeal can
be found in his supplementary report of 13 June. It would
also be the first step in the implementation
of the
provisions of the draft resolution presented by Argentina,
Brazil and Ethiopia which my delegation will certainly
support.

by none other than my friend, Ralph Bunche. And under
his name is “Under-Secretary”.
31. I have known Mr. Bunche for the last twenty years,
Our relationship has always been cordial and friendly. But
when I read that letter I thought that it might have been
written in a fit of nervousness or anger, considering that I
have always known Mr. Bunche to be a hard worker, and
we are all under great strain.
32. SO I called his office-luckily,
he was not there-because I was taken aback when I read the letter; I do not
hide it from you. I called the Secretary-General. He also
was out of his office. I wanted to find out whether the
Secretary-General knew about that letter or was associated
with it in any way, Secondly, I wanted to know from
Mr. Bunche whether, like any one of us, he was under a
strain and had written the letter jl a fit of anger cr
displeasure. Thirdly, I wanted to know whether he had a
reason for writing it. I asked for a verbal reply from the
secretary of the Secretary-General, and then I had to check
with the Secretary-General whether he knew of this letter.
And he advised me, and rightly so, to talk to my friend
Mr. Bunche. So I saw Mr. Bunche and before I could tell
him again what I had to say, he said: “You invaded no
private life here in the Council and I will not allow you or
anybody else to do that.” I said: “I thought you must have
been acting under a strain. You had no right to addressme
in this manner because, in addressing me in this manner you
are addressing every member, not only of the Council, bu!
of the United Nations.” He said-1 am parapluasingwhether you like it or not, I stand on what I wrote. And
that is what brought me to the table, Reluctantly, I came to
the table. I tried to check with him as to whether he had
written this letter under a strain, or whether he perhaps
thought, mistakenly, that he could get away ,yith what lie
did. This is not a tribural, but the feud has begun. As if we
had not enough feuds.

27. Similarly, we think that the Council should take into
account the suggestion of the United Kingdom representative that a special representative of the SecretaryGeneral be entrusted with the task of investigating the fate
of the refugees. We believe that the appalling problem of
these refugees, and indeed of all refugees, should be
regarded as a matter of the utmost urgency, as a noncontroversial, a human problem, without prejudice to the
long-term solutions upon which we shall ultimately have to
agree.
28. May I say in conclusion that in fulfilling their humane
duty, the Governments concerned will not merely be
relieving the suffering of those for whom we feel so deeply.
They will also be working for their mutual benefit and for
their future, without which their reconciliation is impossible.
29. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Saudi Arabia. As the Security Council
table has already been filled as a result of invitations
extended to four representatives, the representative of Syria
has very kindly indicated his wiIlingness to withdraw
temporarily from his seat at the Council table while the
representative of Saudi Arabia makes his intervention. I
appreciate this gesture of the representative of Syria, and I
now invite the representative of Saudi Arabia to take a
place at the Council table.

33. Perhaps you would like to know the contents of th;E
letter. It is like Caesar’s will. Here it is. First, it is typed on
United Nations stationery. A friend could have written tc
me personally or talked to me personally, a friend of
twenty years’ standing. That is why I wanted to check with
him as to whether we could settle this question amicably.
He said: “I stand on my dignity.” As if nnly he had dignity
and others do not have dignity. He says this perhaps
subconsciously because of the reverses of the Arabs now.
As we say in Arabic, their wall is low; everybody can climb
it. Nobody can climb our wall. I am a servant and it is an
honour to be a servant. My good friend, Mr. Bunche, shouid
also consider it an honour to ‘be an international
servant; and servants should be kind to each other and not
write such letters. He should have asked me: “In what spirit
did you pronounce your words? ” I was solicitous that the
Secretary-General would listen to every word I had to .say
because I had not seen him privately for weeks, or perhaps
for months, And I quote what I said from the verbatim
record, without rancour, without cynicism or criticism cr
arrogance. I said:

At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. ,rl. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) took a place at tile Council table.

30. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I have taken the floor,
not to exercise my right of reply to criticism of my two
interventions. What I said stands on the record. I believe
that I spoke long enough and I do not want to take more
time in this Council because it has been seized of draft
resolutions that should have been voted upon before now. I
could easily have asked for the floor to reply to Mr. Kidron
and others, but I kept aloof, not because I had no reply,
but for the reason which I have adduced. However,
something very serious happened, and I hope you do not
take it as being personal, although a letter has been
addressed to my person. If that letter had been addressed
not on the stationery of the United Nations, but had been a
personal letter, I would have accepted it with grace. But it
was a letter typed on United Nations stationery, and signed

“Do not distract the Secretary-General, Mr. Bundle, 1
am talking. I want him to hear every word, my dear
Mr. Bunche. He is my Secretary-General. I do not have
4

-

occasion to talk to him. He is so busy with Viet-Nam, and
now with Palestine.“-in
other words, I do not want to
trouble him and I want him to know what I have to
say-“He should learn what we have suffered.” /1358th
meeting, para. 150.1

here. What are our speeches? Everything is fixed behind
the doors; our speeches are for consumption of the gallery
and arrangements behind the scenes are made. He says:
“Occasionally, I assure you, I have work to do and
matters to take up with the Secretary-General, which are
more important than listening to speeches. . .“.

34. To this, he has taken exception apparently. He
received many calls from friends: “How do you let that
Baroody take such liberty with you? ” He listened to the
telephone calls. I have been receiving telephone calls since
1947. They told me, this Bunche is the biggest traitor to
the Arabs. I never publicized them. “After the death of
Bernadotte he fixed the Palestine question”: I never told
him that because I knew he was a good man. He could have
cleared this. If we were to listen to all that people tell us,
God help us. Today I received about seventy-five letters.
About seventy of them regarding my speech were laudatory, There were five that cursed me from the navel down;
they used such language. I showed a letter to my good
friend, Mr. Goldberg. He said that he received many such
letters. This was after I had spoken in the Fifth Committee
about moving or decentralizing the United Nations Headquarters from New York City. He said that he received such
letters every day, or every now and then. If Mr. Bunche
wants to lend his ear to every Tom, Dick and Harry who
may have a grudge against Baroody because he represents
Saudi Arabia, and he plays on his sentiments, the illustrious
Mr. Bunche who was awarded the Nobel Prize should know
better than to lend his ear. I believe that, subconsciously,
unwittingly, he thinks we Arabs are down, and that he can
take liberties with us.

What speeches? Are they the speeches of persons or of
representatives of sovereign States, even the one being made
by Ambassador Baroody?
36. Even when I spoke about the Zionists, I did not show
such rancour. What have I done to Mr. Bunche? I would
take it personally from him with grace. But as the
representative of a sovereign State, I could say many harsh
words to him. But because he is sick, I will not use them
now. After alI, he is human and we all make’mistakes. I
gave him the chance to have an understanding with me
there. Then he said ‘&No”. I said “To heck with you, I will
ask for the floor, and I mean that”. Now these things
should never happen again, If this went by without any
intervention,
it may occur again. Each member of the
Secretariat is a human being and stands on his dignity. But
if it were to be a question of dignity, personal dignity, let
him not use the stationery of the United Nations. Let him
write to me with the letterhead of Ralphe Bun&e on it and
I will take it very gracefully, and I would perhaps accept it.
I reject this letter officially, although it has already done a
great dea1 of damage.
37. It is only human, when people have reverses,for other
people to take liberties with them, We are not fallen. We are
still on our feet. Even in such a situation he should have
known, because of the reverses, that he should not have
written such a letter, even though I may have been at fault,
assuming that I was at fault. Who does he think he is?

35. Now what wasthe letter? It reads as follows:
“Our relationship over the years has been characterized
by friendly but always completely frank exchanges of
view. This letter is a case in point.

38. The PRESIDENT:
I am sorry to interrupt the representative of Saudi Arabia. But I do think that we have to
proceed with our work, now that he has made his views
known to the Council. I have been very liberal, 1 think. This
matter could not be said to be directly connected with the
item we are discussing. We have now heard his view, and I
believe that we should not be personal now, such as asking
who Mr. Bunche believes he is. I think we should stop now
and proceed with our work.

“I understand that during your speech in the Security
Council yesterday afternoon (13 June) you mentioned
me by name in cautioning me not to distract the
Secretary-General while you were speaking.“-If he could
have checked with the Secretary-General in what spirit I
said it-“This was when I was consulting on an important
matter with him at the table.“-1 did not suggest that he
was not---(‘1 did not hear what you said at the time, which
is just as well. Whether it was your intention to reprove
me”-1 reprove Mr. Bunche? Why should I reprove my
friend? -“as some listeners interpreted it, or merely to
make a typical ploy, I do not know, but in either case I
reject it. The Secretary-General’s work has to go on
during the long sessions of the Council and I frequently
consult with him at the table, as do some of my
colleagues.”

39. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, would
you let me wind up my speech?
40. The PRESIDENT:
has the floor.

The representative of Saudi Arabia

41. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, if you
had not made this remark, I was going to wind up my
speech because I had had my say. But this was the climax:
Who does he think he is? Who do I think I am? We are all
human beings. If you only were patient enough, Mr. President. I thought you were patient enough, coming from a
Nordic country where people are cool and collected. We are
all human, brothers in humanity, and if you think that this
incident has nothing to do with our work, I can say that it
emanated from the Security Council. Where did it emanate
from? Arabia? Denmark? or in the United States? From
this chamber here.

That is all right until now. But wait. Here is the climax
now:
“Occasionally, I assure you, I have work to do and
matters to take up with the Secretary-General, which are
more important than listening to speeches, even to one
being made by Ambassador Baroody.”
I am glad that some people are laughing. He says, even the
ones made by me. But we represent sovereign States sitting
5

50. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Mr, President, it was
not my intention to intervene in this debate, but since the
proceedings have developed to such a stage that, in my
view, complete silence on my part would be construed as
acceptance of the charges that have been made, I must
make a brief statement.

42. Anyway, I must thank you, Mr. President, for being
very gracious, because you did not even contest my right to
speak, When I say this to you, I say this without paying you
any sort of compiiment.
43, Before bringing this intervention-which
I deplore
because of its subject matter-to a close, I thank God that
the Secretary-General was not associated with it. If my
good friend Mr. Bunche had only consulted with him, or if
Mr, Bunche had written to me on personal stationery, I
would not have taken the floor.

5 1, Last night, during the meeting of the Security Council,
Mr. Bunche, as usual, reported to me orally, from his seat
behind me, about a very important cable that had been
received from General Bull, That message came while the
representative of Saudi Arabia was speaking. I turned
around and listened to Mr. Bunche, for perhaps one minute
only. While I was listening to Mr. Bunche’s report, Ambas.
sador Baroody was continuing his statement, to which, of
course, I had been listening very attentively.

44. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated j?om Russian): We have just heard the
representative of Saudi Arabia address the Council for an
unusual reason, This does not occur very often in our work;
and when it does occur, we cannot remain indifferent. We
feel obliged to state our views on occurrences of this kind,
It is not only the ethical aspect of the matter which we
have to consider in the present case. This is not just a
breach of elementary courtesy in relations between an
international
civil servant and the representative of a
sovereign State Member of the United Nations. This is
something more, and we cannot therefore disguise the fact
that we regard this occurrence as a kind of challenge to the
other members of the Security Council as well.

52, When I read the verbatim record this morning, 1 found
this extract from Ambassador Baroody’s statement:
“Do not distract the Secretary-General, Mr. Bunche. I
am talking, I want him to hear every word, my dear
Mr, Bunche. He is my Secretary-General. I do not have
occasion to talk to him. He is so busy with Viet-Nam, and
now with Palestine, He should learn what we have
suffered.” [ 1358th meeting, para. 150.1

45. We are not concerned with the inner feelings of those
present at this table, in whatever capacity they may be
here. But we are thinking of the official status of persons
who, in view of the functions they perform, must display
tact and self-discipline. We are not interested in the private
opinions of a particular person, We are dealing with too
serious a matter, and a sense of responsibility is expected of
all of us,

Of course, I did not take any particular notice of that, I
have known Ambassador Baroody very well for a number
of years. We have had very friendly relations. But just now,
on my way down to the meeting this afternoon, Ambas
sador Baroody came to see me and asked me if I had seen
the letter from Mr. Bunche. I told him that I had not, That
wasthe last of the story.
53. I have therefore been listening to Ambassador
Baroody’s statement with interest. I did not intend to reply
to him, but since Ambassador Fedorenko made some very
adverse remarks about Mr. Bunche, I thought I could no
longer keep silent.

46. We find it incredible that a member of the Secretariat
should take the liberty of making offensive attacks on the
representative of a Member State of our Organization. We
do not think this was merely an emotional outburst. We
wish to say that it is strange how certain names crop up in
certain situations, at sudden breaks or in dramatic situations which occur in international relations. This name has
now cropped up at a time when the Security Council is
discussing the situation in the Near East; but one cannot
help remembering the past, and everything that was written
about it, where the very same name is offensively linked
with the notorious “Congo Club”.

54. I must say here and now that I have complete faith in
Mr. Bunche. I must say here and now that to my knowledge
Mr. Bunche has been an outstanding international civil
servant; that to my knowledge he is a very objective
international civil servant.
55. Therefore, for the record, I want to say, Mr, President,
that any imputations of disloyalty to the Organization, or
infringement of the tenets of an international civil servant,
cannot be acceptable to me.

847. Do we really have to point out that all staff members
of the United Nations Secretariat, particularly the senior
ones, must strictly observe the principles of impartiality
and objectivity ? Patience is an indispensable quality for
staff members of an international organization.

5 6. Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
French): The delegation of the. People’s Republic of
Bulgaria has so far refrained from speaking on the draft
resolution submitted by Argentina, Brazil and Ethiopia
[S/7968/Reu.3]
on the question of the refugees now
leaving their homeland because of the aggression that has
just been committed against their country.

48. The contents of the letter from Under-Secretary Ralph
Bunche to the representative of Saudi Arabia are incorn.
patible with the code of conduct governing the official
activities of staff members of the United Nations Secretariat, and we want to say so outright, no matter who may
be involved.
49. The PRESIDENT:
General.

57. We had thought that this draft resolution was superfluous, because we had hoped that the draft resolution
submitted by the Soviet Union (S/7951/Re~.2]
COIP
demning the aggression and calling for the immediate

I now call on the Secretary6

withdrawal of troops would be accepted by this Council
and that measures would be taken to ensure compliance
with that decision by the aggressor. Some might say: “But
Sir, as representative of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria,
you are living in a dream world. You know full well the
position of certain countries in this Council, you know that
they would never allow the aggressor to be condemned
when that aggressor is an instrument of the imperialists”.
Perhaps they are right. But all the same we had hoped that
there might prevail in this Council a kind of international
marality-which
in any case should be the rule in the
Council-and that those Powers which encourage aggression
would not dare at this time to block a withdrawal by the
aggressor, and thus resolve the problem of the refugees.

66. However, I take some exception to what the Secretary-General said, as if by implication to give the impression
that I was questioning the loyalty of Mr. Bunche as an
international servant. I never had that in mind, and I hope I
will always consider him a friend, if he so desires, However,
I must say that I hope that such an incident will not recur
in the future and that the Secretary-General will see to it
that such incidents do not recur on the stationery of the
United Nations. This is a question of principle and not a
personal question, and my statement should not constitute
a slur on the work or character of Mr, Bunche because I
hope he still considers me as a friend.
67. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): We have little to add to
what has been said by the representative of Saudi Arabia;
but we should like to refer to the statement by Secretary
General U Thant.

58. Of course, this hope did not take the full measure of
those who instigated the aggression, who gave it the green
light, and who are now trying to reward the aggressor,
59. We are now confronted by this situation: at the
moment, the delegation of the People’s Republic of
Bulgaria still thinks that the draft resolution may not
significantly advance the cause of the liberation of the Arab
peoples from the yoke which some people wish to place on
them because it diverts attention to a question which,
although a human problem, is ancillary at this stage.

68. A specific matter has been raised in the Council. A
staff member of an international organization-in this case
Mr, Ralph Bunche-has challenged or, if you wish, insulted
the representative of a sovereign State-in this caseAmbassador Baroody-and there is material evidence of this in the
letter which bears the signature of the person who wrote
it-namely,
Ralph Bunche. This letter is written on the
official notepaper of our international Organization.

60. However, in view of the humanitarian considerations
underlying the draft resolution, and the human sufferings
which could be prolonged still further by the resistance of
the aggressorcountry as well as by those within the Council
who continue to support it, we, the delegation of the
People’s Republic of Bulgaria, will not oppose the draft
resolution before us and will vote for it to help alleviate the
sufferings that this aggression has caused.

69. It is clear from all this that the issuehere is not one of
personal relations or personalities. These circumstances
affect the official status of our Organization. It is true, of
course, that the Secretary-General of our Organization is
the best judge of his own staff, and is entitled to give his
own assessment of the work of any of his assistants.But we
are not dealing here with the question of giving references
in general: we are considering a specific case, which is a
matter of great regret to all of us.

61. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Saudi Arabia who has asked to exercise his
right of reply. I hope that the representative of Syria will
agree to the same arrangement as previously.

70. On the other hand, we know that, if a stone is thrown
at you, you should not blame the stone; the stone is not
responsible, But a stone has been thrown at one of us, at
one Member of the United Nations, and we cannot
disregard the question of who threw it+

At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. M Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) took a place at the Council table,
62. The PRESIDENT: Before I call on the representative
of Saudi Arabia, I should like to appeal to all members of
the Council and to all representatives taking part in our
discussion to be as brief as possible on questions which are
not directly related to the item we are discussing at the
present moment.

64. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, I will
heed your request and I will be very brief.

71. Mr. BUFFUM (United States of America): I had had
absolutely no intention of intervening in this particular,
distasteful and unpleasant exchange. I think it is noteworthy that in his last intervention, as I interpreted his
comments, the representative of Saudi Arabia had felt that
he had disposed of his complaint to his satisfaction, We had
also heard from our Secretary-General, who defended the
conduct of Mr. Bunche in, I think, a very stirring and
eloquent manner. But twice now, we have heard the
representative of the Soviet Union intervene in this particuq
lar discussion.

65. I should like to address myself to my good friend, the
Secretary.Genera.l. I said in my statement that I believed
that my good friend, Mr. Bunche, had written what he has
written in a fit of anger or because of nervousness; we are
all under a strain. I never questioned his loyalty to the
Secretary-General in particular and to the Organization in
general because, after all, the SecretaryGeneral is the
symbol of this Organization.

72. I believe it was only yesterday, if I remember correctly
the clouded schedule of this last week, when Ambassador
Fedorenko challenged Ambassador Goldberg for having
intervened in what he considered to be a dialogue between
yourself, Mr. President, and him. Therefore, I think one
must stop and wonder why the representative of’ the Soviet
Union should find it necessary to intervene in what had
apparently been a dialogue between the delegation of Saudi

63. I call on the representative of Saudi Arabia to exercise
his right of reply,

7

We took a tolerant attitude to this. We were prepared to
give way, so as not to side-track the Council once again
from our main task; but the President was so tactful that
when he himself noticed that something had been overlooked, he immediately took steps to rectify the situatiofl,
and we duly appreciated this. But the President felt it
necessary to apologize twice for his oversight; and it was
just at this moment that our colleague from the United
States, Ambassador Goldberg, decided to intervene. I ask
you, distinguished colleague, was that the right thing to
do? It wastactless and completely out of place.

Arabia and the President of the Council and the Secretariat.
It may be that we can find some answers to that question as

we re-read Ambassador Fedorenko’s first intervention when
he mentioned such United Nations operations as the Congo.
73. It seems to me that this Organization and its servants
will find themselves in an impossible position if Members of
the Organization and this Council in particular stoop to
attacks of a personal character, such as we have just
witnessed, to serl:? obvious political ends, and in particular
when they involve an individual whose character, whose
reputation and whose record are of such an outstanding
calibre as that of Under-Secretary Bunche.
74.

78. Now there is another situation, the Saudi Arabian
representative’s statement about the letter, whose contents
he has read out. If you listened carefully to the letter and
noticed how Mr. Baroody read it out, you must have
realized that its contents do not only represent impertinence to one of the speakers. The letter challenges speeches
made in the Security Council and, in particular, a speech
made by the representative of Saudi Arabia.

Mr.

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
I would not have taken the floor in this discussion
concerning a question which is nevertheless very important
to our Council, had it not been for the last statement of the
United States representative, Mr. Buffum. I leave aside the
personal qualities of the Under-Secretary, Mr. Bunche, who
is certainly a remarkable man. Likewise I shall not dwell on
the opinions expressed here by the Secretary-General of our
Organization concerning Mr. Bunche’s ability. I am sure
that he must have them if the Secretary-General says so.
What I am here concerned with are not his qualities or his
faults, if he has any, or the qualifications which have been
attributed to him. What is important is what is happening
within our Organization. I do not believe that we should
encourage the recurrence of such an incident, which after
all is of some importance.

French):

79. Does this not entitle us to raise our voice in defence of
representatives who speak here? Does this not entitle us to
express our views on the incident which has occurred
between Under-Secretary Mr. Ralph Bunche and the reprti
sentative of Saudi Arabia? In our view, this is quite
reasonable. This is why we thought it was our moral duty
to speak on this matter.
80. The PRESIDENT: I should like now to close the
debate on this particular sub-item on our agenda, and I
should like to do that by reading out a letter I have just
received from Mr. Bunche:

7.5. The Secretariat should certainly be able to rely upon
our co-operation, but we, in turn, should be able to rely on
theirs. We should respect them; but they cannot, I do not
think they have the right, when addressing the representative of a country, arrogate to themselves the authority of
our Organization. Personally, they may think what they
please; personally, they may even say what they please; but
to use the authority of our Organization is not in keeping
with the Charter. From the human point of view, I have no
right to tell Mr. Bunche: “You should think differently of
Ambassador Baroody or of any other ambassador, whoever
he may be”. He is entitled to think what he wants, and may
even have reason for thinking so. That is another question.
But what he does not have the right to do-and this is the
point I wish to stress-is to use the name and the authority
of our Organization in order to express his thoughts.

“Mr. President,
“I am very sorry that a letter written by me should have
diverted the attention of the Council from its consideration of matters of such transcendent importance. As
Ambassador Baroody has said, we have long been friends,
and I am happy to hear him say that we can continue so.
I wrote the letter because I thought my personal dignity,
which means very much to me, had been violated
publicly. Ambassador Baroody has clearly stated that this
was not his intention.
“May I say again only that I express my personal regret
that I should have done anything to interrupt the
Council’s attention to the extremely pressing problem
before it which means so much to so many suffering
people.

76. This is all I wish to say at present, except that I do not
want such a situation to recur in future.
77, Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Just a few words by way of
reply. We have just heard a statement by our United States
colleague. His verbose intervention was quite extraordinary.
Obviously his nervous system could no longer stand the
strain, and he hastened first to give Mr. Ralph Bunche a
flattering testimonial, which he hardly needs. But, since we
hear the United States representative interrupting, we can
only say: “Well, of course, no great imagination is required
here.” But allow me in all humility to tell my United States
colleague that the conversation between the President,
Ambassador Tabor, and the Soviet representative related to
the fact that certain action had been taken rather hastily.

“(Signed) Ralph BUNCHE”

81. I have no more speakers on the draft resolution
submitted by Argentina, Brazil and Ethiopia. We have
several draft resolutions before us, and according to rule 32
of our provisional rules of procedure, draft resolutions shall
have precedence in the order of their submission.
82. The United States representative informed the Council
earlier that the United States will not press to a vote today
the two draft resolutions [S/7916/Rev.l, S/7971] which It
submitted before the draft resolution of Argentina, Brazil
8

’

I

/

I

and Ethiopia was submitted. Further, the representative of
Canada has likewise informed the Council that he is not
pressing his draft resolution (S/7$41] to a vote today.
Finally, the draft resolution submitted by the representative of the Soviet Union [S/7951/Rev.2/
has already been
disposed of. Therefore, if there is no objection, I believe we
can now proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
submitted by Argentina, Brazil and Ethiopia, as amended in
accordance with the suggestion made by the representative
of Mali[S/7968JRev.3].

Security Council this morning with regard to the draft
resolution submitted by the Soviet Union [S/79.51/Rev.2/.
The vote taken on that draft resolution was most unfortunate. It did not result in a decision arresting the aggression
of Israel and liquidating its consequences.
90. What remains before the Council is the United States
draft resolution [S/795Z/Rev.3/
which, as I said in my
intervention yesterday, does not reflect the reality of the
situation and does not condemn the aggression or the
aggressor; nor does it call for an immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the Israel forces from the area illegally
occupied. As we see it, the United States draft resolution
accommodates the invader and occupier. It enables Israel,
through force, to acquire political gains. It amounts to
encouragement of the aggressor. What is more, it reflects a
new attitude of the United States-and this is very
important-an
attitude conflicting with the stand of the
IJnited States on the Sinai aggression committed in 1956.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 3

83. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Jordan, on whom I now call.
84. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): Let me at the very outset
pay tribute to our Secretary-General, UThant, a great
symbol of this Organization, and to Mr. Ralph Bunche, the
Under-Secretary. We greatly appreciate their constructive
work and their very helpful efforts regarding this problem.

91. The question arises: why is the ‘United States Government changing attitudes and stands? Is it because the
United States is now more involved in this problem than it
was in 1956, one indeed wonders. Is it permissible or
compatible with the principles of the Charter to permit
Israel to use as a bargaining point a gain achieved by means
of force? Mr. Goldberg, who is not at the meeting this
evening, is a jurist and can clarify this question. Both the
American nation and the Arab nation are entitled to know.
I regret to say that the American attitude today is different
from its attitude on similar aggression committed by Israel
in 1956, Here is what the Permanent Representative of the
United States, Mr. Cabot Lodge, had to say on that
occasion concerning that aggression:
I‘ . . . we”-referring to the Government of the United
States-“have recognized that it is incompatible with the
principles of the Charter and with the obligations of
membership in the United Nations for any Member t!j
seek political gains through the use of force” -then
Mr. Lodge continued-“or
to use as a bargaining point a
gain achieved by means of force.“4

85. We are grateful to the three sponsors, Argentina, Brazil
and Ethiopia, for their constructive initiative. They made
genuine and helpful efforts to present a draft resolution
safeguarding the rights of all the inhabitants within the
illegally occupied area and of those expelled from there.
This resolution, which was unanimously adopted, reflects
the will of the Security Council. It calls for the restoration
of the expellees to their homes, and it also calls upon Israel
to ensure the safety, welfare and security of both the
inhabitants who stayed within the illegally occupied area
and those who were expelled from there.
86. I should like to pay tribute to all the members of the
Security Council who gave this human problem their
attention and who gave the draft resolution their support.
We are grateful to the representative of Mali for his
amendment, which referred to the implementation of the
resolution, It is a most helpful amendment.
87. My delegation would like to record with gratitude the
most constructive and helpful part played by the representative of India and the Indian delegation, not only on the
resolution just adopted, but during the various stagesof our
deliberations on this tragic problem. The Indian attitude
and its stand taken here in the Security Council on this
question were dictated, and indeed inspired, by the great
traditions of India, by the spirit of Gandhi and Nehru, and
it is this same spirit which is now being followed by
Mrs. Gandhi.

92. This was the attitude of the United States in 1956. We
would like to see the same United States standing against
aggression in 1967. There is something called continuity in
a policy, and in a big State, a big Member, a great Power, a
permanent member of the Security Council having a greater
responsibility. I quote the words of Justice Goldberg: “The
greater the Power, the greater the responsibility.” A great
Power, a permanent member of the Security Council, is
expected to have continuity in its policy, particularly on
the very same aggression, in the very same area, against the
very same people-with
one difference, a difference in
timing.

88. In conclusion, on this question, I am instructed by my
Government to state that all expellees without exception
desire to live in their homes, not in tents or cavesor huts, a
prey to hunger. We owe to this resolution, which reflects
the will, the demand, the request of the Security Council,
genuine and sincere and immediate implementation.

93. Does it not look strange to the members of the
Security Council when they compare the attitude of the
United States Government in 19.56 with the present
attitude of the United States in 1967? Does it not seem
unique to call for discussions promptly among the parties
concerned-according to the draft resolution of the United

89. Having made these remarks on the resolution, I should
like to make a few observations on the stand taken by the

4 Off~clal Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh Session,
Plenary Meetings, vol. II, 666 th meeting, para.2.5.

3 Seeresolution 237 (1967).
9

-

tried to deceive the Security Council here and has been
exposed. This has been confirmed by the objective evidence
contained in the report by Secretary-General U Thant.

States-looking
taward the establishment of arrangements
encompassing many questions and leading to a stable and
durable peace in the Middle East, while allowing the
aggressor and the aggression to continue?

102, Now we see that some new characters have made
their appearance. The former representative has disappeared
into the wings, and a new individual has taken the stage,
but the statements are still the same and the same deceit
continues.

94. Let me reiterate the position of Jordan on this
question. It reflects the position of the Arab homeland; it
reflects the position of every Arab State; it reflects the
position of every Arab individual on this question. On the
day that we accepted the cease-fire in this Council we said
that no pressure, no intimidation,
no force would take
away from us our determination to live and enjoy liberty
and ta work for it. No intimidation
will bring us to
negotiations with the aggressors.

103. But is it really necessary to tax the patience of the
members of the Security Council? How long must we go
on listening to repetitions af the same thing?
104. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the rules of
procedure and with established practice, I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.

95. Through force and intimidation
you cannot, gentle
men, make peace, And at gunpoint you cannot make us sit
with the aggressor, Patrons and protectors of Israel should
know that in ignoring this, they would not be laying the
groundwork for peace. In ignoring this, they would be
encouraging the Israelis to take advantage of their aggression, to encourage them to try to acquire the fruits of their
aggression. It will cultivate further aggression.

105. Mr. KIDRON (Israel): I have very little indeed to add
to what I said this morning on the substance of the joint
draft resolution which the Council has just adopted, except
to repeat that in spite of the short time which has elapsed
since the firing ceased, every effort has been made by my
authorities to restore normal civilian life and to alleviate the
lot of the refugees.

96. Finally, this morning, the report of the SecretaryGeneral [S/7930/&d.
71 referred to a very important thing
which was not given adequate consideration, although it is a
real reflection of the Zionist movement. I am referring to
paragraph 1, sub-paragraph (vi), (cl, of the report where it
is stated that: “Movement of Israel forces approximately
2 kilometres east along Kuneitra-Damascus road” took
place.

106. Local government has been reconstructed wherever
possible, and municipal and other public services have been
renewed. An agreement with the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency has been negotiated and agreed, and I
informed the Council this morning of its text, I have also
informed the Council of our request to the delegation of
the International Committee of the Red Cross that it do its
utmost to expedite an exchange of prisoners, We have
anxieties as to the treatment of our men who are in United
Arab Republic, Jordanian and Syrian hands,

97. These are two kilometres of expansion. If you look at
the history of our problem, you will find that the question
of expansion took place either by one kilometre or two
kilometres; by one village or two villages; by one area or
two areas; by one district or more districts. That has been
the story of the question of Palestine.

107. Our policy is that the human miseries of this conflict
should be brought to an end, and my Government is doing
all in its power to implement this policy, with fairnessand
humanity. All the world can see what we do. There is
nothing that we hide or that we can hide. Representatives
of the world’s press have visited all areas of hostilities and
the diplomatic representatives of all States represented in
Israel have been invited to do so. They will be frac to see
and report what they like, And the reports which have
already appeared in the press do not in any way confirm
the atrocity stories which have been disseminated in this
Council, This is a human problem of which my Government
is most sensible, and we are genuinely and sincerely doing
our best to solve it.

98. If you go to the homeland, you will find nothing but a
promise given by Lord Balfour of the United Kingdom,
Then it became a State; then a partition; then more
additional areas; then more additional areas, sometimes by
one kilometre, sometimes by mare. The occupation of
these two kilometres in violation of the cease-fire decision
deserves condemnation by the Security Council. It is not a
question of one kilometre or two; it is part and parcel of
the whole policy of expansion. This cannot pass unnoticed.
Two kilometres mean a great deal to us, knowing the
aggressive expansionist designs of Israel.
99. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Israel, to whom I now give the floor.

108. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, to whom 1 now
give the floor,

100. I call on the represantative of the Soviet Union on a
point of order.

109, Mr, TOMEH (Syria): Thank you for giving me the
floor. I wish ta associate myself with the representative of
Jordan in thank.@ the authors of ths draft resolution
[S/7968/Rev,3] which wasvoted upon unanimously by the
Council. We believe that this is a very timely resolution and
a very necessary one. Unfortunately, in the comments just
made by the representative of the Tel Aviv authorities, he
tried again to obscure the issue. I should say that it is a

101, Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Repubn
lies) (translated from Russian): I am taking the floor with
great reluctance. I am taking the floor in order to point out
that too many speeches have been made in the Council by
the representative of Israel, and we have already shown
what these speeches are wortj.i, The Israel representative has
10

variation on a theme. But when one speaks of a variation on
a theme, the words are associated with music, There are
variations on a theme by Bach or Handel, or something of
the sort. But when the variations on a theme are distortions
and lies, the analogy can hardly be made, except that it
displeases the ear and upsets the thought and the mind of
man, The resolution, in operative paragraph 1, states the
following:

contending that Israel started the aggression in this war.
The representatives of the Tel Aviv authorities, in their
variations on their theme, have suggested the contrary. But
I have in my hand here a news item published by Reuters,
emanating from Vatican City, dated 14 June, This is what it
states:

“1. CalIs upon the Government of Israel to ensure the
safety, welfare and security of the inhabitants of the areas
where military operations have taken place and to
facilitate the return of those inhabitants who have fled
the areas since the outbreak of hostilities,”

and its recent declaration could make peace even more
difficult, An editorial by leading Vatican journalist
Federico Alessandrlni said: ‘In practice, in starting hostilities Israel must have known with sufficient certainty it
could move without risk in order to get it over quickly’.

110. Surely, the authors of the resolution have definite
proof that Israel is the party to which this appeal should be
addressed. Furthermore, in the note of the Secretary
General of yesterday, 13 June, which waspublished today,
we have the text of a letter addressed by the Secretary
General to the representative of Israel, which states:
“The Secretary-General . d . wishes to refer to the situp
tion of the Arab civilian population in the areasoccupied
by Israel’s military forces in the course of the recent
fighting.
“The Secretary-General is sure that the Government of
Israel will readily recognize United Nations interest in the
well-being of the civilian populations in the areas now
under Israel military occupation, both on broad human&
tarian grounds and because of the long-established United
Nations concern with the Palestine refugees as reflected in
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency.”
(Sf 793O/Add. 6, para, 5.1

111. In this connexion we wish particularly to thank the
representative of Mali for having suggested an amendment
that was incorporated in the resolution as operative
paragraph 3, which states:
‘Requests the Secretary&General to follow the effective
implementation
of this resolution and to report to the
Security Council.”

“The Vatican weekly newspaper Osscrvatore delb
Domenica said today Israel started last week’s fighting,

“But the way to peace was long and difficult, he wrote.
Declarations by the victors can make it even more
arduous, he said. When he heard it said that there is no
room on Israel territory for even one Arab refugee
because-economic conditions do not permit it, the least
we can say is that we are very perturbed.”
114. This Vatican weekly speaks in the name of the
Holy Father, and I wish to state here that the Holy Father
is holy not only to Catholicism, he is equally holy to us.
This is witnessed by the fact that his visit to Jordan was a
momentous and historic one. The whole population of
Jordan, the majority of which is Moslem and the minority
of which is Christian, came to welcome the Holy Father,
especially when he came to the Jordan River, took up some
water in his hand and sprinkled it. I think that in this news
item there ought to be enough proof that the party that
started the war was, as stated in the Vatican weekly, Israel.
115, In concluding, I would be remiss in my duty if I did
not thank the delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics for having submitted to the Security Council
their draft resolution [S/7951/Rev.Z] which, as I had
occasion to state, meets the situation, very much unlike the
United States draft resolution, which is meant for nothing
else but to serve as a cover for the aggressor and for the
invasion. I wish also to thank all the members who voted
separately for operative paragraphs 1 and 2 of that draft
resolution.

Surely this amendment is very necessary.
112. The representative of the Tel Aviv authorities has
stated, and you have all heard him, that pre’ss correspondents and photographers are free to come to Israel and to
let the truth be known, I am sure that all members of the
Council saw on the morning of 9 June a photograph
emanating from Israel, later published in many newspapers
and more recently in Life magazine in colours. I am
referring to a picture which showed some members of the
United Arab Republic army, captives of the Israel forces,
stripped of their uniforms, put face down on the ground,
their hands tied behind their backs, and the Israel Yoldiers
standing above them, The caption under the picture read:
“Victorious and Defeated”. If anybody wants proof that
Zionism is equivalent to nazism, he has only to look at that
picture,
113, We can only emphasize time and again that the party
responsible for this whole tragedy is Israel. We have been

116, Mr, FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated porn Russianj: In our view the Security
Council has in fact exhausted this question at the present
stage, since it has not been able to take the necessary
decision in accordance with the Charter. Mention has been
made of the United States draft resolution. But, as we have
stated several times, this draft resolution will not be
adopted by the Council. We should like to warn members
of this once again, so that there will be no misunderstanding in the Council. The Soviet Union will exercise its
right in the Council in regard to the United States draft
resolution.
117. Of course, if the United States delegation still
harbours any ideas about its draft resolutions and is having
consultations about them, that is its own affair. It can do
that wherever and whenever it likes. That is of little
concern to us, There is only one fate in store for the United
States draft resolution, It will remain in the dusty archives

of the United Nations as a shameful document, as evidence
of complicity in Israel’s aggression.

124. We have already expressed our opinion on the draft
resolution submitted by the United States. We have already
seen the draft resolution undergo three revisions, but in
spite of all the embellishments introduced by successive
revisions, in spite of all the consultations among the
members of the Council-and we are not opposed to
consultations-the substance of that draft resolution will
certainly not be changed. Indeed, it is a statement of
United States policy. That policy is, as has been stated on
several occasions by the United States representative, not to
allow the unconditional and immediate withdrawal of the
Israel troops, but to try and find a way to change the status
quo ante so as to reward the aggression and not return to
the situation which previously existed in the Middle East.

118. Mr, BUFFUM (United States of America): Before we
complete our work, I would like to draw to the attention of
the representative of the Soviet Union, a statement made
by Ambassador Goldberg earlier today in which he indicated with regard to the United States draft resolution
that we are very open-minded about its text. We will be
glad to consider constructive suggestions for improvement.
Therefore, particularly inasmuch as we have indicated we
do not intend to press our text to a vote in its present form,
it is difficult for us to foresee, although perhaps the Soviet
delegation is better able to do so, exactly in what form the
United States text will ultimately be put to the vote.

131. 1
dent,J
1 thinll
several
While
merely
wehat
also w:i
pendin

132. .I
Counci
or Bul
Counci

125. You will remember that in the past the United States
representative has frequently quoted the report of the
Secretary-General of 26 May 1967 [S/7906/ which stated
that there should be a breathing spell and that we should go
back to the previous situation so that we could discuss
certain matters. Now the United States representative is no
longer thinking of a breathing spell which would permit a
soluti’on of the problems of the Middle East; he is
attempting to solve these problems so that the aggression
will benefit.

119. I am not completely clear whether the statement of
the Soviet representative is intended to indicate that the
position of his delegation will under any and all circumstances be a negative position, without regard for changes
that may be suggested or made pursuant to the consultations which we do intend to undertake with respect to our
draft resolution.
120. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated fvom Russian): Mr. President, my United
States colleague is anxious to know what considerations we
were guided by in making the statement which we felt we
had to make to the Security Council. These considerations
are based not on fantasy or im.agination, but on facts. Our
attitude is based on recent facts illustrating the position of
the United States delegation. This position was made clear
when the Council voted on the Soviet proposal. It was a
negative position.

126. The Soviet representative has stated that he cannot
accept less than the immediate withdrawal of the aggressor’s troops. The Arab countries have also said this, and it is
the desire of the whole world that this should be so. I do
not think that the Security Council as a whole can agree to
less than that.
127. What then does the United States delegation and the
other delegations !5-ho wish to continue this procedural
debate want and what is their purpose? They are simply
trying to prolong this debate in order to prevent recourse to
other procedures in the United Nations.

121. Consequently, it is perfectly clear that there can be
no basis for understanding between our positions, and no
amendments or revisions of their drafts will help matters at
all, whatever statements are made or whatever eloquence is
used by the United States delegation.

128. We believe ihat we should take the position from
now on that the substance of the United States draft
resolution, whether or not it is amended further, is
unacceptable because we cannot agree to tolerate the
aggression and refrain from condemning the aggressor.

122. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): I would only say that I
would have thought that consultations among members of
the Security Council would continue with regard to further
constructive measures as well as to the observance of the
cease-fire, which is our continuing responsibility. It is our
impression that the majority of the members of the Council
wish to continue such consultations.

129. That being the case, as has just been said, since the
United States delegation has expressed its intentions this
morning, we believe that this discussion in :11!: Cuuncil,
even if it continues, will have no purpcse other than to
delay other action than that which the Security Council can
take at this moment. Therefore we think that we should
bring our work to an end and seek within the United
Nations a mearis of continuing our task, which is to
condemn aggression and to demand the immediate withdrawal of all the aggressor’s troops.

123. Mr.

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated
from
The members of the Council cannot have been
unaware of the manner in which the delegations of some
Western countries seemeg to be perplexed when we sought
to establish the fact of Israel’s aggression, claiming that
they had no information to support the charge that
aggression had taken place. Yet, now that we have reached
the final stage of our debate, they are taking a very active
part in the procedural discussion on how to do this or that
and how to continue the work of the Council in order to
prevent other United Nations organs from taking a decision
which could at least help, although perhaps not as much as
the Security Council’s, to make a political contribution and
to resolve the problem of Israel’s aggression.
French/:

130. The PRESIDENT: With reference to the intervention
made by the representative of Canada, I wish to draw the
attention of the members of the Council to the fact that
the Council has the following draft resolutions pending: the
one in document S/7941, submitted by Canada; and the
following three submitted by the United States, S/7916/
Rev.1, S/7952/Rev.3, and S/7971.
12

his intl
and tl
which
forgot1
case.I
Secret;
which
the fol
underl:
tions”
seekink
133.
should
about
to an!

131. Mr. BUFFIJM (United States of America): Mr. President, you have already made one point of substance which,
I think, is very important, to remind US that there are
several draft resolutions still pending before this body.
While I spoke earlier of the United States draft, this was
mereiy because that wasthe key substantive proposal which
we had introduced before the Council. We will, of course,
also wish very serious consideration to be given to the other
pending resolutions.

whenever he considers it necessary, and that we should not
assume that the attitude of some members of the Council
means that the rest of us are not free to pursue in this
Council the efforts to make a valuable contribution in
dealing with the grave situation which is before us.

132. I should just like to take one more moment of the
Council’s time to answer the question of the representative
of Bulgaria as to our purpose in suggesting that further
Council consideration of this grave situation is required. In
his intervention, he recalled the Secretary-General’s report
and the Secretary-General’s appeal for a breathing spell
which he appears to believe has now been overtaken or
forgotten, I should like to assure him that that is not the
case. Indeed, as I read that paragraph again from the
Secretary-General’s report, I find that the purpose for
which the Secretary-General asked for a breathing spell was
the following: “to allow the Council to deal with the
underlying causes of the present crisis and to seek solutions” /S/7906, para. 141. That is our only purpose in
seeking further Council consideration of this matter.

135. I call on the representative of the United Arab
Republic.

133. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. President, I
should merely wish to say, as I anticipate that you are
about to adjourn our meeting, that I take it that it is open
to any member of this Council to ask for a meeting

134. The PRESIDENT: I would say that every member of
this Council is, of course, always free to ask for a meeting
of the Council.

136. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): I believe that
we have a draft resolution submitted by the United Arab
Republic on 31 May /S/7919]. For the time being, we are
not going to insist upon having it put to the vote, but I
should like to say it is still before the Security Council.
137. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of the
United Arab Republic for drawing my attention to the
draft resolution submitted by the United Arab Republic.
That means that the Council also has that draft resolution
pending.
138. I have no further speakers. It is my intention to
adjourn the meeting. The next meeting of the Council will
be fixed by me after consultations with members of the
Council.
The meeting rose at 8.10 p.m

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Notions
publications,mey
the world,
Consult
Your bookstore
or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publications
des
deposttaires
du monde
Notions
Unies, Section

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

in U.N.

UNIES

Nations
Unies sont
en vente
dons les libroiries
et les agencer
entier.
Informer-vous
aupres
de votre libroirie
ou odressez-vous
8:
des ventes,
New York ou Geneve,

KAK

tlOIlYL1MTb

M3AAHMR

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

OPTAHMSA~MM

DE LAS

Las publicociones
de 10s Nocionar
Unidas
estirn
en todos partes
del mundo.
Consulte
o su librero
Ventor,
Nuevo
York o Ginebro.

Litho

throughout
New York

Price:

$U.S.

0.50

(or

OEibEAMHEHHblX

NACIONES

HAL(Mfi

UNIDAS

en venta en llbrerfas
Y cosos distribuidoros
o dirfjose
a: Noclones
Unidos,
Section

equivalent

in other

currencies)

de

11414~January

197 1-2,l~f~
