III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

putes and respect for permanent sovereignty over natural
resources;
(c) The need for just and viable solutions of existing
problems and crises in the area on the basis of the provi­
sions of the Charter and of relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, the withdrawal of foreign forces of occu­
pation and the right of peoples under colonial or foreign
domination to self-determination and independence;
2. Welcomes any further communication to the Secre­
tary-General, from all States, of proposals, declarations
and recommendations on strengthening peace, security
and co-operation in the Mediterranean region;
3. Urges all States to co-operate with the Mediterra­
nean States in the further efforts required to reduce tension
and promote peace, security and co-operation in the region
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and with the provisions of
the Declaration on Principles of International Law con­
cerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States
in accordance with the Charter;
4. Encourages once again efforts to intensify existing
forms and to promote new forms of co-operation in vari­
ous fields, particularly those aimed at reducing tension and
strengthening confidence and security in the region;
5. Renews its invitation to the Secretary-General to
give due attention to the question of peace, security and
co-operation in the Mediterranean region and, if requested
to do so, to render advice and assistance to concerted
efforts by Mediterranean countries in promoting peace,
security and co-operation in the region;
6. Invites the member States of the relevant regional
organizations to lend support and to submit to the Secre­
tary-General concrete ideas and suggestions on their
potential contribution to the strengthening of peace and
co-operation in the Mediterranean region;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the itern entitled "Strengthening of security
and co-operation in the Mediterranean region".
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/154. Review of the implementation of the Decla­
ration on the Strengthening of International
Security
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/73 H of 15 December 1983.
Profoundly concerned over the situation of the international community today in circumstances of tensions and
conflicts long continuing between nations, denoting a
marked decline in the respect for the Charter of the United
Nations and the basic elements of international law,
Gravely concerned over the increasing manifestations of
various forms of international terrorism,
Considering that the main organ of the United Nations
which under the Charter has the essential characteristic of
rendering effective its decisions is the Security Council,
Bearing in mind that the notes by the President of the
Security Council dated 12 September 1983 132 and 28 Sep­
tember 1984, 133 although referring to the subject of collec­
tive security, indicate no concrete steps taken or to be
taken to implement the relevant provisions of the Charter,
132 S/1597 I. For the printed text, see Official Records of the Security Coun­
cil, Thirty-eighth Year, Resolutions and Decisions, /983. part II, "Considera­

tlOn of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Orgamzatton.
1982".
l33 SI 16760. For the printed text, see Official Records of the Secunty Coun­
cil, Thirty-ninth Year, Resolutions and Decisions, /984, part 11. "Considera­
tion of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization"

95

Taking due account of the need that, on the occasion of
the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, specific
endeavours should be devoted by the international com­
munity to enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations
required by the Charter,
1. Recommends that the Security Council give priority
consideration to the need for strengthening the system of
collective security provided for in the Charter of the
United Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/155. Implementation of the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Review of the
implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security",
Noting with concern that the provisions of the Declara­
tion on the Strengthening of International Security 134 have
not been fully implemented,
Noting further with concern that the United Nations sys­
tem of collective security has not been used effectively,
Recalling the duty of States not to intervene in the inter­
nal or external affairs of any State, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling the provisions of the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, 135
Noting the provisions of the Declaration on the Inad­
missibility of Intervention and Interference in the Internal
Affairs of States, 136
Recalling the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settle­
ment of International Disputes, 137
Alarmed by increasing tensions in international relations
and the heightened confrontations that characterize the
relations between the great Powers, accompanied by the
policy of competition for spheres of influence, domination
and exploitation in more and more parts of the world, the
escalation to new levels of the arms race, particularly in
nuclear weapons and the danger of its extension into outer
space, all of which pose a grave threat to global peace and
security,
Profoundly disturbed by the increasing recourse to the
use or threat of use of force. military intervention and
interference, aggression and foreign occupation, by the
aggravation of existing crises in the world and the outbreak
of new ones, by the continued infringement of the inde­
pendence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of countries,
by the denial of the right to self-determination of peoples
under colonial and foreign occupation and by attempts to
characterize erroneously the struggles of peoples for inde­
pendence and human dignity as falling within the context
of East-West confrontation, thus denying them the right to
self-determination, to decide their own destiny and realize
their legitimate aspirations, by the persistence of colonial­
ism, racism and apartheid supported by the growing use of
I H Resolution 2734 (XXV)
I 35 R esolution 2625 (XXV). annex.
136 Resolution 36/ l 03, annex
7
1_1 Resolution 37/ 10. annex
