A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/70
10 February 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 105
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/51/614)]
51/70.

Follow-up to the Regional Conference to
Address the Problems of Refugees,
Displaced Persons, Other Forms of
Involuntary Displacement and Returnees in
the Countries of the Commonwealth of
Independent States and Relevant
Neighbouring States

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/113 of 20 December 1993, 49/173 of
23 December 1994 and, in particular, 50/151 of 21 December 1995,
Taking note with satisfaction of the successful conclusion of the
Regional Conference to Address the Problems of Refugees, Displaced Persons,
Other Forms of Involuntary Displacement and Returnees in the Countries of the
Commonwealth of Independent States and Relevant Neighbouring States, held at
Geneva on 30 and 31 May 1996,
Aware that involuntary, mass displacement, in addition to the human
suffering involved, imposes significant economic and social burdens and may
affect security and stability at the regional level,
Reaffirming the view of the Conference that, while the primary
responsibility for tackling population displacement problems lies with the
affected countries themselves, the serious challenges cannot be met by the
limited resources and experience of the countries of the Commonwealth of
Independent States individually,
Recalling that the protection and promotion of human rights and the
strengthening of democratic institutions are essential to prevent mass
population displacement,
97-76669

/...

A/RES/51/70
Page 2

Mindful that effective implementation of the recommendations contained
in the Programme of Action adopted by the Conference1 should be facilitated
and can be ensured only through cooperation and coordinated activities
undertaken in this respect by all interested States, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations and other actors,
Welcoming the spirit of international solidarity and cooperation that
made the preparatory process of the Conference and the Conference itself a
success,
Reaffirming the importance of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees2 and its 1967 Protocol,3
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;4

2.
Expresses its gratitude to the Government of Switzerland and other
host States that made it possible to convene the Regional Conference to
Address the Problems of Refugees, Displaced Persons, Other Forms of
Involuntary Displacement and Returnees in the Countries of the Commonwealth of
Independent States and Relevant Neighbouring States and a series of
preparatory meetings, as well as to those States that made voluntary
contributions for this purpose;
3.
Welcomes the Programme of Action adopted by the Conference on
31 May 1996;1
4.
Also welcomes the innovative approach and close cooperation of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the International
Organization for Migration and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe in initiating and supporting a multilateral constructive dialogue
among a wide range of countries concerned that has brought agreement on
guidelines for practical action;
5.
Expresses its satisfaction with the work of the Conference, which
laid down a solid foundation for further action by countries of the
Commonwealth of Independent States and States concerned and relevant
international, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations;
6.
Underlines the urgent need to address the problems of those
displaced, implement measures to prevent situations leading to further
involuntary population displacement and effectively manage other types of
migratory flows in the region;

1

A/51/341, appendix.

2

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.

3

Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.

4

A/51/341.
/...

A/RES/51/70
Page 3

7.
Urges all States and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations concerned to take further action with a view to the full
implementation of the recommendations of the Conference;
8.
Invites all countries that have not yet done so to accede to and
implement fully the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its
1967 Protocol;
9.
Calls upon the Governments of the countries of the Commonwealth of
Independent States to continue to strengthen their commitment to the
principles underlying the Programme of Action and to ensure progress in its
implementation;
10.
Recognizes that implementation of the Programme of Action requires
additional financial resources, and calls for international cooperation in
order to assist the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States in the
field of migration and related matters;
11.
Welcomes the readiness of States and interested international
organizations to provide appropriate forms and levels of support for the
practical implementation of the Programme of Action in a spirit of solidarity
and burden-sharing;
12.
Invites international financial and other institutions to
contribute to financing projects and programmes within the framework of the
implementation of the Programme of Action;
13.
Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, and invites the International Organization for Migration and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to continue to steer in
close coordination the ongoing and future activities ensuring progress in the
implementation of the Programme of Action;
14.
Calls upon all relevant United Nations organs, bodies and
organizations to promote, within their respective mandates, the implementation
of the Programme of Action of the Conference;
15.
Recognizes the important role to be played by non-governmental
organizations in the implementation of the Programme of Action, and encourages
the Governments of the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States and
international organizations to strengthen their cooperation with
non-governmental organizations and to involve them actively in the follow-up
to the Conference;
16.
Reaffirms the necessity for effective follow-up mechanisms to the
Conference;
17.
Highly appreciates the initial steps undertaken by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in cooperation with the
International Organization for Migration to promote the implementation of the
Programme of Action;
18.
Invites the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to
demonstrate similar initiative in contributing to the effective implementation
of the Programme of Action;

/...

A/RES/51/70
Page 4

19.
Welcomes the Joint Operational Strategy for 1996-2000 of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
International Organization for Migration in the countries of the Commonwealth
of Independent States, which outlines the practical dimensions of implementing
the results of the Conference;
20.
Emphasizes the necessity of fulfilling the recommendations of the
Programme of Action relating to ensuring respect for human rights as an
important factor in the management of migration flows, the consolidation of
democracy, the rule of law and stability;
21.
Urges the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in
coordination with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the International Organization for Migration and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, to take into account those elements of
the Programme of Action that are relevant to his mandate;
22.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly
at its fifty-second session on the measures taken and proposed and on progress
achieved in the implementation of the present resolution;
23.
Decides to continue examination of this question at its fiftysecond session.
82nd plenary meeting
12 December 1996
