$

UNITED NATIONS ./ NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY .COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
FOURTH. YEAR

440th and ·f41st MEETINGS: 9 SEPTEMBER 1949 .
440~me et 441Cme SEANCES: 9 SEPTEMBRE 1949

'iCONSEIL DE SECURITE
I

RDeES·VERBAUX OFFICIELS
UATRIEME AJ:\lNEE

SUCCESS. NEW YORK.

·30 p.)

No. 40

12
as a consequence of insisting on a vote and thus par consequent, de prolonger le debat, on en
on a continuation of the discussion, this should arrive it cette solution, il y a des gens qui comoccur, some people. might begin to wonder menceront it se demander s'il ne serait pas prefewhether it would not be better, in connexion with rable pour le Conseil d'ecarter les candidatures
applications for membership in the United par un vote emis apres une seance it huis clos
Nations, to employ a system of blackballing, plutot que d'examiner les demandes d'admission
rather than to have an open, unsavoury and un- aux Nations Unies au cours d'un debat public qui
dignified discussion in the Security Council, before manque de tenue et de dignite: le monde attend
a world which expects a more constant, serious du Conseil de securite qu'il fasse preuve, dans
and substantial handling of responsibilities by the l'exercice de ses fonctions, de plus de seneux,
Security Council.
d'espnt de suite, de sens des realites.
Je voudrais donc savoir si les representants de
Therefore, I should like to know whether the
representatives- of Argentina and the USSR l'Argentine et de 1'URSS accepteraient de revenir
could revert to the position they took previously it leu!" attitude anterieure et de ne pas insister pour
in connexion with this matter, and not insist on que 1'on procede it un vote.
taking a vote here.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Avant
The PRESIDENT: Before this meeting opened I
was told that certain representatives had unavoid- 1'ouverture de la seance, des representants m'ont
able engagements which would necessitate a fait savoir qu'ils ne pourraient differer certains
rather early adjournment this morning. I have engagements et que nous devrions nous separer
one more name on my list of speakers, and if we plus tot que de coutume. I1 y a encore un orateur
are to vote I do not think that \ve shall have time inscrit, et, si nous devions proceder it un vote, je
to finish before the usual hour of adjournment. ne pense pas que nous en aurions fini avant
I would therefore ask the Council if it would l'heure habituelIe. Je demande donc si le Conseil
object to adjourning now and meeting again at accepte de lever la seance et de se reunir cet
apres-midi it 15 heures. .
3 o'clock this afternoon.
Comme il n'y a pas d'objections, il en est ainsi
Since there is no objection we shall meet again
decide.
at 3 p.m.
La seance est levee cl 12 h. 45.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

FOUR HUNDRED AND FORTY-FffiST
MEETING

QUATRE CENT QUARANTE ET
UNIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Friday, 9 September 1949, at 3 p,m.
President: Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United
Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland).
Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.
The agenda Was that of the 440th meeting
[S/Agenda/440].

Tenue cl Lake Success, New-York
le vendredi 9 septembre 1949, cl 15 heures.
President: Sir Alexander CADOGAN
(Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et
d'Irlande du Nord).
Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Eg-ypte,
France, Norvege, Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne
et d'Irlande du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
L' ordre du jour estcelui de la 440eme SefmCe
[S/Agenda/440].

4. Admission of new Members

4.· Admission de nouveaux Membres

(continued)

(suite)

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglai's): NouS
poursuivons la discussion du point 2 de notre
ordre du jour. Deux orateurs sont iriscrits. Je
donne tout d'abord la parole au representant de
la Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine.
M. MANUILSKY (Republique socialiste sovie_ Mr. MANUILSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian): In con- tique c1'Ukraine) (traduit du russe): Le reprenexion with the United States representative's sentant des Etats-Unis ayant annonce [440eme
statement [440th meeting] that when a vote is seance] que sa delegation demanderait. un vote
taken on the USSR draft resolution regarding par division sur le projet de resolution de l'URSS
the admission of all the twelve States, his delega- relatif cl. 1'admission des douze Etats candidats,
tion will require separate votes, the delegation of la delegation <;le la RSS d'Ukraine declare a son
the Ukrainian SSR in its turn declares that, in tour que, dans ce cas, elle insistera pour que
that event, it will insist on the discussion of each chaquedemande d'admission soit discutee separeapplication separately, as it would be quite irregu- ment. En effet, it serait tout it fait anormal de
proceder au vote sans avoir examine chacunedes
lar to take a vote without first having done so.
demandes.
The PRESIDENT: We shall continue the discussion of item 2 of the agenda. There are two
speakers on the list. I call upon the representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.

. M

'et

-- '-".

f

"""

----------~---------------

....-

13

Mr. CHAUVEL (France) (translated from
French) : \Vhat the representative of the Ukrainian SSR has just said only confirms my intention
of this morning tn support the arguments
advanced by the representative of Egypt.

M. CB:AUVEL (France): Ce que vient de dire
le representant de la RSS d'Ukraine ne peut que
me confirmer dans l'intention que j'avais ce matin
d'appuyer les. considerations developpees par le
representant de I'Egypte.

n me semble qu'au point ou en sont les choses,
It seems to me that at the present stage, after
the vote taken the day before yesterday concern- apres le vote d'avant-hier [43geme seance] en ce
ing Nepal [439th meeting]-a vote which is quite qui concerne le Nepal - vote qui est aussi caractypical-and after the discussion concerning this teristique que 1'0n veut - et apres les explications
particular case as well as the more general aspects echangees tant sur ce <:as particulier que sur les
of the problem, we have little to learn that is new. aspects plus generaux du probleme, nOilS n'avons
The President now has all the facts he will need pas grand'chose de nouveau a. apprendre, Le
for the report which he proposes to make to the President dispose maintenant de tous les eIements
General Assembly on the present state of the ,du rapport qu'il se propose de faire a. I'Assemquestion in the Council.
blee generale sur le point ou en sont les choses
au sein du Conseil.
The PRESIDENT: I have already ~"Cpressed my
own preference for that course of action. However, the proposers of the draft resolutions which
are before the Security Council LS/1331-S/1337
. and S/1340] have insisted that they should be
put to a vote. In these circumstances I have no
alternative: we must proceed to a vote.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : J'ai deja.
exprime ma preference personnelle pour cette
methode. Toutefois, les auteurs des projets de
resolution dont le Conseil est saisi [S/1331S/1337 et S/1340] insistent pour que .ceux-ci
soient mis aux voix. Dans ces conditions, je n'ai
pas le choix: i1 faut proceder au vote.

As I have already intimat~d to 'the Council, I
shall put to the vote first the draft resolution submitted by the representative of Argentina concerning the application of Portugal [S/1331].

Comme je l'ai deja indique au Conseil, je vais
d'abord mettre aux voix le projet de resolution
soumis par le representant de l'Argentine, concernant la demande d'admission duPortugal
[S/1331].

Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): Resolution 197 (lII) C, to which the Argentine representative refers in his drafts, does not stand alone.
I know, and we all know, that 197(III), also
includes another section, B, the first paragraph
of which states:

M. TSARAPKlNE (Union des Republiques socialistessovietiques) (traduit du russe) : Le representant de l'Argentine s'est rHere, dans ses projets de resolution, a la section C de la resolution
197 (lII) de I'Assemble generale; or, nous sayons
tous la resolution 197 (Ill) comporte egalement
une section B, dont le premier paragraphe contient
le passage suivant:

"Having noted the special reports of the Security Council on the question of the admission of
new Members (A/617 and A/618) ..."

"Prenant acte des rapports speciaux du Conseil
de securite concernant la question de l'admission
de nouveaux Membres (A/617 et A/618) ..."
Jevoudrais attirer l'attention du Conseil de securite sur ce premier document mentionne a la
section B de la resolution 197 (UI), laquelle
precede la section C.

I should ·like to draw the Security Council's
attention to the first of the documents referred
to in that resolution 197(III)B, which precedes
~esolution 197(UI)C.
,

Le document A/617 enumere les pays qui ant
Document Aj617 lists the countries which have
applied for membership in the United Nations presente des demandes d'admission a l'Organisain the following order: Albania, Austria, Bul- tion des Nations Unies. Ces pays y figurent dans
garia, Hungary, Ireland and so forth. I wish to l'ordre suivant: Albanie, Autriche, Bulgarie,
point out to the members of the Security Council Hongrie, Irlande, etc. J'attire l'attention des memthat in this official document Albania is men- bres du Conseil de securite sur le fait que, dans
tioned first. If, therefore, we are to be guided ce docutnent officiel, l'Albanie figure en premier
by the General Assembly resolution; and if we lieu. Ainsi donc, si nous voulons noUs conformer
are to maintain an objective approach to the dis- a la resc1ution de l'Assemblee generale, si noris
cussion of this question, then the applications voulons
lir <:ompte des faits et examiner la
which were' made earlier must be discussed and .question en toute impartialite, nous devons etudier
voted on before those of other countrles.
et mettre' aUX1 voix en tout premier lieu les demandes des pays qui nous sont parvenues les
premieres.
. Resolution 197(IlI)B asks the Security CounLa section B de la resolution 197 (IU) decll to reconsider the applications, taking into mande au Conseil de securite a reconsiderer les
Cl;ccount document A/617,' in' which Albania is demandes d'admission et se refere au document
hstedfirst. The USSR delegation insists that the A/617 ou l'Albanie figure en, tete de liste. La
Security Council should be completely objective iielegation de l'URSS insiste pour que le Conseil
~nd fair in its approach to this question and that de securite agisseen cetteaffaire d'une maniere
It sh?uld not adopt low political stratagems by objective et equitable. Elle s'oppose a ce qu'il
drawmg from among the applicants only those emploiedes procedes de basse politique en ne
countries which are favourably viewed by the choisissant, parmi les pays candidats, que ceuxqui
Anglo-American bloc. I have in mind countries jouissent des faveurs du bloc-anglo'-camericain. Je
such .as Portugal, Ireland, Austria, Italy, Jordan veux parler notamment des pays tels que le Portu-

.

"'~i.,.,.£

4 ;,.•.•.

~M._,U. ~ . . . !'!I Il¥_~'.! IlI.
'!iI'iW00!.

INl!!!!llIIiIr_ _

.ga_:I I I:I"~:I lIlI_Il Ir1.:lI IiJldl l :.~.l1l.'A_u.tr.ichl1l.el l..~I.ta.l
,.I .i.e:l ,.I.aIl lJI IiI~lI ir.d.al l ml le.,..
l· e.tc

"_ _
lIII

14
We must act absolutely objectively, justly and
impartially. The USSR delegation insists on this
and demands that the Security Council refrain
from engaging in any sort of procedural chicanery and approach this question fairly and
objectively. Nobody here will be misled by procedural chicanery.
If the Security Council nevertheless considers
a vote ne<:essary, it should be taken only in the
order in which the applications were submitted.
That is my first point.

My seco:p.d is the following. On 16 June 1949,
when the Security Council first resumed the discussion of the question of the admission of new
Members [427th meeting], the President, Mr.
Sunde, made the following proposal:
"In my capacity as President of tlle Council,
I should like further to suggest that if statements
which might be made at this meeting do not reveal
any such change of position as would make it
possible for the Council to recommend the admission of any or all of the applicant States, it would
not be necessary for us to take a formal vote."

I1 faut agir d'tme maniere tout a. fait objective
imparHale et denuee de favoritisme. La delegatio~
de l'URSS insiste sur ce point. Elle demande au
Conseil de securite de ne. point s'engager dans
des ruses de procedure, mais d'examiner cette
question d'une maniere equitable et objective. En
effet, ces manceuvres tactiques ne tromperont
personne.
Si, malgre tout, le Conseil estime qu'il faut
proceder a un vote, il convient que les demandes
d'admission soient mises aux voix dans l'ordre ou
e1les ont ete presentees. C'est la une premiere
remarque.
Void maintenant ma deuxieme remarque: Le
16 juin 1949, lorsque le Conseil a repris la discussion sur la question de l'admission de nouveaux Membres [427eme seance], le President,
M. Sunde, a fait la proposition suivante:
"En ma qualite de President du Conseil de
securite, je voudrais faire encore une autre suggestion: au cas ou les declarations qui seront
faites durant cette seance ne feraient pas apparaitre, dans l'attitude des differentes delegations,
un changement qui permit au Conseil de securite
de recommander l'admission de tous les Etats qui
ont pose leur candidature ou de l'un entre eux,
il ne serait pas necessaire que le Conseil procede
a un vote en bonne et due forme."
Le 24 juillet, a la 42geme seance du Conseil de
securite, le representant du Royaume-Uni a dit:
"S'il doit y 'avoir vote - et nous nous demandons si, etant donne l'echange de vues qui a eu
lieu, ce vote presenterait un intt~ret que1conque ..."

At the Security Council's 429th meeting on 24
June, the United Kingdom representative stated:
"My delegation believes that if there is to be
any voting-and we wonder whether in the light
of the exchange of views which we have had, any
useful purpose w.ould really be served by proceeding to ~ote ..."
Ainsi donc, le representant du Royaume-Uni
Thus, the United Kingdom representative too
expressed a doubt as to whether any useful pur- doutait, lui aussi, qu'iI y eut un sens ou qu'it y
pose would be served by taking a vote on the eut inten~t a mettre aux voix ces demandes d'adsaid applications if the parties had not changed mission si l'attitude des parties demeurait in..
their positions and if a vote, did not alter the changee et si un vote ne devait apporter aucun
existing position on the question of the admission element nouveau a la maniere dont se presente
of new Members.
la question de l'admission des nouveaux Membres.
At the same meeting the United States repreA la meme seance, M. Austin, representant des
sentative, Mr. Austin, said:
Etats-Unis, a declare:
"I would wish to support the recommendations
"Je desire appuyer les propositions du Presiof the President that we should at this time dent tendant a ce que nous nous contentions a
simply take note of our inability, at the present present de noter que nous ne sommes pas en
time, to make a favourable recommendation on mesure de faire a. l'heure actueIle une recom~
any of the applications before us."
mandation favorable au sujet de l'une queIconque
des demandes dont nous sommes saisis."
At the same meeting the French representative
Le representant de la France a declare 111i aussi
stated that his delegation would adhere to the au cours de la meme seance que sa delegation
Council's tradition and practice. The French avait l'intention de s'en tenir a. la tradition du
delegation, he said, "does not think it at all Conseil. II affirma que la delegation· franc;aise ne
necessary to take any new votes" on the question. croyait "nulIement necessaire que de nouveaux
votes interviennent" sur cette question.
The Egyptian representative said, at that meetC'est encore a la meme seance que le represening, that he thought that it would be better not tant de l'Egypte a dit que, a son avis, la meilleure
to take a vote on the admission of new Members. methode consisterait a ne pas mettre aux voix la
He voiced a like view this ,morning [440th meet- question de I'admission des nouveaux Membres.
ing ], as did also the French representative.
Le representant de l'Egypte a soutenu la meme
these ce matin [440eme seance], et le representant de la France a fait de meme.
.
Enfin,
le
24
juin
[42geme
seance],
le
President
Finally, on 24 June [429th meeting), at the
a declare vers la fin de la seance : .
close of the meeting, the President said:
"Je continue a penser qu'il ne servirait a rien
etI am still of the opinion that no practical
purpose would be served by taking a formal vote de procedera un vote formel sur les demandes
on the applications before us. Several representa- . dont nous sommes saisis. Pltisieurs representants,
tives have expressed their agreement with this, ont exprime leur accord sur ce point. Je demandet

I

...-----------:1"::"'5- - - - - - - - - - - - and I therefore now formally ask the Security
Council whether all representatives would be in
a/5reement if we were now to conclude the debate
without a vote and merely report to the General
Assembly that we have reconsidered the applica~ons ror membership, but that the discussion has
;ot revealed any change of attitude on the part
of the members of the Council whiCh would
make it possible to make a recommendation for
the admission to mt\mbership of any of the twelve
States the applications of which we have been
asked to reconsider."
That statement was made at the end of the
meeting, and there was no formal reply from
the membe"s of the Council, as the USSR representative s',tggested that the discussion should not
be closed but should be continued. The point at
issue was not whether the question should be
put to the vote, but whether the discussion should
be continued, since everything had not yet 'been
said, and it was necessary to reply tu certain
observations made by other members of the
Council.
Thus, at that time a considerable section of
the Council had already expressed the opinion
that it would serve no useful political or practical
purpose to put the question to the vote, since
the result was foreordained and quite obvious
to each of us. It is perfectly clear that the result
would be an exact repetition of what happened
at previous votes on this question in the Security
Council; the Council would not gain anything
new by taking a fresh vote. Everybody is aware
of this, including the Argentine representative
who now insists that a vote should b~ taken on
this matter.
Should the Security Council-one of the most
important organs of the United Nations, which
deals with the most serious and important questions-approach the question of voting as lightly
as in the present case, none of us, including those
who insist on a vote's being taken, should have
any doubt as to the result.
The result of the vote will be that not one of
the States whose applications we are now con.sidering will be recommended for admission to
the United Nations. That has happened re~eatedl~ in the Security Council, twice or three
times, m respect of each of the States whose
applications are before us. In these circumstances, it is impossible to understand the purpose
of the proposal made by one or several members
of the Council, who insist that another vote should
be taken.
. The Egyptian representative· was right in saymg [440th meeting] that the Security Council
should not make itself ridiculous in the eyes of
the. General' Assembly and the entire world, by
agam taking a vote on this question which has
been put to the vote not once but several times,
for we all know what the result will be.
. Why, then, is a vote being demanded? What
IS the purpose of such a vote? There' is only
?ne purpose, namely, to place the Security Council
In a ridiculous position and to gather additional
argut;'le!1ts for a fresh, attack on the principle of
u.nammIty among the. five great Powers, a prinCIple whIch must be observed to the ,'letter when
liiiiil.;ken on, important, political questions

d tLLblhg"

..11 unlit' 'u

'fii

donc formellement au Conseil de securite si tous
les representants acceptent que nous mettions fin
au debat sans passer a1t vote, et que nous rappor- '
tions simplement a l'Assemblee generale que nous
avons examine a nouveau les demandes d'admission, mais que le debat n'a fait apparaitre, dans
l'attitude des representants, aucune modification '
qui puisse permettre au Conseil de recommander
l'admissioncomme Membre de l'un quelconque
des douze Etats dont il a ete invite a reconsiderer
les candidatures."
Cette declaration a et~ faite en fin de seance.
Les membres du Conseil de securite n'y ont pas
donne de reponse formelle, parce que le representant de I'URSS avait propose de ne pas clore
le debat, mais de continue,r la discussion. I1 ne
s'agissait pas de savoir s'il fallait mettre la question aux voix, mais simplement de savoir s'it
fallait poursuivre la discussion, etant donne que
le dernier mot n'avait pas encore ete dit et qu'il
fallait repondre a certaines observations et declarations faites par d'autres membres du Conseil.
Ainsi donc, la plupart des membres du Conseil
avaient indique des ce moment-la que, a leur avis,
il etait illogique, tant du point de vue pratique que
du point de vue politique, de mettre cette question
aux voix, puisque le resultat en etait clair
d'avance. Il ne fait aucun doute que le vote reproduira fidelement les resultats des scrutins auxquels
le Conseil a deja procede sur la meme question.
Un nouveau vote n'apportera rien de nouveau.
Tout le monde le sait, y compris le representant
de l'Argentine qui insiste en ce moment pour que
cette question soit mise aux voix.
Si le Conseil de securite, qui est l'un des orgartes
les plus importants des Nations Unies pa.rce qu'il
est charge d'examiner des problemes d'importance
vitale, se met a traiter les questions concernant
le vote de fac:;on aussi legere qu'il le fait maintenant, il est facile, pour chacun de nous, y compris
celui ou ceux qui insistent en faveur d'un scrutin,
d'en prevoir les consequences.
A la suite de ce vote, aucun des Gouvernements
dont nous examinons id les demandes n'obtiendra
de recommandation ;favorablea 'son admission
dans l'Orl~anisation des Nations Unies. Cela s'est
deja produit a plusieurs reprises - deux ou trois
fois - aU sein du Conseil de securite en ce qui
. concerne chacun des Etats qui nous ont soumis
des demandes; aussi, le semf de la proposition
faite par un ou plusieurs membres duConseil qui
insistent pour qu'on procede aun nouveau vote
n'est-il pas du tout clair.
Le representant de l'Egypte a dit a juste titre
[440eme seance] que le Conseil de securite devait
eviter de se mettre clans une situation ridicule
devant l'Assemblee generale et devant le monde
entier en mettant aux voix unequestion qui a
deja fait l'objet deplusieurs scrutins ~uccessifs.
En dIet, chacun de nous saitd'avance quel serait
le resultat de ce vote.
It est done permis de se demander pourquoi on
exige un vote. Quel but'veut-on atteindre par-la?
It n'en a qu'un: on vet\tmettre le Conseil de
se,curite dans une situation ridicule et, peut-etre,
obtenir de nouveaux arguments pour lancer une
nouvelle attaque contre la regIe de l'unanimite
dont l'application est de rigueur lorsque le Conseil
met aux voix une question politiqueimportante.
,-OH

16

in the Security Council. It is common knowledge
that several members of the Council are seeking
to aChieve that result; the Council, however,
must not follow that course.
I cannot agree with those who allege that the
position in regard to this question remains unchanged. That is not true of the position of the
Soviet Union, which agreed to withdraw a number of serious objections to the admission to the
United Nations of some States in order to help
solve this question, and proposed [Sj1340] that
all the twelve States whose applications are before
the Council should be admitted.
This morning [440th meeting] the representative of the Soviet Union submitted a draft resolution [S/1340 j Rev.1] to the effect that a vote
should he taken on the applicatiop.s of all the
thirteen countries, including Nepal, and· that
Nepal should be admitted to membership in the
United Nations.
Thus the position of the Soviet Union has not
remained unchanged. The Soviet Union has
altered its position in order to make it possible
to solve the question of the admission of new
Members, which has reached a deadlock owing
to the attitude of the United States, the United
Kingdom an<;l some other States which follow in
their w a k e ~ '
There is, however, no change ih the position
of the Anglo-American bloc on the question of
the admission of new Members. It is apparent
from the statements of the representatives of the
United States and other countries that those representatives will veto the admission to the United
Nations of Albania, Hungary, Romania, Bulgariaand tl!.e Mongolian People's Republic.
In these circumstances my delegation can see
no need for a vote on this question, since all the
members of the C;:ouncil are well aware of the
fact that. not a single one of othe twelve States
will be admitted to the United Nations.
That is the situation today. There is another
point to which I must refer. I fully agree with
my colleague, the representative of the Ukrainian
SSR who said that, if we are to proceed to a
separate vote on each of the requests from the
twelve or thirteen States which have applied for
admission to the United Nations, then before the
voting we shall have to discuss each of those
applications again. Regardless of the faCt that
such discussions have already taken place before,
each member of the Council, before voting on any
one of the applications, must again explain his
vote and state why he is voting as he is in the
'case of the country concerned.

On sait bien que certains membres du Conseil
c1'lerchent precisement a atteindre ce resultat.
mais le Cons~il aurait tort de s'engager dans cett~
voie.
.J e ne puis me rallier a ceux qui pretendent
que la situation n'avait pas change. Pour sa part,
l'Union sovietique, desireuse de faciliter le regIe.'
ment de la question, avait consenti a passer outre
aux objections graves qU'elle avait contre l'admission de certains candidats, et elle a propose
[S/1340]qu'on admette a 1'0rganisation des
Nations Unies les douze Etats dont les demandes
sont soumises a l'examen du Conseil.
Ce matin [440eme seance], le representant de
l'Union sovietique a soumis un projet de resolution [S/1340/Rev.1] tendant a mettre aux voix
les treize demandes, y compris celle du Nepal, et
a admettre ce demier pays comme Membre de
1'Organisation des Nations Unies.
On voit done que la position de I'Union sovietique a change. L'Union sovietique a modifie son
attitude pour qu'il devienne possible de resoudre
la question de l'admission de nouveaux Membres
et de sorti.r de l'impasse dans laquelle le Conseil
s'etait trouve par suite de l'attitude adoptee par
les Etats-Unis, le Royaume-Uni et quelques
autres Etats qui les suivent.
Neanmoins, l'attitude du bloc anglo-americain
sur la question de l'admission de nouveaux Membres est r'estee inchangee. Il est evident, d'apres
les declarations des representants des Etats-Unis
et de plusieurs autres pays, que cesrepresentants
opposeront un veto aux demandes d'admission
1'Organisation des Nations Unies presentees par
l'Albanie, la Hongrie, la Roumanie, la Bulgarie
et la Republiq?e populaire de Mongolie.
.Dans ces Circonstances, ma delegation ne voit
pas la necessite de mettre cette question aux voix,
puisque'tous les membres du Conseil savent fort
bielJ. qu'aucun des douze Etats ne sera admis a
l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
,Telle est la situation dans laquelle se trouve le
ConseiI. Il y a encore un autre point dont je
voudrais parler. J e me joins entierement a mon
collegue, le representant de la RSS d'Ukraine qui
a dit que, si le Conseil devait mettre aux voix,'
separement, chacune des douze ou treize dema117
des d'admission dont il est saisi, it nous faudrait
avant le vote discuter a nouveau chacune de ces
demandes. Bien que .cette question ait deja
donne lieu a des debats, chaque membre du ConseiI, avant de voter sur telle ou telle demande
d'admission, devra de nOUveau expliquer son vote
et indiquer les considerations et les motifs qui
l'ont pousse it adopter telle ou telle attitude a
l'egard du pays interesse.

a

Mr. TSIANG (China): It is my understanding
M. TSIANG (Chine) (traduitde l'anglais):
that the President considers that the Security Si je comprends bien, le President estime que le
Council might well postpone voting on the draft Conseil de securite peut parfaitement ne pas proresolutions. Nevertheless, he was about to put ceder immediatementau vote sur ces proje'ts de
one of the draft resolutions to the vote, for the resolution. Neanmoins, le President etait sur le
simple reaSon that the proposer of that draft point de mettre aux VOi;lC l'un .de ces projets de
resolution desired that it be put to the vote. My resolution pour la simpleraison que son auteur
delegation shares the sentiment already expressed desirait qu'il en fut ainsi. Ma delegation partage
by several other delegations that no useful purpose l'opinion deja .exprimee par plusieurs autres delecould be served by putting this draft resolution gations qui ne voient pas d'interet a mettre ce
to the vote. Although we wish to consider as projet qe resolution aux voix. Malgre notre desir
much as we can the desires of proposers. of reso- de tenir compte, dans la mesure du possible, des
lutions, I think the Security Council is fully vceitx des auteurs des projets de resolution, j'es__.......
en...ti
...·......
tled.·......t_o...b...e_th_e_ _m...a_s_te...r......
of_it...s...p...r_o_c...e_d_ur...e......in_t...
h_at_ _t_im_...e...q_u...e_l_e...C~,o.nsei1~~ ~ecurit~e~t, entieremitltt

ps

17

maitre de sa procedure a cet egard, attendu
au'aul;un article du reglement interiettr ne prevoit
expresseJ:!1ent qu'un projet de resolution doive
etre mis aux 'lobe a la demande de son auteur.
Si ma motion est recev-able, je propose formelleUnless I am ruled out of order, I shall formally
move that the Security Council postpone voting ment que le Conseil de securite remette a plus tard
on the draft resolutions relating to the admission son vote sur les huit projets de resolution relatifs
a l'admission de nouveaux membres.
of new Members.
Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de
Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt); I support the
proposal of the rep~esen!ativ~ of C~ina.. One l'anglais) : J'appuie la proposition du representant
consideration I have m mmd m so domg IS that de la Chine. S~ je le fais, c'est notamment parce
such a procedure does not constitute a refusal que j'estime que cette fac;on d'agir n'equivaut
on the part of the Security Council to vote on a nu1lement a un refus du Conseil de securite de
proposal submitted by one or other of the delega- voter sur une proposition soumise par telle ou
tions, but means only that the Security Council tel1e delegation, mais qu'elle signifie simplement
is not at present ready t9 vote on these _draft que le Conseil de securite n'est pas, pour le moresolutions. At the same time, I should welcome ment, pret a voter sur ces projets de resolution.
any. expression on the part of the proposers of Cependant c'est tres volontiers que j'ecouterai
the draft resolutions which are before us. I think. l'avis, sur ce point, des auteurs des projets de
we have already had an expression in a favour- resolution dont nous sommes saisi. Je crois que
able sense from the representative of the Soviet nous avons deja entendu l'opinion fa-vorable du
Union, and it now remains for the repre~,entative representant de I'URSS, et c'est au representant
of Argentina, if he so desires, to contribute still de l'Argentine qu'il appartiellt maiptenant, s'ille
more to the growing harmony in our deliberations. desire, de contribuer a mettre plus d'hannonie
encore dans nos debats.
Mr. ARCE (Argentina) (translated from
M. ARCE (Argentine) (traduit de l'espagnol) :
Spanish): The Egyptian representative has just Le representant de l'Egypte vient de dire qu'il
mentioned the desirability of restoring harmony serait bon de retablirl'harmonie au sein du Conin the Security Council. Risum teneatis amid? seil de securite. RiswJn teneatis amici? Tout le
Everyone knows that if anything exists within monde sait que, s'il est un sentiment qui regne au
the Security Council, it is discord. To try to sein du Conseil de securite, c'est bien la discorde.
contribute to restore harmony at the present Pretendre contribuer a· y retablir l'harmonie en
moment and in the political situation of the world depit de la situation politique qui existe actuel1eis clearly like trying to get pears from the elm, ·ment dans le monde, revient exactement. a dewhile knowing that the elm cannot produce pears. mander a. un orme de produire des peches tout
.Likewise, the Egyptian representative has stated en sachant que l'orme ne peut pas donner de
that if the vote were postponed, that would in peches. D'autre part, le representant de l'Egypte
no way reflect on the substance of the matter, but a declare que, si le voteetait differe, cela ne prewould mean only that the Council was not pre- jugerait en rien la decision sur le fond. de la quespared to vote. It is abundantly clear that the tion, rnais signifierait seulement que le Conseil de
Council is prepared to vote; that is proved by the securite n'est pas pret a. voter. Or, il est parfaitefact that statements have been heard from all its ment. evident que le Conseil est· en niesure de se
members who have not changed their point of prononcer; la p~euve en est que nous avons enview. Therefore the two main arguments of the tendu tous ses membres declarer que leur point
Egyptian representative have not convinced me. de vue n'avait pas change. Les deux arguments
xrtajeurs du representant de l'Egypte ne m'ont
donc nullement convaincu.
I come now to the argUments of the Chinese
J'en 'liens maintenant a.. l'argumentation dti
representative. I find them unfortunate, and representant de la Chine. C'est la. une mauvaise
feel that they set a very bad precedent. They argumentation, un tres mauvais precedent; cela
would allow any majority-not of a fixed bloc permettrait a une majorite quelconque- non·
but of any chance bloc of seven members where pas a un bloc determine, n-J;tis aun blococcaa question of· procedure is at issue---o-to prevent sionne! de sept membres, s'i1 s'agit d'une question
!he 111.inority of four from being heard and from de procedure -'- d'empecher que la minorite,
mducmg the Council to make a clear statement composee desquatre autres membres, se fasse
through the vote of its members. The Chinese entendre et obtienne que le Conseil de securite se
representative's proposal is a very bad one, and prononce par. un vote. C'estune tres mauvaise
I cannot support it. It is very bad because of proposition que celle du representant de la Chine,
the. very bad precedent it would set and the et jene puis m'y rallier"; elle est extremement
Chmese representative himself will soon regret mauvaise en raison dudangereuxprecedent
having made this proposal.
qu'eIleHablit, et le representant de la Chine luimeme se repentira a bref delai de l'avoir formulee.
A vrai dire, on cherche ici, par des discours
Let us be truthful. What we have here is the
pressure of speeches and the promise of new et par la promesse de nouv~aux discours, a exerspeeches to. influence the Security Council not to cer une pression sur le Con!'~i1 de secllrite pour
vote. I am not prepared to submit to this pres- l'empecher de proceder a un vote. Je ne suis pas
sure no matter how many speeches may be made; dispose a me soumettre a cette pression. Que
and even if I must remain the sole defender in viennent tOllS les discoursannonces; si je dois,
the S~curity Council of the. rights of the small rester seul au sein du Conseil de securite a sou..\,
countnes in this question, I ask the President tenir les droits des petits pays' en cette. matiere, \" .
~ere to~the rules and custom and therefore je demanderai au President de se conformer a \,
respect since there is no specific rule that any
draft;esolution should be put to a vote at the
demand of its proposer.

18
l'usage, d'appliquer le reglement et, par consequent, de mettre aux voix tous les projets de
resolution pr~sentes, ~ans exception; nous. resterions ainsi a discuter de ces projets jusqu'aux
calendes grecques. Nous savons deja quels sont
les arguments qui vont etre presentes. Je suis le
seul a ne pas avoir presente d'arguments, car les
miens sont deja bien connus. Je connais egalement
les arguments de tous les autres representants. Si
1'on prononce des discours, c'est pour faire pression sur le Conseil et pour l'inciter a ne pas
proceder au vote. Bien que, je le repete, je reste
seul a dHendre les droits des petits pays, je demande qu'i 1 soit procede a. ce vote. J'ajoute que,
si le Conseil decidait d'ajourner le vote demande
par la delegation de l'Argentine, je me retirerais
du Conseil jusqu'a ce que j'aie re~u de nouvelIes
instructic ~s de mon Gouvernement.
Mr. TSIANG (China): I ventured' to make a
M. TSIANG (Chine) (traduit de l' anglais) :
proposal a moment ago with the sole purpose Je me suis permis, il y a un moment, de faire une
of preventing a bad situation from becoming prop( ,ition dans la seule intention d'eviter que
worse. As to my attitude in regard to the sub-. s'aggrave une situation deja facheuse. Je crois
stance of the matter, I think it is clear from my que, sur le fond, mon attitude est nette: n'ai-je
earlier statements that I admire the objective of pas dit, en effet, que je considere avec une
the representative of Argentina, although I differ extreme satisfaction le btlt que vise le represenfrom him in regard to the way to reach that tant de l'Argentine, 'bien que je ne sois pas
objective. From his statement a moment ago, I d'accord avec lui sur les moyens de l'atteindre?
can see that my proposal would have a result De la declaration qu'il vient de faire, il y a un
contrary to the one I intended, aI!d I therefore instant, jeconclus que ma proposition aurait un
withdraw it.
resultat contraire a celui que j'envisageais: aussi,
je la reti~e.
M. MANUILSKY (Republique socialiste sovieMr. MANUILSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from R1lSsian): I feel tique d'Ukraine) (traduit du rtf,Sse) : A mon avis,
that a somewhat dangerous precedent is being on risque en efIet .de creer un precedent fort
created when a member of the Security Council dangereux en se pliant aux exigences d'un repremakes a completely arbitrary demand for a new sentant qui' demande, d'une fa~on tout a fait
vote on a question on which we have already' arbitraire, qu'on mette de nouveau aux voix une
voted several times. I maintain that nowhere in question ay~nt' deja fait l'objet de plusiel.\rs
the rules of procedure is it directly or indirectly scrutins. J'affir:me que le reglement interieur ne
stated that such a request by a member of the contient aucune disposition dont on puisse deSecurity Council should be granted.
duire, directement ou indirectement, qu'il y a lieu ,
de satisfaire· une revendication de ce genre formulee par un membre du Conseil de securite.
In particular, may I remind the Council that
_ J e tiens a. rappeler en outre qu'il est parfaitethe demand to put Portugal's application to the ment illegitime d'exiger que la demande d'admisvote first is completely arbitrary too. Why Portu- sion du Portugal soit la premiere a etre mise aux
gal? Why should we follow the flights of fancy voix. Pourquoi £aut-il accorder la priorite aU
of one member of the Security Council, even Portugal? Pourquoi faut-il se plier a la fantaisie
if that member is the representative of Argen- d'un des membres du Conseil de securite, meme
tina?
s'il s'agit du representant de l'Argentine?
We have precedents established by authoritaDes organes competents, tels que le Conseil de
tive bodies, namely, the Security Council and the securite et le Comite d'admission de nouveaux
Committee on the Admission of New Members. Membres, ont deja etabli des precedents . en la
I am now referring to document S/479 whichmatiere. Je veux parler a ce propos d'un docuappeared in 1947, that is to say the 1947,report ment publie en 1947 sous la cote S/479, c'est-a.of the Committee on the Admission of New dire du rapport soumis par le Comite d'admission
Members to the Security Council. That report de nouveaux Membres au Conseil de securite en
sets forth the chronological order in which 1947. Ce rapport etablit l'oi'dre chronologique
requests should be considered. The Security dans lequel il y a lieu d'examiner les demandes
Council adopted that order for the consideration d'admission.. Le Conseil de securite a approuve
of applications and decided in its turn to consider cette methode, et a decide, a son tour, d'examiner
them in the order in which they had been sub- les demandes d'admission dans l'ordre meme DU
mitted.
elles avaient ete presentees.
In accordance with that pre~edent, the Security
C'est a ce precedent que le,Conseil de securite
Council should follow the established procedure doit se conformer, au liell d'adopter la methode
and not'the procedure now being forced upon qu'on essaie de Iui imposer d'une fa~on entiereit in a completely arbitrary, way. That is why I ment arbitraire. Pour cette raison, je considere la
feel that the procedure which is now being pro- procedure qu'onpropbse en ce moment comme
posed would create a particularlY dangeroUSpQllv.Ml..!:--eoostituer un precedent extremement
precedent which would lead us in a direction. .dangereux, qui risque de faire devier leConseil
dans' une direction entierement opposee am deentirely contrary to previous decisions.
cisions anterieures,
.~

to take a vote on each and everyone of the
drafts submitted; thus we should stay here indefinitely discussing them. We already know
what arguments are going to be· advanced. The
only person who has not advanced an argument
is myself, because my opinions are. known. I am
also familiar with the arguments of all the other
representatives. If speeches are made, it is for
the purpose of· inducing the Council not to vote.
I repeat that, although I stand alone in the defence of the rights of the small countries, I ask
that a vote be taken. I add, furthermore, that
should the Council decide to postpone the vote
requested by the Argentine .delegation, I shall
withdraw from the Council until I have received
new instructions from my Government.

19
I appeal directly to.the comm:>n sens~ of the
Council. Several meetmgs on thIS questu:m have
already been held. In June, the President, ~i:Ir.
Sunde ruled [427th meeting] that a question
which' had already been voted on should not
be the subject of yet another vote.
It is characteristic that, at the time, that proposal was opposed neither by the representatives
of the United States .and the United Kingdom
nor by the :represe.ntative of Argentina, who supported it and proposed that no vote should be
taken on the question.

In July there was a second ruling by the then
President [431st meeting] to the effect that the
question should not be put to a vote. There was
not a single member of the Security Counciland that includes the representative of Argentina~who insisted on a vote.
Those who now demand a vote should at
least explain why they demand It, what has
changed, why the Council should go back on its
decisions, on two rulings from the Chair and on
two unanimous decisions of the Seourity Council?
Should the Council go back on all these because
one or its members feels that it is necessary to
take a fresh vote on a question which has been
discussed? That is not logical and the precedents
are against it. That is why I feel there is no
need to adopt this proposal.

In addition, I should like to make a request
of the President. I am very grateful to the
representative of Argentina who has magnanimously stated that he has absolutely no objection
to our discussing and giving our opinions on each
application separately. I welcome that statement
by the representative of Argentina, and if the
majority nevertheless decides today that a vote
should be taken, I shall ask the President to
put my name immediately at the head of the
list of speakers on the application of Portugal.
I do not know which application is to be disCl1ssed, that of Albania or that of Portugal, although I assume, that we shall have to discuss
the applications in the order in which they were
submitted. At all events, I should like to be the
first speaker on the question.
Mr. ARCE (Argentina) (translated from
Spanish) : At no time have I given my support to
a.ny resolution such as that which the representative of the Ukrainian SSR has just described.
I shall add further that at no time has, the Council
adopted any resolution, either in June or July.

I_
11

11 faut que ~e Con~eil fasse preu-v:e cl: b,on sens.
y a eu plusleurs seances consacrees a 1examen
de la question. Au mois de juin, M. Sunde, qui
presidait le Conseil a l'epoque, a decide [427eme
seance] qu'H n'y avait pas lieu de proceder a un
nouveau vote sur une question qui avait deja fait
l'objet d'un scrutin.

Il est significatif de COllstater qu'a. ce moment
aucune objection n'a ete soulevee'tontre ceite
decision, ni par les representants des Etats-Unis
et du Royatlme~Uni, lli mbne par cf'lui de
l'Argentine, qui a appuye cette decision et propose
qu'on renon~at au vote.
Au mois de juillet, il y a eu une deu...aeme decision presidentielle [431eme seance] visant a ce
que cette question ne sait pas mise aux voix.
Aucun membre du Conseil de securite, pas meme
le representant de l'Argentine, n'a insiste pour
qu'on procedat a. un vote.
Ceux qui, aujourd'hui, exigent un vote, devraient au mains prendre la peine d'expliquer sur
quoi repose cette exigence, ce qu'H y a eu ,de
change et pour quels motifs ils demandent qu'on
revienne sur deux decisions du President, confirmees a. l'unanimite par le Conseil de sckurite?
Pourquoi £aut-il que le Conseil l'evienne sur seS
decisions? Est-ce parce q1.1'un des membres da
Conseil de sedlrite estime qu'H y a lieu de remettre
aux voix une question qui a deja. fait 1'objet d'un
examen? Cela n'est pas logique, et une teIle
methode s~rait contraire a. tous les precedents.
J'estime, par consequent, qu'il n'y a pas lieu de
suivre cette suggestion.
Je voudrais enfin adresser une demande au
President. Je suis reconnaissant au representant
de I'Argentine d'avoir genereusement declare que,
pour sa part, i1 n'aurait pas d'objections ace que
chaque demande d'admission fit l'objet d'une discussion separee. J e me felicite de cette declaration
du representant de l'Argentine, et j e demandeau
President, pour le cas ou le Consei1 aura.itdecide
de proceder malgre tout a un vote, de m'inscrire
des maintenant en tete de sa liste des orateur:"
car je veux exposer mes vues sur la candidatun:
du Portugal. Je ne sais pas si c'est la demande de
l'Albanie ou celle du Portugal qui va Hre mise en
discussion en premier lieu, 'bien que j'esUme qu'il
faut examiner les demandes dans 1'ordre 01:1 eIles
ont ete presentees. Quoi qu'il en soit, je demancle
.a etre inscrit comme premier~ orateur.
M. ARCE (Argentine) (tradu/it de I'espagnol) :
A aucun moment je n'ai donne mon assentiment
a une resolution du genre de celle dont vientde
parler le representant de la RSS d'Ukraine.
J'ajouterai encore qu'a. aucun moment le (:onseil
de securite n'a adopte de resolution de ceg:~nre,
ni en juin, ni en juillet.
.
,

The PRESIDENT: Before calling on the next
Le PRESIDENT (tr,wuit de l'a~'tglais): Ava.'1t
speaker, it might bring a little clarity into our , de donner la parole a. l'orateur suivant, je crois
proceedings, and expedite them, if I' attempted que ce serait apporter quelqt1e clarte dans notre
to ~um up very briefly the situation as I see it. debat et permettre d'en accelerer le conrs que
d'essayer de resumer tres brievement la situation,
teIle qu'elle m'apparait.
Thi~ item, which has been before the Security
Ce point, dont le Conseil de securite e8t saisi
Counctl now for a long time, arises from General depuis longtemps, decoule de, la resolution 197
Assembly- resolution 197 (Ill) in which, among (Ill) de 1'Assemblee generale invitant notamment
other !hmgs, the Assembly asked the Council to' le Conseil a. reconsiderer certaines demandes
reconSIder specifically certain listed applications. d'admission expressement visees. C'est bien ce
. !he Security Council has been doing that at que fait le Conseil de securite, par intervalles,
llllllli'iPals now, for some months.
depuis plusieurs mois.

=..

20
The Security CouncH has also had before it,
since the middle of June, these eight draft resolutions. There has been prolonged discussion, in
the course of which several members indicated
that they had doubts whether it would be good
to vote on these draft resolutions, though a VOLe
is the usual fate reserved for a draft resolution
submitted to the Security Council. Today r myself expressed doubt as to whether it was a good
thing to vote, and asked whether we could not
forgo the vote. That opinion seemed to be shared
by several other members of the Council.
However, these dt'aft resolutions are before us
in the names of the representative of Argentina
and the representative of the USSR. r cannot
remove them from the agenda. After making
my suggestion to the effect that there should not
be a vote, I could merely appeal to those representatives and ask them whether they wish to
persist in submitting their draft resolutions to a
vote. The representative of Argentina was good
enough to reply that he wisheci that at least one
of them should be put to the vote.. r think that
he has now indicated that he might, in certain
circumstances, wish that all of them be put to
the vote. That being so, t..~e representative of
the USSR said that he also wished to maintain
his draft resolution.
r think that, as President, I have no aIternative; I cannot forbid any member of the Security
Council to as"k for a vote on a draft resolution
which he has submitted.
The representative of China stated-and I
think he is quite right-that the Security Council
is master of ies own procedure and that it could
decide not to vote on these draft resolutions. He
submitted tentatively, though not in writing, a
motion to that effect, which he subsequently
withdrew. That motion having been withdrawn,
r have no alternative, so far as I can see, but to
proceed, as I am doing, to put the first of these
draft resolutions to the: vote.

r might say that I thought the discussion had
been pretty well exhausted, and that seemed to
be the general opinion this morning. These draft
resolutions have all been open for dis:~!Jssion for
months, and I think everything has been said
that can be said about them. Therefore lean
see .no possible use ,or reason, if we proceed to
vote on them, for having the whole discussion
reopened and all the arguments repeated.
I return to the point that, unless any other
motion is proposed or unless even now the
a~thors of t~le .dra~t r:esolutions state ~hat they
wdl not at thIS tIme mSIst upon a vote bemg taken
on them, I, as President, have no alternative: I
am bound to put the draft resolutions to the vote
and I shall put them, as I commenced to dO'arlie;
in our meeting, in the order in which I ind:.cated.

I.

Mr. MANUILSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) ( translated from Russian) : I cannot
agree to the procedure which the President has
indicated. If the question of the admission of
new Members to the United Nations, which is
before us, has already been discussed and voted
on, then there is no need for a fresh vote. If that
is so why does the President change his mind in
the afternoon and insist on a vote, when he stated
this morning [440th meeting] that, generally
III

Le Cotlseil est egalement saisi depuis la mi-juin
de ces huit projets de resolution. Ils ont fait
1'objet d'une longue discussion, au COttrs de
laqueUe plusieurs membres ont exprime des
doutes quant a 1'opportunite de les mettre aU1\:
voix, bien que tel soit le sort normal reserve
tout projet de resolution soumis au Conseil de
securite. J'ai moi-meme dit, aujourd'hui, que je
n'etais pas sur qu'il ftit indique de proceder au
vote, et fai demande si nous ne pourrions pas y
renoncer. Cette opinion semble etre partagee par
plusieurs autres membres du Conseil.
It n'en demeure pas moins que nous avons ete
saisis de ces projets de resolution par le repr~­
sentant de 1'Argentine et le representant de
1'URSS. Je ne puis les retirer de 1'ordre du jour.
Apres avoir formule ma suggestion, je ne pouvais
pas faire autremcnt que de demander a ces representants s'ils persistaient a vouloir que leurs proj~ts de resolution fussent mis aux voix. Le representant de l'Argentine a bien voulu repondre qu'il
desirait que l'on votat au moins sur 1'un de ces
projets. Si je comprends bien, it vient de dire
maintenant qu'il voudra peut-etre, selon le cas,
les faire mettre tous aux voix. Dans ces conditions, le representant de l'URSS a declare que,
lui aussi, souhaitait maintenir son projet de resolution.
Je pense que, en tant que President, je n'ai pas
le choix; je ne puis pas empecher un membre du
Conseil de securite de demander qu'un projet de
resolution dont il est 1'auteur soit mis aux voix.
Le representant de la Chine a dit - et je crois
qu'il a parfaitement raison - que le Conseil de
securite est maitre de sa procedure et peut decider
de ne pas proceder a un vote sur ces projets d
resolution. M. Tsiang a depose, a titre de suggestion et sans le faire par ecrit, une motion a
cet effet, qu'iI a ulterieurement retiree. Dans ces
conditions, je ne puis faire autrement, semble-t-i!,
que de mettre aux voix le premier de ces projets
de resolution, et c'est d'ailleurs ce que j'allais
faire.
A mon sens, la discussion a entierement epuise
le sujet, et tout le monde semblait etre de cet avis
ce matin. Ces projets de resolution sont en ,discussion depuis des mois, et je crois que tout ce
que I'on pouvait dire a leur sujet a ete dit. Par
consequent, dans le cas ou ces projets de resolution seraient mis aux voix, il ne sert de rien, a
mon avis, de rouvrir la discussion et de presenter
de nouveau tous les arguments.
J'en reviens a. ceci: a. moins qu'une nouveIle
motion ne soit deposee ou que les auteurs des
projets de resolution ne declarent qu'ils n'insisteront .pas pour que ces projets soient mis aux
voix maintenant, je n'ai pas le choix, en tant que
President: je dois mettre les projets de resolution
aux voix, et je ferai proceder au vote, comme
j'ai d'aiIleurs commence a le faire au debut de la
seance, dans l'ordre que j'avais indique alors.
M. MANUILSKY (Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine) (traduit du, russe) : J e ne puis
accepter la methode que le President vient de
definir. It est inutiIe de proceder a un nouveau
vote, puisque la question que nous sommes en
train d'etudier, a savoir 1'admission de nouveaux
Membresa l'Organisation des Nations Unies, a
deja ete examirlee et a fait l'objet d'un scrutin.
Ce matin [440eme seance], le President a dit
qu'un nouveau vote ne lui paraissait pas indique;

a

I

J.;!"jJM.te:#i!l~iM
• .. 'Ul!l~!li.!"Jt,!!MU.':!$~.•.".j!"MJ.~~"Ii!!'J,~~tt@il!!'!J$~iW.&.~~~_lll!!l!!l:"~".!!"I,!t'.'~~!I"

__

pi

21

speaking, he considered a vote to ba unwise? And
if he insists on a vote on applications on which
a vote has already been taken, then it is absolutely
illogical and unwarrantable that he should impose
silenr;e on those who wish to speak for or against
a particular application.

pourquoi a· t1 change d'avis dans l'apres-midi?
Pourquoi ihSiste-t-il maintenant en faveur d'un
vote? Cependant, puisque le President insiste pour
qu'on mette aux voix des demandes d'admission
qui ont deja fait l'objet d'un scrutin, il est absolument illogique et inj ustifie de ,efuser la parole
aux membres du Conseil qui desirent se prononeel' pour 01' ("ontre les demandes presentees.

I would point out to the President that this is
not some procedural matter or other. It is a
question concerning human beings, concerning
States, many of which have tens of millions of
inhabitants. The question is whether or not to
admit those States to the United Nations. How
can we close the debate on such a question with
one stroke of a pen or one ruling from the Chair,
and state that in the President's opinion the
question need not be discussed any further? That
would be unjust; it would be disloyal towards
those States whose applications we are considering. It clearly would be so, regardless of whether
a particular member of the Security Council did
or did not sympathize with a particular State.

I1 ne s'agit pas la d'une simple question de procedure. I1 s'agit d'etres humains et d'Etats qui
comptent parfois des dizaines de millions d'habitants. I1 s'agit d~ savoir s'il faut ou non admettre
ces Etats a l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
Comment peut-on, d'un trait de plume ou par une
simple decision presidentielle, clore le debat sur la
question en se bornant a. dire que, de l'avis du
President, il n'y a pas lieu de poursuivre la discussion a. ce sujet? Une telle procedure serait
aussi bien irreguliere que, deIoyale a. 1'egard des
Etats dont on examine les demandes. Quels que
soient les sentiments de sympathie ou d'antipathie
eprouves par tel ou td membre du Conseil a
l'egard de l'un ou l'autre de ces Etats, il est evident que cette methode serait deloyale envers
ceux-ci.

That is why the delegation of the Ukrainian
SSR is firmly opposed to the President's proposal to proceed to a vote without any preliminary discussion; such a proposal is completely
unfounded politically and is also a logical contradiction.

C'est pourquoi la delegation de la RSS
d'Ukraine s'oppose de la fac;on la plus categorique
a. la proposition du 'President selon laquelle it y
aurait lieu de proceder au vote sans aucune discussion prealable; cette proposition est insoutenable du point de vue politique et contradictoire
du point de vue logique.

The PRESIDENT: Before calling on the next
speaker, I must reply to what hJ.s just been said
by the representative of the Ukrainian SSR. I
have not changed my view at all. I said that
I was in favour of not voting. I am still in favour
of not voting, but in my capacity as President I
cannot strike out a draft resolution which is on
the table, having been proposed by a member of
this Council; I cannot do it.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de T:anglais): Avant
de donner la parole a. l'orateur suivant, it faut que
je reponde au representant de la RSS d'Ukraine.
Je n'ai nullement change d'avis. rat dit que je
n'etais pas partisan d'un vote. Telle est encore
mon opinion, mais, en qualite de President, j e
n'ai pas le droit de supprimerune resolution dont
le Conseil a ete saisi par l'un' de ses membres; je
ne pense absolument pas le faire.

D'autre part, au sujet de ce que j'ai dit de la
Secondly, with regard to what I said about
renewing the discussion which appeared to have reouverture de la discussion de chacune de ces
reached its end on all these separate applications, demandes d'admission alors que cette discussidh
Mr. Manuilsky said that would be unjust and semblait etre parvenue a son terme, M.' Manuunfair, and that members of the Council here ilsky a trouve que ma suggestion etait inj uste
would not be able to speak in favour of certain et peu equitable. et qu'elle empecherait certains
applicants. The representative of the Ukrainian membres du Conseil de securite de parler en
SSR speaks as if some fresh application had been .faveur de tel ou tel candidat. Le representant de
submitted today. All these applications have been la RSS d'Ukraine parle comme si de nouve11es
demandes avaient ete deposees aujourd'hui. Le
befor~ the Security Council since June, and the
representative of the Ukrainian SSR had Conseil de securite est saisi de toutes ces deseveral opportunities during the intervening time mandes depuis le mois de ju~n, et le representant
of saying everything that he might have wished de la. RSS d'Ukraine a eu plusieurs fois l'occato say in favour of the candidates he favours, or sion, depuis, d'exprimer tout ce qu'il pouvait avoir
of heaping any amount of obloquy on those he a. dire en faveur des candidats qu'it soutient, ou
does not favour. There has been no suppression d'accabler ceux dont i1 n'est pas partisan de tous
of discussion whatever.
les denigrements possible. La discussion s'est done
deroulee sans aucune entrave.
Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): It is with.
regret that I note that the fears which I expressed, along with other members of this Council,
of our falling into an interminable discussion on
the draft resolutions before. us because of the
insistence that they should be put to a vote, are
justified. I should have been happier if· I had
been shown to be wrong in thinking that we
were on the way to an endless discussion in connexion with the subject matter before us,.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de

ranglais) : J e constate avec regret que mes appre-

I

hensions, partagees par d'autres membres du
Conse-H, etaient justifi.ees lorsque je craignais de
nous voir plonges dans une discussion inter..
minable des projets de resolutiondont nous
sommes saisis, puisque l'on insiste pour qu'ils
soient mis aux voix. J'aurais mieux aime avoira.
reconnaitre que j'avais eu tort de croire que nous
etibns sur la pente d'une discussion sans fin sur
le .fond de la question qui nous est. soumise.

"IK;.i§;lK~}i~ql~.!!)l" ,,~,~tt·~;~l.~II~'!'!"iI;"')Ii\!l!!I.tI J~I!lI'••.~IIM!. IJtlO 11ll1J3IIW:Ml!lIiM!" tl1~

]j .

-

22
I do not want to enter into a round of argument with the representative of Argentina-not
even when he seems impatient with my reference
to the growing harmony in our deliberations.
Some people might think that these deliberations
would be too monotonous if there were too much
harmony in them. At the same time, I share the
fuU respect that the representative of China has
expressed for the motives and intent of the
representative of Argentina. I doubt whether
anyone could rightly hesitate to subscribe to
those motives as such. They are good motives.
r have no doubt about their being good motives.
But I have great doubt as to the wisdom of the
approach which is so assiduously insisted upon
by the representative of Argentina. He is, I am
sure, one of those who would never think that a
representative of Egypt could be among those
who would take part in any attempt to suffocate
proposals, to kill discussion in the Security
Council.

Je ne tiens nullement cl. rompre des lances avec
le representant de l'Argentine, encore qu'il semble
avoir pris en mauvaise part mon allusion cl. I'harmonie croissante de nos debats. Libre a. certains
de penser que ces debats seraient trop monotones
s'il y regnait une trop grande harmonie. Je n'en
partage pas moins le respect sans reserve que le
representant de la Chine a exprime pour les rrr
tifs et les intentions du representant de l'Argc,,tine. Je doute que qui que ce soit puisse hesiter
a. souscrire a. ces motifs en tant que tels. Ce sont
de bons motifs. Je n'hesite pas a. reconnaitre leur
excellence. Mais j'ai du mal a. croire a. la sagesse
de la maniere de proceder que le representant de
l'Argentine s'obstine a. preconiser. Il est, j'en suis
stir, de ceux auxquels il n'est jamais venu a.l'esprit
que le representant de l'Egypte puisse participera
une tentative quelconque pour noyer des propositions ou pour etouffer une discussion au sein du
Conseil de securite.

There are, however, at least two considerations
of which we cannot lose sight. One consideration
is the matter of procedure. It is very clear that
at certain moments the Security Council can say
that the moment is not ripe for taking a decision
or that the moment is not ripe for voting. I do
not see why this should be put into doubt. I do
not see it, although I repeat that a. representative
of Egypt can never, in the deliberations of the
United Nations, be among those supporting any
suffocation of discussion or killing of proposals_

I1 y a cependant au moins deux considerations
que nous ne devons pas perdre de vue. L'une
d'eUes concerne la procedure. Il est patent que,
dans certains cas, le Conseil de securite peut
estimer que le moment n'est pas venu de prendre
une decision ou de proceder au vote. Je ne vois
pas pourquoi cela pourrait etre mis en doute. Je
n'eo vois pas la raison, sans que cela m'empeche
de repeter qu'on ne trouvera jamais un representant de l'Egypte dans le camp de ceux qui
voudraient faire avorter une discussion ou une
proposition, au cours d'un debat a. l'Organisation
des Nations Unies.

Besides procedure, there is the matter of logic,
of wisdom. I am not even going to speak too
long on that now, especially when I think of thegood advice of the representative of Argentina,
who said that we should not unduly tax the
patience of the Security Council amI its members,
a piece of advice which we sometimes forget.
Many members of this CounciI-I can rightly say
most members of this Council, except perhaps
one member-have repeatedly stated that it would
not be wise for the Security Council to proceed
to a vote now. No member of this Councilnone at all-said that we should never proceed
to. a vote. Why then all this wrangle?

Outre ce probleme de procedure, il y a une
question de logique, de sagesse. Je n'ai nullement
l'intention de m'etendre longuement sur ce point
a. l'heure actueUe, surtout quand je me rememore
le bon conseil que nous a donne le representant de
l'Argentine de ne pas abuser de la patience du
Conseil de securite et de ses membres, conseil que
nous avons parfois tendance a. oublier. De nombreux membres d" Conseil de securite - je suis
meme fonde a. due, la plupart des membres du
Conseil, a. l'exception peut-etre d'un seul - ont
declare a. plusieurs reprises que le Conseil serait
mal avise de proceder a. un vote actuellement.
Aucun membre -du Conseil de securite - je dis
aucun - n'a pretendu que nous ne devrions
jamais voter sur ces propositions. A quoi bon,
alors, toute cette querelle?

Considerons le resultat. S'il est dit que nous
Let us see the result. If we say that we are
on the road to a vote, that we are nearing a vote, prenons le chemin du vote, que nous sommes sur
then we already have the assurance of hearing le point de voter, nous savons deja. que nouS
the repeated arguments submitted by the repre- allons entendre repetel' les a,rguments formules
sentatives of the USSR and the Ukrainian SSR. par les representants de I'URSS et de la RSS
They point to an endless discussion. From their d'Ukraine. Cela fait prevoil' une discussion sans
point of view, it seems that this should be - fin. Du point de vue de ces representants, il semble
allowed. Then, may I· remind the Council that que cette discussion doive -etre toleree. Or, qu'il
I said at least once before at our previous meet- me soit permis de rappeler au Conseil ce qui j'ai
ings and again today [440th meeting], that we deja. dit au moins une fois au cours de nos precehave three new members who, last year, when dentes seances et que j'ai repete aujourd'hui
most of these applications were considered, did [440eme seance], a. savoir que nous avons parmi
not take part in the deliberations of this Council nous trois nouveaux membres qui, l'annee deror those of its Committee on the Admission of niere, a. l'epoque ou la majorite de ceS demandes
New Members. Until now, at the many meetings ont ete examinees, n'ont pris part, ni aux delibewe have had on this matter-I regret to say, rations du C9nseil, ni a. celles du Comite d'admismostly useless meetings-we treated the applica- sion de nouveaux Membl'es. Jusqu'a. present, aU
tions in a general way. We did not go into the cours des nombretlses seances que nous avons
detail of discussing each and everyone of them consacrees a. cette question - je regrette d'etre
separately, as we should certainly do. I do not oblige de dire que la plupart d'entre elIes ont ete
say that I intend to discuss each and every one vaines - nous avons traite ces demandes d'un

I

>

23
point de vue general. Nous n'avons pas discute
cha<:une d'eHes dans le detail et separement
comme nous aurions certainement du le faire.
Ce n'est pas que j'aie l'intention de discuter
chacune de ces demandes separement - peut-etre
le ferai-je, peut-etre n'en discuterai-je aucune mais, en principe, je maintiens que les trois nouveaux membres qui sont entres au Cunseil cette
annee ont parfaitement le droit de presenter les
observations qu'ils veulent faire au suj et de ces
demandes, en les <:onsiderant separement et non
dans leur ensemble, s'ils le desirent.
Puis-je esperer, dans ces conditions, <que nous
May I then hope that we shall . desist from
taking a vote now, in spite of the well-intentioned allons renoncer au vote pour le moment en depit
arguments put forward by our colleague from des arpuments developpes en toute bonne foi par
Argentina. But if the President says that we notre colIegue de l'Argentine? Cependant, si le
have no other choice but to proceed to a vote, President affirme que nous n'avons pas le choix
and if our colleague from Argentina insists, then et qu'il faut proceder au vote, et si notre collegue
in that case. I repeat, we should allow everyone, de l'Argentine insiste pour qu'il ait lieu, dans
and particularly the three new members of the ce cas, je le repete, nous devrions permettre a
Security Council, to submit any remarks they chacun d'entre nous et notamment, aux trois
want to make on this matter.
nouveaux membres du Conseil de securite, de
faire les observations qu'ils estiment devoir faire
en cette matiere.
The PRESIDENT: If nobody' has anything
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Si perfurther to say on the immediate point at issue, sonne n'a d'autres remarques a faire sur le point
I am compelled to return to the simple and actuellement en discussion, je me verrai oblige de
straightforward procedure from which I was revenir a la procedure simple et nette, dont j'ai
diverted a little while ago, and put the first ete detourne il y a quelques instants, et de mettre
Argentine draft resolution to the vote. The aux voix, en premier lieu, le proj et de resolution
draft resolution is to be found in document· de 1'Argentine. Ce projet de resolution figure
S/133l.
dans le document 5/1331.
.
Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
M. TSARAPKINE (Union des Republiques sociaRepublics) (translated from Russian) : The dele- listes sovietiques) (traduit du 1'usse): La dele:'
gation of the Soviet Union is strongly opposed gation de l'Union sovietique s'eleve energiqueto the procedure proposed by the President for ment contre la methode que le President vient de
voting on the draft resolutions before the Security suggerer en ce qui concerne la mise aux voix
Council.
des projets de resolution dont le Conseil de
securite est saisi.
It is difficult to describe the situation which
On ne peut s'empecher d'employer le terme
has arisen otherwise than by the word "arbi- "arbitraire" pour decrire la situation existante.
trary". In actual fact, what legal basis has the En effet, le Conseil de securite n'a aucune raison
Security Council for putting to the vote the draft valable pour voter en priorite sur 1es projets de
r~solutions which the representative of Argen- resolutions que M. Ar:ce s'est empresse de lui
tina hastened to submit to it on 16 June 1949 soumettre le 16 juin dernier; il n'est pas fonde
before any others, and before the application of ales mettre aux voix avan,t tous les autres proAlbania, which was submitted not on 16 June jets de resolution, avant meme la demande d'ad1949-when the draft resolutions of the repre- mission de l'Albanie .qui avait ete presentee, non
sentative of Argentina were handed in-but on pas le 16 juin 1949, date a laquelIe le representant
25 January 1946, that is to say, more than three- de l'Argentine a soumis ses. textes, mais le 24
and a half years ago? There is now a movement janvier 1946, c'est-a.-dire il y a plus de trois ans
to vote on the admission to the United Nations et demi. A present, on veut mettre .aux voix
of countries which submitted their applications 1'admission a. i'Organisation des Nations Unies
more than a year, a year and a half or two years de pays qui ont pr€:sente leur demande un an,
after Albania. There are no grounds whatsoever dix-huit mois ou deux ans plus tard que ne l'avait
~or such a step, since Albania, which submitted fait l'Albanie. On ne peut justifier <:ela, puisque
lts application first, is entitled to have that <l'Albanie, ayant ete la premiere a. presenter une
application voted on first, that is to say, before demande d'admission, peut exiger que sa demande
the others.
soit mise aux voix en premier lieu, c'est-a.:-dire
avant les autres.
J evais donner lecture du tableau dresse. par
I s?all read a list drawn up by the Secretariat·
sh~wmg the dates at which it received the appli- le Secretariat au sujet des pays candidats et de!i
catlOns for admission to the United Nations and dates de reception de leurs demandes au Secre,tariat de 1'Organisation des Nations Un,.ies.
from whom those applications were received.
L'Albanie a presente sa demande le 25 janvier
Albania submitted its application on 25 January
1946. I wish to draw the Council's attention to 1946. J'attire l'attention du Conseil sur cette date
the date, 25 January 1946, that is to say, more du 25 janvier 1946, qui indique que la demande
en qt+estion a ete presentee i1 y a plus de trois
than three and a half years ago.
ans et demi.
<

of these applications separately-perhaps I shall
do so, perhaps I shall discuss none of them-but
on principle I maintain that the three new mt;ffibers whom we happen to have on this Council are
fully entitled to submit what they want to submit
in connexion with these applications, separately
and not as a whole, if they so desire.

The Mongolian People's Republic submitted
its application on 24 June 1946, more than three

La Republique populaire· de Mongolie a presente
sa demande le 24 juin 1946, c'est-a,..dire i1 y a

24
years ago; Jordan submitted its application on
26 June 1946; Portugal on 2 August 1946; Ireland on 2 Augt'\st 1946; Hungary on 22 April
1947; Italy on 7 May 1947; Austria on 2 July
1947; Romania on 10 July 1947; Bulgaria on
26 July 1947; Finland on 19 September 1947;
Ceylon on 25 May 1948; Nepal on 13 February
1949.

plus de trois ans; la Jordanie a presente le sienne
le 26 juin 1946; le Portugal, le 2 aotit 1946;
l'Irlande, le 2 aotit 1946; la Hongrie, le 22 avril
1947; l'Italie, le 7 mai 1947; l'Autriche, le 2
juillet 1947; la Roumanie, le 10 juillet 1947; la
BUlgarie, le 26 juillet 1947; la Finlande, le 19
septembre 1947; Ceylan, le 25 mai 1948; le Nepal.
le 13 fevrier 1949.

What, then, was the further development of
this question?

Comment la question a-t-ell evolue ensuite?

Until now neither the Security Council nor
other organs of the United Nations have queried
the procedure to be followed when considering
these applications. That procedure was based on
the order in which applications were received.
An application submitted earlier was considered
and put to the vote earlier; an application received later was considered and put to the vote
later.

J usqu'a present, ni le Conseil de securite, ni
aucun des autres des Nations Unies n'a mis en
doute l'ordre a suivre lors de l'examen de ces
demandes. Elles ont toujours ete examinees dans
l'ordre meme de leur presentation. Les demandes
qui avaient ete presentees les premieres ant ete
examinees et mises aux voix avant les autres.

It was precisely in that order that the Sectirity
Le Comite d'admission de nouveaux Membres,
Council Committee on the Admission of New que nous connaissons tous, a suivi precisement
Members, with which we are all familiar, con- cette methode pour examiner les demandes qu'il
sidered the applications received; in other words, avait re<;ues; il a etudie en premier lieu la deit began by considering the applications of Al- mande de l'Albanie, puis celle de la Repulbique
bania, the Mongolian People's Republic and then - populaire . de Mongolie, puis toutes les autres dethe others in the order of their reception. The mandes, en respectant l'ordre dans lequel eUes
Security Council at its previous meetings followed avaient ete presentees. Au cours des seances preexactly the same method, while at this meeting cedentes, le Conseil de securite a suivi exactement
it suddenly rejects this logical, objective and, I la meme methode. Et voici que, a la seaniCe
should have thought, honest order of considering d'aujourd'hui, on rejette cette methode logique,
applications and gives preference to the seven consciencieuse et, permettez-moi de le dire, imOr eight countries whose admission to the United partiale, d'examiner les demandes d'admission,
Nations is ~upported by the United States, the et on choisit arbitrairement les sept ou huit pays
United Kingdom and others.
que les Etats-Unis, le Royaume-Uni et quelques
~lt1tres tiennent a voir admettre a l'Organisation
des Nations Unies.
We all know that the Anglo-American bloc
favours the admission of such countries as
Jordan, Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Austria, Finland,
Ceylon and Nepal, w; ~le it objects to the admission of Albania, the Mongolian People's RepUblic,
Hungary, Romania and Bulgaria because of the
internal political regimes of those people's democracies. The United States cannot endure the
progressive and democratic; regimes of those
countries nor the independence of their policies;
hence it blocks their admission to membership in
the United Nations.

Nous n'ignorons pas que, si le bloc angloamericain soutient les candidatures de pays tels
que la Jordanie, le Portugal, l'Irlande, l'Italie,
l'Autriche, la Finlande, Ceylan et le Nepal, et
s'eleve contre l'admission de l'Albanie, de la
Republique populaire de Mongolie, de la Hongrie,
de la Roumanie et de la Bulgarie a l'Organisation
des Nations Unies, c'est a cause du regime politique qui est en vigueur dans les pays de democratie
populaire. Les Etats-Unis n'aiment pas le regime
progressiste et democratique de ces pays, ni l'independance de leur politique, et c'est en raison
de leur antipathie pour ce regime qu'ils empechent
ces pays d'entrer a l'Organisation des Nations
Unies.

Thus we see that this policy of discrimination
against some countries and of' favouritism to
others makes itself felt even in the question of
the order in which the Council should consider
and vote upon the applications received. In
deciding this question, those who pursue that
policy do not wish to take into account the dates
at. which the applications were submitted.

Cette politique de discrimination envers certains pays et de favoritisme envers d'autres pays
se ,manifeste encore' aujourd'hui, lorqu'il s'agit
de determiner l'ordre. dans lequel il conviendrait
d'examiner et de mettre aux voix les demandes
d'admission re<;ues. En envisageant cette question,
ceux qui poursuivent cette politique ne veulent
pas tenir compte des dates auxquelles les differentes demandes ontete presentees.
-

The demand of the Argentine representative
that his draft resolutions should be voted first
is entirely unjustified; and we cannot agree that
the applications of the seven countries referred
to in those drafts should be voted on first, while
the Council has before it the application of AIbania, submitted as long ago as 25 January 1946,
and others. The applications of Albania, the

La pretention du representant de l'Argentine,
qui demande qu'en premier lieu on mette aux
voix ses propres projets de resolution, est absolument indefendable. Nousne pouvons pas accepter
que l'on mette aux voix en premier lieu les
demandes des sept pays mentionnes dans ces
projets. de resolutionalors que le Conseil elOt saisi
de la demande d'admission de .1'Albanie qui a

!:_=~~~~~~=~~=:=~~J~:~~i~:=~'::::~:,:~:~=::~;:::...I

p----

25

demandes d'admission. 11 faut mettre aux voix
les demandes d'admission de l'Albanie, de la
Republique populaire de Mongolie et des autres
pays dans l'ordre chronologique ou ces demandes
ont ete presentees.
That is what we should do. Any other order
C'est cette procedure que nous sommes tenus
of consideration and voting would represent a de suivre. Accepter toute autre methode pour
radical departure from an objective and just l'examen et la mise aux voix des demandes de
treatment of the question of the admission of pays ayant sollicite leur admission cl l'Organisaapplicant States to membership in the United tion equivaudrait cl adopter une attitude injuste
et partiale.
Nations.
QueUe est la situation en realite? Le 16 juin,
What is happening in fact? On 16 June the
Argentine representative hastened to indicate le representant de l'Argentine s'est empresse de
his desire to be the first to spea}i:. I too had demander la parole en premier. Moi aussi, j'avais
intended to speak first and I asked Mr. Sunde, l'intention de le faire et j'avais demande cl
who was then President, to allow me to be the M. Sunde, qui etait alors President du ConseH, de
first to spe'lk on the question of the admission of m'inscrire en tete de la liste des orateurs sur la
new Members. But he replied that the Argentine question de 1'admission de nouveaux Membres;
representative had asked to speak first; howev~r, toutefois, il m'a repondu que le representant de
if he agreed, the order of the speeches might be l'Argentine avait ete le premier a. demander la
changed.
parole, mais que, si M. Arce y consentait, il serait
possible d'intervertir l~ordre des orateurs.
I did not insist. If the Argentine representaJ e n'ai pas insiste. Puisque le represent:mt de
tive wished to speak first, I would not stand in l'Argentine avait exprime le desir d'etre le prehis way. It was in that way that he introduced mier a. prendre la parole, il y avait bien droit.
his draft resolutions. I. would' ask, however, C'est ainsi qu'il a eu la pOGsibilite de presenter
whether we should allow ourselves to be guided ses projets de resolution. Mais ce fait, purement
by such purely fortuitous circumstances in de- ac.cidentel, peut-il determiner aujourd'hui notre
ciding the order in which we shall vote. Is this decision quant a. l'ordre dans lequel on procedera
order anything but fortuitous? No, we cannot aux votes? 11 s'agit la. d'un ordre purement forlet ourselves be guided by chance in this question; tuit, et le Conseil n'est pas fonde a. l'adopter;
we must follow a logical and objective order, il doit suivre en effet la methode logique et objecthat is 1:0 say, the chronological order of suJ:>- tive qui consiste a. examiner' les demandes dans
mission of applications.
l'ordre meme ou e1les ont ete presentees.
J e voudrais faire encore une observation. Le
I wish to make a further observation. Mr.
Sunde, speaking in the Security Council even premier a. prendre la parole au Conseil de securite
before the Argentine representative, made a fut M. Sunde, qui, avant meme que le representant
preliminary statement [427th meeting] on the de l'Argentine ne fUt intervenu, formula [427eme
question of the admission of new Members, in seance] quelques observations preliminaires au
which he advanced a suggestion to which refer- sujet de l'admission de nouveaux Meinbres cl
ence has been made today by other representa- l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Dans ses obsertives and in particuJar by the representative of vations, il avait expose la proposition qu'ont
Egypt. That suggestion, which I have already mentionnee aujourd'hui d'autres representants,
commented upon, was to the . effect that if the particum~rement celui de l'Egypte. Cette suggesvarious countries did not change their position tion, a. laqueUe je me suis deja. refere, consistait
and. if no proposal were submitted making it a. dire que, si la position des membres du Conseil
posslb1e to hope that anyone of the applicant demeurait inchangee et si aucune proposition
States would be admitted to membership, there permettant d'esperer qu'un des Etats candidats
was in his opinion no need to vote on these puisse etre admis aux Nations Unies n'etait pre··
applications.
sentee, il n'y aurait pas lieu de mettre aux voix
ces demandes de l'Argentine.
Cette suggestion a ete faite~vant que le repre. That suggestion was made befor~ the Argentme representative spoke. Since we are being so sentant de l'Argentine ne prenne la parole. Puisoverscrupulous as to feel that we must vote first qu'on tient cl se montrer pointilleux en ce qui
on the hastily ,submitted Argentine draft resolu- concerne 1es propositions formulees avec une teUe
tions, .it should be noted that the first proposal precipitation par M. Arce, et puisqu'on veut 1es
to be lntroduced was that of. our President, Mr. mettre aux voix en tout premier lieu, il convient
Sunde, at the opening of the 427th meeting, on de rappeler que la premiere proposition a. etre
16 June. We might therefore follow the course soumise fut celle de M. Sunde, notre President;
of taking up this proposal and seeing whether en dIet, ce1ui-d l'avait .formulee dans Son disthe members of the Council agree with it. If cours d'ouverture a. la 427eme seance du Conseil
the majority of the members agree, this will de securite tenue le 16 juin dernier; Si l'on tient
represent a decision of the Security Council and done a. suivre cette voie, il faut examiner cette
all other proposals will fall. If, however, the proposition et voir si les membres .du Conseil
majonty still wishes to vote again on the appli- J'approuvent. En acceptant cette proposition, la
catlOns for admission to the United Nations, majoritedu Consei1 aura adopte une decision qui
then, as I have already said, the only legal pro- dispensera le Conseil de securite d'examiner 1es
ced?re would be to vote upon them in chrono- autres resolutions. Si, toutefois,'la majorite delogIcal order, that is to say, in the order in which sire qu'il soit a. nouveau procede a. un vote sur
they were received.
1es demandes d'admission a. l'Organisation, alors
le seul ordre legitime serait, comme je 1'ai deja.
dit, l'ordre chrono10gique, c'est-a.-dire l'ordre dans
. leque1 les demandes ont eie presentees.
put to the vote first, in the chronological order
of their submission.

"'llLl.II·!IIJ.LI"'II!!·Illl.lIltZIii!·"!IlIJ!If;'~!!iI·!llI·

!!I\i_""'·IiIlI·lliIirlliSl'lI!ile

"iWl~

"

·11110

,

.'

_

_

26
I now come to the question of the draft resoJ'aborde maintenant la question du projet de
ltttion presented by the USSR delegation. The resolution presente par la delegation de l'Union
revised version [S/1340/Rev.l], which I sub- . sovietique. Le texte revise [S/1340/Rev.l] de
mitted this morning [440th meeting], reads as cette proposition que j'ai soumis ce matin
follows:
[440eme seance] est le suivant:

"The Sec1trity Council,
"Having considered the applications of Albania,
the Mongolian People's Republic, Trans-Jordan
(Jordan), Portugal, Ireland, Hungary" Italy,
Austria, Romania, Bulgaria, Finland, Ceylon and
Nepal for admission to membership in the United
Nations,
"Recommends to the General Assembly that
the above-mentioned countries be admitted to
membership in the United Nations."
This draft resolution lists all the applications

in the order of submission, that is to say, beginning with Albania, which was the first to apply,
and ending with Nepal, which was the last to
do so. There is consequently every reason why
this draft resolution should be put to the vote
first; then all the other questions will be
eliminated.
If, therefore, the Council still comes to the
conclusion that a vote is necessary, 1 'would
urge that the USSR draft resolution should be
voted on first and that Albania should be the
first country on which we vote. The delegation
of the Soviet Union will object strongly to any
other procedure, since any other procedure would
be illegal ,and arbitrary. We shall object if the
S~curity Council casts its vote in an arbitrary
manner even though that should be done as the
result of a majority decision.

"Le Conseil de sccuritc,

a

"AWnt examine les demandes d'admission
l'Organisation des Nations Unies presentees par
l'Albanie, la Republique populaire de Mongolie,
la Transjordanie (Jordanie), le Portugal, l'Irlande, la Hongrie, l'Italie, l'Autriche, la Roumanie, la Bulgarie, la Finlande, Ceylan et le
Nepal,
"Reco11tmande a l'Assemblee generale d'admettre les Etats designes cl-dessus a l'Organisation
des Nations Unies."
Ce projet de resolution enumere toutes les
demandes d'admission dans l'ordre de leur presentation, c'est-a-dire en commencsant par l'AIbanie, qui a soumis sa demande la premiere, et
en finissant par le Nepal qui a pose sa candidature le dernier. En consequence, c'est a cette
resolution que revient la priorite absolue pour
etre mise aux voix et, dans ces conditions, toutes
les autres questions disparaitraient.
C'est pourquoi, si malgre tout le Conseil de
securite vient a conclure qu'il est indispensable
de proceder a un vote, j'insisterai pour que le
projet de resolution soumis par le representant
de I'URSS soitmis aux voix avant les autres
et pour que la premiere demande a faire l'objet
d'un vote soit celle de l'Albanie. La delt~gation
de I'Union sovietique s'opposera categoriquement
a toute autre methode de vote, car toute autre
methode sera entachee d'illega.lite et d'arbitraire.
N ous nous opposerons a ce que le Conseil de
securite - ft1t~e par une decision :prise a la
maj orite des voix - s'acquitte de sa tache en
suivant un ordre arbitraire.

Furthermore, if it is decided, as the United
States representative insists, that the application
of each country in our draft resolution should be
voted upon separately-a suggestion which we
oppose--then we consider it essential that there
should be a separ?-te discussion with respect to
each country.

D'autre part, si notre projet de resolution doit
faire l'objet d'une decision du genre de celle
que reclame le representant des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique, .qui veut qu'il soit procede a un
vote separe sur chacun des pays - procedure
contre laquelle nous protestons - nous demanderons une discussion separee sur chacun des pays
candidats.

The PRESIDENT: I could reply at once to the
statement which has just been made by the representative of the USSR, but in view of the lateness of the hour, I propose to the Council that
we might adjourn now, and I should like to
reserve to myself the right of making that .reply
at the beginning of our next meeting, unless, of
course, in the interval, the representative of the
USSR indicates that his attitude has in any way
been modified.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'ang1ais) : Je pourrais repondre immediatement a la declaration que
vient de faire le representant de l'URSS, mars,
etant donne l'heure tardive, je propose de lever
maintenant la seance tout en me reservant le
droit de faire cette reponse au debut de notre
prochaine seance, a moins, bien entendu, que,
dans l'intervalle, le representant de l'URSS n'ait
fait connaitre qu'il avait modifie son attitude de
quelque maniere quece soit.

Comme il n'y a pas d'objections, je tiens pour
As there are no objections, I take it ,that the
Council is prepared to adjo1.lrn now. Before acquis que le Conseil est pret a lever la seance.
doing so, we have, to consider when we shall meet .Avant de le faire, il faut que nous decidions
next. I am afraid that we have to recognize that quand nous nous reunirons la prochaine fois.
our work is going along rather slowly. The Nous sommes obliges de reconnaitre, j e le crains,
General Assembly is approaching, and we shall que nos travaux n'avancent que lentement. La
therefore probably have to have quite a number session de l'Assemblee generale ,approche, et il
of meetings in the course of 'the next few days. va falloil', par consequent, que nous tenions un
I was going to propose that if the membe'rs of assez grand nombre de seances dans les quelques
the Council would agree, we should meet again jours a venir. Je proposerais que, si les membres
on Tuesday morning, 13 September, with the du Conseil y consentent, ,nous nous re lissions
possibility .of continuing that afternoon. That de nouveau le mardi 13 septembre, dans la matigives a little interval. I am optimistic enough still nee, et que nous continuions event~el1e~ent7

1:4

..

-----------2i~------------

to hope that members might reflect durimg that
interval upon how they can expedite our work
and avoid, so far as they can, unnecessarily contentious subjects, and, above all, how they can
shorten their remarks, if there again they find
it possible, on questions of procedure, which
occupy such an undue amount of our time.

debat dans l'apres-midi du meme jour. Cela nous
donnera un peu de repit. Mon optimisme me
laisse esperer que, dans l'intervalle, les membres
du Conseil vont refle~hir sur la fac;on dont ils
pourraient hater nos travaux en evitant, dans la
mesure du possible, les sujets donnant lieu a
des controverses inutiles et, surtout en abregeant
leurs observations - touj ours s'ils le jugent possible - sur les questions de procedure qui nous
prennent beaucoup trop de temps.

Since ! hear no objection, I take it that the
Security Council agrees to meet again at 10.30
l.m. on Tuesday, 13 September.

Comme je n'entends formuler aucune objection, je considere comme acquis que le Conseil
de securite pourra se reunir de nouveau le mardi
13 septembre a 10 h. 30.

The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

Le seance est levee a18 heures.

(

SALES AGENTS OF THE UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIO
DEPOSITA'RES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UN
FINLAND-FINLANDE

ARGENTlfIIA-ARGENTINE

Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI

Editoria. ,damericana S.A.
Alsma 50L
BUENOS AmEs
AUSTRALlA~AUSTRALlE

FRANCE

H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.

Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Soufllot
PARIS, ye

255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S; W.

BELGIUM-BELGIQUE

GREECE-GRECE

Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A.
14·22 rue du Pe.i'sil
BRUXELLES

"Eleftheroudakis"
Lihrairie mtemationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHENES

BOLlVIA__BOl.lVIE

GUATEMALA

Lihrena Cientifica y Literaris
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ

Jose Goubaud
Gouhaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA

CANADA
The Ryerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO

HAITI

CHILE-CHill
Edmundo Pizarro'
Merced 846
SANTIAGO

CHINA-CHINE
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGIL\I

COLOMBIA-COLOMBIE
Lihrerfa Latina Ltda.
Aparladll ~6J;eo "';'011
BOGOU

COSTA RICA-COSTA-RICA
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JosE

CUBA
La Casa 'Belga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA.1IAEANA

CZECHOSLOVAKIATCFlECOSLOVAQUIE
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1
DEN~RK-DANEMARK

Einar Munksgaard
N56rregade 6
K$15BENHAVN

, DOMINICAN REPUBLICREPUBLlQUE DOMINICAINE
Lilireria Dominicana
CalIe Mercedes No. 49
Apartado 656
CIUDAD· TnUJILLO

ECUADOR-EQUATEUR
Muiioz Hermanos y Cia.
NueV'e de Octubre 703
Casilla 10·24
C;UA.YAQUIL

,

Max. Bouchereau
Lwrairie "A la Carave11e"
BOlte postale 11l~B
PORT-AU-PRINCE
~ELAND-ISLANDE

.. Bokaverzlun Sigfusar Eymundsonnar
Austurstreti 1 8 '
REYKJA~

INDIA-INDE
Oxford Book & Stationery Company
Scmdia House
NEWDELID

IRAN
BongahePiaderow
731· Shah Avenue
TEHERAN

'IRAQ-IRAK Mackenzie & Mackenzie
l'he Bookshop
BAGHDAD

LEBANON-L1BAN
Librairie universelle
BEYROUTH

LUXEMBOURG
Librairie J. Schummer
Place Guillaume
LUXEMBOURG

NETHERLAND5-PAYSaBAS
N. Y. Mariinus Nijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9
's-GRAVENHAGE

NEW ZEALANDNOUVELLE-ZELANDE
Gordon & Gotch: Ltd.
Waring Taylor Street
WELLINGTON
United Nations Association of
New Zealand
P. O. 1011,G.P.o.
WELLINGTON

EGYPT-EGYPTE

NICARAGUA

nTHIOPIA-EiHIOPIE

NORWAY-NORVEGE

Lihrairie "La Renaissance d'Egyp~e"
9 Sh.Adly Pasha
'·C.AtRO
Agenceethiopienne de publicite
P.O. Box 8
J\l)DIS.ABEBA

Prinkdin the U.S.A.

Ramiro ·Ramfrez V.
Agencia de Publicaciones
MANAGUA, D. N.
Johan Grundt Tanum Forlag
Kr. Augustgt.7A
OSLO
Price in United States: 30 cents

PERU-PEROU

Lihreria internaciona1den~
S.A.
,
Casilla 1417

LIMA

PHILIPPINES
D. P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN, R!zAr..

POLAND-POLOGNE
Spotdzielna Wydawnicza
"Czytelnik"
38 Poznanska
WARSZAWA

SWEDEN-SUEDE
A.-B. C. E. Fritzes Kungl.
Hofbokhandel
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM

SWITZI5RLAND-SUISSE
Lihrairie Payot S. A. LAUSANNE, GENEVE, VEVEY,
.MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Rauuhardt
Kirchgasse 17
. ZURICHI

SYRIA-SYRIE
Librairie universelie
DAMAS

TURKEY:-·TURQUIE
Librairie Hachette
469 ·Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU·!sTANBUL

UNION OF SOUTH AFRICAUNION SUD-AFRICAINE
Central News Agency
, Commissioner & Rissik Sts.
JOHANNESBURG and at CAPBTO
and DURBAN

UNITED KINGDOMROYAUME-UNI
H. M. Stationery Office
P. O. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shops in ,
LONnON, EDINBURGH, MANe
CAIwIFl?, BELl?AST, BIRMINGHA
and ..BRISTOL

UNITED STATES Of AMERICA
ETATS..UNIS D'AMERIQUE'
.International Documents Servic
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N,Y.

URUGUAY
Oficma de Representaci6n de
Editoriales
Av. 18 de J ulio 1333 Esc.1
MONTEVIDEO

VENEZUELA
Escritoria Perez Machado
Condea Piiiango 11
CARACAS

YUGOSLAVIA-YOUGOSLA
Drzavno Preduzece
J ugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska Ul.36
BEOGRAD
