S/PV.8147

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8147th meeting

Thursday, 21 December 2017, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Kandeel
Mr. Woldegerima
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Biagini
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2017/1056)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-45789 (E)
*1745789*

S/PV.8147

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.

I now give the floor to Mr. Yamamoto.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2017/1056)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Canada,
Germany, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Netherlands, Pakistan, Turkey and Uzbekistan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan; Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime; and Ms. Wazhma Frogh, founding member
of the Women and Peace Studies Organization and
member of Afghanistan’s High Peace Council.
Mr. Fedotov and Ms. Frogh are joining today’s
meeting via video-teleconference from Vienna and
Kabul, respectively.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Her Excellency
Ms. Joanne Adamson, Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
delegation of the European Union to the United Nations,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/1056, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Yamamoto; Mr. Fedotov; Ambassador
Kairat Umarov, Permanent Representative of
Kazakhstan, in his capacity as the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011); and Ms. Frogh.
2/37

21/12/2017

Mr. Yamamoto: As this calendar year closes, we
are still left to tackle the issue that concerns us most
in Afghanistan: a convincing peace process to end the
40 years of conflict, which have left 39 per cent of the
population under the poverty line, including 3.3 million
in acute need of humanitarian aid.
One year ago in the Council, I called upon all
Afghans to come together and find ways to build their
own joint future. I also called upon each country of
the region to help create an environment conducive to
peace in Afghanistan and the region. We must use the
upcoming winter months, when conflict levels tend to
decrease, to advance on this issue before the cycle of
violence is renewed next spring.
How can this be done? The Kabul Process
meeting planned for 1 February offers an opportunity.
At the meeting, the Government of Afghanistan is
expected to present its strategic concept for reaching
a political settlement with the armed opposition and
seek the support of the international community.
This chance must not be missed. The Government
and the international partners must focus on how we
can reduce the levels of violence next year. We must
also seek commencement of a structured dialogue for
peace. I once again call on the Taliban to express a clear
willingness to begin negotiations towards a political
settlement and to start the initial dialogue.
I welcome the increased consultations among
the countries in the region about securing peace in
Afghanistan. Countries in the region recognize that
they have a common stake in the future of Afghanistan.
Any regional consensus, however, must be built around
a clear policy. Regional efforts for peace also need to
be consolidated. That is why the Afghan Government’s
presentation to the Kabul Process conference is of such
great importance.
Another crucial issue is the holding of parliamentary
elections next year, followed by presidential elections
in April 2019. The holding of timely, credible and
accepted elections is indispensable to maintaining
the constitutional order and trust in the representative
system of government.
There has been, to be frank, insufficient progress
on electoral preparations. The lack of progress,
and intense criticism from electoral stakeholders,
led the Independent Election Commission to vote
17-45789

21/12/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

to remove its Chairman. The Commission needs to
demonstrably advance on electoral preparations to
regain its credibility.
On a positive note, on 6 December the Commission
finally announced the modalities that it will use to
conduct voter registration. If implemented as planned,
the process will result for the first time in a single,
complete voter register, as well as polling-station-based
voter lists. This will significantly cut down on fraud
by reducing the number of extra ballots that are
distributed. The United Nations technical support team
has been working closely with the Commission on
the operational concept for voter registration and will
assist the Commission in its implementation, though
this is ultimately a process that must be owned and led
by Afghan institutions. I should also like to underline
security as a defining factor enabling credible
and inclusive elections. The Afghan Government
needs to have a thorough security plan for this
democratic exercise.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) will continue its efforts to
advance women’s political participation. We recently
convened 13 dialogues across the country in which
women described in often poignant terms how their
participation as voters and candidates was obstructed
by corruption, conflict and conservative cultural
norms. Based upon these experiences, women offered
practical recommendations to bolster women’s strong
participation in the 2018 elections and beyond.
Despite an intense fighting season, recent efforts
by the Afghan security forces to protect civilians
have resulted in reductions in the number of civilian
deaths and injuries caused by those forces during
ground engagements. However, we remain concerned
by the continued indiscriminate use of improvised
explosive devices by anti-Government elements, as
well as civilian casualties from air strikes by proGovernment forces. All in all, the number of civilian
casualties remain at terribly high levels. I continue
to receive disturbing reports of child recruitment by
armed groups, mainly Da’esh and the Taliban. I urge
the parties to immediately cease this unlawful practice.
Afghanistan’s election to the Human Rights Council
provides an opportunity for all national institutions,
including the military, to deliver on public pledges to
comply with its international legal obligations. As an
initial step, I encourage the Government to ratify the

S/PV. 8147

Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture
and to withdraw its reservations to the Convention.
We often overlook the impact of Afghanistan’s
economy on its society and the conflict. The significant
reduction of the international military presence in 2014
led to a collapse in economic growth, from 10 per cent
to minus 2 per cent. This year, Afghanistan is expected
to record positive growth for the second year, but not
enough to absorb the 400,000 young Afghans who
annually seek to join the labour force. At the same time,
the illicit economy is expanding, as demonstrated by
the massive increase in opium production recorded by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in 2017.
Narcotics trades are known to be a source of funds for
insurgencies. We must pay more focused attention to
those issues and reinforce our efforts.
If the vision of Afghan economic development is to
succeed, the Afghan National Peace and Development
Framework must be supported. The entire United
Nations family is engaged in a continuing dialogue with
the President on better aligning the work of the United
Nations to support the Framework, providing value for
money and demonstrating impact. The Government’s
goal is to reduce reliance on aid and secure its own
tax base. That will require intense efforts to stimulate
the private sector, reduce corruption and red tape,
and build infrastructure that allows Afghanistan to
benefit from its central geographic location. Once
investment mechanisms and infrastructure are in
place, Afghanistan’s mineral wealth can be exploited.
Achieving that goal is possible. The past year has seen
important progress on infrastructure development, with
an eye to connecting Afghanistan to Europe through
the Caspian Sea and the Caucasus to the Arabian Sea.
Such developments demonstrate how Afghanistan’s
relationships with its neighbours present opportunities
for prosperity. But there are also obstacles. I am
particularly concerned about recent reports of
increased military activities between Afghanistan and
Pakistan. UNAMA has recorded some of the suffering
caused by such activities on local residents, including
civilian casualties, closures of education facilities and
population displacement. I call on the Governments of
Afghanistan and Pakistan to find ways of collaborating
more effectively to address that issue, which affects the
populations of both countries.
The achievements in regional cooperation are
encouraging, but the main dividends of regional

17-457893/37

S/PV.8147

The situation in Afghanistan

cooperation cannot be achieved until there is peace
and stability in Afghanistan. I do not believe that this
sequence can be reversed. In the coming months, there
must be significant progress on election preparations,
real attempts to reduce violence and a transition towards
a credible peace process. Because of the cyclical nature
of the conflict, opportunities that are missed in the next
three months will, in all likelihood, be missed for the
next year.
Before closing my remarks, we request members of
the Council to lend their political and financial support
to the implementation of the humanitarian response
plan, which addresses 3.3 million people who are in
need of such assistance.
We see the need to focus on seeking peace. The
United Nations is ready to do whatever it can, from
raising the importance of the issue, as I have tried to do
today, to using good offices for mediation, should that
be requested. I truly hope that empathy for the ongoing
suffering of millions of Afghans will move us all to
make the efforts necessary to achieve peace and realize
the important opportunities that lie beyond a muchneeded peace agreement.
The President: I thank Mr. Yamamoto for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: Like my friend and colleague,
Mr. Yamomoto, I addressed the Council on Afghanistan
a year ago (see S/PV.7844). At that debate, I reported
that the Afghanistan Opium Survey 2016 of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) showed
a worrying reversal in efforts to counter the problem
of illicit drugs and highlighted the need to address that
destructive threat.
Today, one year later, the situation has become
much worse. Our Afghanistan Opium Survey 2017
shows unprecedented highs in opium poppy cultivation
and production. Estimated production is up by almost
90 per cent to 9,000 metric tons. The area under poppy
cultivation has risen to 328,000 hectares. Those are
absolute records in the entire history of Afghanistan.
Let us make no mistake — we are facing a genuine crisis
and our response must be urgent, swift and decisive.
The expected surge in high-quality, low-cost
heroin may have a number of negative consequences
for Afghanistan, its neighbours and many other transit
or destination countries. Increased opiate consumption
4/37

21/12/2017

and related harms may be expected in many parts of the
world. Afghanistan and the international community
have struggled for many years to address the formidable
challenges posed by drugs and the related threats of
organized crime, terrorism and corruption. Recent
analysis confirms the interregional links between
organized crime and terrorist groups that exploit
drug trafficking.
At the 2016 Brussels Conference on Afghanistan,
partners of Afghanistan endorsed the ambitious reform
agenda presented by the Afghan Government and
pledged continued political and financial funding to
support the country on its path towards stability and
development. Nevertheless, we must recognize that in
recent years attention has progressively shifted away
from the threats posed by drugs. We must reverse that
trend or risk the further expansion and destabilizing
influence of non-State actors, organized criminal
groups and violent terrorists. What priority steps need
to be taken?
First and foremost, comprehensive counternarcotics programmes that mainstream drugs in
national development agendas are essential. That
includes promoting alternative development in order to
create new jobs, as well as access to education, financial
services and markets for farmers and their families.
Secondly, in order to ensure effective operational
responses to reduce supply, we must focus on all aspects
of counter-narcotics capacity-building in Afghanistan,
including support for intelligence-led investigations,
controlled delivery, eradication programmes, the
dismantling of opium processing labs, integrated
border management, financial intelligence units and
law enforcement, as well as prosecutorial capacities, in
order to disrupt criminal networks.
Thirdly, we need to further strengthen regional and
international cooperation in order to stop precursor
chemicals from being diverted and trafficked into
Afghanistan for the purpose of manufacturing heroin.
Fourthly, we must continue to build the interdiction
capacities of key countries along trafficking routes with
an eye to enhancing long-term effectivenessm, rather
than focusing on immediate seizures.
Fifthly, we need to intercept illicit financial flows
and support effective prosecution, as well as asset
confiscation and asset recovery.
17-45789

21/12/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

Finally, prevention and treatment responses must
be urgently scaled up, most of all in Afghanistan,
which continues to struggle with the severe health
consequences of opiate misuse.
UNODC is working with Afghanistan, neighbouring
countries and the wider region to promote the integrated
responses needed, in line with the Sustainable
Development Goals and the recommendations of
the special session of the General Assembly on the
world drug problem. We are currently seeking to step
up regional and interregional action to counter the
increases in opium cultivation and production and
respond to related threats of crime, terrorism and
corruption. That includes comprehensive and inclusive
support to implement the Afghan National Drug Action
Plan 2015-2019, with Afghanistan in the lead.
But we cannot succeed without the engagement
and renewed commitment, including financial
commitments, of Member States. The international
community cannot afford to do less. I thank the Council
for the attention that it has given to this urgent problem.
As always, UNODC stands ready to support the Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Umarov.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank you, Sir,
for the opportunity to brief the Council on the work
of the Committee pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011)
pertaining to Afghanistan and the Taliban. I am also
thankful to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Yamamoto and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their support of
the work of the 1988 Sanctions Committee.

S/PV. 8147

Afghan Government. No additional individuals or
entities have been delisted this year, nor have any
individuals or entities been added to the 1988 sanctions
list. The Committee has reason to be optimistic in
the coming months, as there are indications that
the Afghan Government and other members may
request the delisting of several individuals to further
facilitate the peace and reconciliation efforts. In that
context, the delisting of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar earlier
this year by the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, as requested by the
Afghanistan Government, has had a positive impact on
the peace and reconciliation process. Since the delisting,
Mr. Hekmatyar has been participating in the political
process in Afghanistan, strengthening the prospects for
reconciliation of other individuals in the future.
Ever since the death of the previous Taliban leader,
Mullah Mansour, in 2016, the leadership ranks of
the Taliban have continued to face internal friction,
primarily between the pro-Mansour faction and the
new leader Haibatullah Akhundzada, who is not
yet listed. The Monitoring Team’s latest report (see
S/2017/409), submitted to the Committee in May, noted
that the reasons for dissent are primarily the question
of Haibatullah Akhundzada’s ability to lead militarily
and over the distribution of finance, in particular funds
formerly controlled by Mullah Mansour.

The 1988 Committee’s chief aim is to deter the
Taliban and associates through the use of tools,
such as a global assets freeze, global travel ban and
global arms embargo. At the same time, the 1988
sanctions regime is intended to support the peace
and reconciliation process, including through the use
of the delisting process and the process of granting
exemptions to enable listed persons to engage in peace
and reconciliation negotiations and other approved
activities. The existence of the 1988 sanctions regime
matters to the Taliban. Removal from what the Taliban
call the United Nations blacklist is consistently in the
top three demands of the group.

But those internal dissensions have not affected the
Taliban’s military capabilities. As a result, 2017 has also
been a difficult year in terms of security challenges. As
in previous years, the Taliban have retained the ability
to conduct attacks against Afghan forces, the Afghan
people and the international presence in Afghanistan, in
spite of the sanctions measures. Indeed, the Monitoring
Team’s report predicted a very challenging fighting
season, with the Taliban potentially threatening several
provincial capitals, both in the north and the south of the
country. That has been borne out since then, indicating
that despite considerable losses, the fighting strength of
the Taliban has not diminished. Those clashes continue
to be funded mainly by the narcotics economy and the
illegal extraction of natural resources. The situation is
also complicated by the presence of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and foreign terrorist fighters
in Afghanistan.

In 2017, the 1988 Committee has delisted one
reportedly deceased individual at the request of the

However, it is important to note that in spite of initial
losses to the Taliban, Afghan Government forces have

17-457895/37

S/PV.8147

The situation in Afghanistan

managed to maintain control over provinces and district
headquarters that initially came under heavy attack
by the Taliban. That indicates that the Government’s
fighting capacity is improving, in no small measure due
to the consistent support and assistance it has received
from the international presence in Afghanistan.
While there are many structures and frameworks
in place for the implementation of the 1988 sanctions
regime, implementation is dependent not only on
internal actors, but also on regional and international
actors. The Committee would therefore like to
encourage Member States to play a more active role
in providing information that would help to keep the
sanctions list as up-to-date as possible.
A worrying development has been the large-scale
increase in opium production in Afghanistan, which
continues to fuel the Taliban’s activities. The Afghanistan
Opium Survey 2017, published in November by the
Government of Afghanistan and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, highlighted an increase of
87 per cent in opium production, rising to 9,000 tons
from its 2016 level of 4,800 tons. That clearly needs to
be addressed, as Taliban involvement in illegal opium
production and trade may have provided the group
with an estimated $400 million in annual income in
2016. Cutting off that financial stream would have a
significant impact on the Taliban’s ability to resource
its offensive against the Government of Afghanistan.
The overall effectiveness of the 1988 sanctions
measures also relies on close coordination with the
Government of Afghanistan and region. One of the
reasons why I travelled to Afghanistan in October as
Chair of the 1988 and 1267 sanctions committees was
to engage directly with interlocutors in the Afghan
Government. I was pleased with the level of engagement
the delegation received while in Kabul, including
meetings with President Ghani, Chief Executive
Abdullah and other senior Government officials. The
meetings in Kabul showed that there is potential for
greater use of the 1988 sanctions regime to deter the
Taliban and support the peace process. Towards that
end, I was briefed on the Government’s efforts to
identify Taliban members for potential delisting in the
coming months in order to strengthen the peace and
reconciliation efforts.
At the same time, renewed efforts are also needed
to list individuals and entities associated with the
Taliban who are not yet on the sanctions list but who
6/37

21/12/2017

carry out activities harmful to the peace and security
of Afghanistan. The legal frameworks are in place
to implement the sanctions measures, but structures
are effective only against listed individuals who are
identifiable. While there are many associates of the
Taliban currently not on the list, some listed individuals
lack sufficient identifiers that would enable the
countermeasures to function more effectively. Those
measures are effective not only within Afghanistan,
but also and particularly against cross-border flows of
money, narcotics, arms and foreign terrorist fighters.
Those are challenges that extend to the wider region,
and the sanctions regime can support the region in
meeting those challenges.
The Committee is keen to assist the Government
of Afghanistan in making wider use of the tools
offered by the 1988 sanctions regime. In that respect,
the Committee awaits the Government’s proposals
regarding the sanctions list updates. The Committee
once again urges all Member States to assist in the
sincere implementation of the sanctions measures
to enhance its effectiveness. The Committee looks
forward to continued close engagement with UNAMA,
Afghanistan and regional States under the chairmanship
of Kazakhstan in 2018.
The President: I thank Ambassador Umarov for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Frogh.
Ms. Frogh: I would like thank you, Sir, the Japanese
Ambassador and President of Security Council this
month, for inviting me to participate in this meeting. I
would like to congratulate the members of the Security
Council on standing for peace and justice around the
world. The people of my country have great hopes of
this important institution on global justice.
In light of the ongoing armed conflict and sustained
violence against civilians, especially Afghan women,
it is particularly significant for me to be here. I have
been advocating for women’s participation in peace
and security processes for the past 20 years, having
previously worked for gender and human rights at the
Ministry of Interior and Defence. I am currently one
of the 12 women at the 70-member Afghanistan High
Peace Council, but I am speaking as a civil society
activist today.
The National Unity Government has appointed a
number of Afghan women to leadership and management
17-45789

21/12/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

positions in the Cabinet and as governors, judges and
prosecutors, and has increased efforts to increase the
number of women in the police and army. I would like
to recognize the efforts of Afghanistan’s First Lady in
standing in solidarity with Afghan women.
Many Afghans, and I myself, see Afghanistan
moving in the right direction. However, there are
major concerns, especially about the convening of
parliamentary and presidential elections on time.
Afghans want an elected Government and elected
members of Parliament and provincial and district
councils, as those are important elements of checks and
balance for effective governance.
While every Afghan is asking for democracy and
justice, the impact of local armed groups, Taliban,
affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) and some political figures have hampered the
process for transitional justice and civil liberties
for Afghanistan. We are still considered to be one of
the most dangerous countries for media freedom and
for journalists, and have not seen due processes to
prosecute those elements that put the life of Afghan
men and women journalists at risk.
Despite national and international commitments
to women’s empowerment in Afghanistan, only
one woman in the Government of Afghanistan is
female — the Minister of Women’s Affairs — while the
Afghan Parliament failed to elect another strong women
as the Minister of Mines and Petroleum. Also, there is a
small number of female Deputy Ministers and Director
Generals. It is a question not of lack of capacity, but of
lack of political will.
In 2017, the Afghanistan Human Rights Commission
reported more than 5,000 cases of severe violence
against women in different parts of the country, while
scores of such incidents go unregistered and unheard
in areas where the Government and media have no
access. Only one in three women can read and write.
The Taliban and now the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIS) affiliates are targetting women and
children indiscriminately to create fear and control in
Afghan communities. Just last week, a woman was shot
dead in public by the Taliban in Sar-e Pol, a northern
province, her brother having been accused of having
links to the Government. The ISIS-affiliated militants
in Jowzjan province, which is also in the north, have
reportedly taken away more than 300 children from
their families to unknown training camps, and reports

S/PV. 8147

of the provincial council members indicate that these
children — as young as six or seven — are being taught
how to become suicide bombers.
This year, we had more than 10 attacks on Shia
mosques in Kabul and other provinces that killed and
injured so many men, women and children. All of that
happens while the pro-Government armed militant
groups are still complicit in rape, abduction, forced
marriages and the extortion of women in families in
so many parts of the country. The political distance is
widening between the centre and the provinces.
Afghanistan’s national action plan on women,
peace and security, in line with resolution 1325 (2000),
was adopted in 2015 and was internationally celebrated
at that time. It is of great importance and relevance
to the lives of Afghan women, and yet it has not been
operationalized at the national and provincial levels.
The ongoing war is not being fought on the borders. It is
being fought in our communities, in our markets and in
our mosques. The Taliban assert their presence in our
communities and the first attacks are against women.
We are seeing our previous achievements relating to
women erode. However, Afghan women do not have a
role in decisions on how to combat insurgencies at the
national or local level.
The changing nature of conflict is evident in
Afghanistan — from an insurgency towards the brutal
killing of civilians and women, in particular, to the
radicalization of young men with violent extremist
ideologies. And this continues at very local levels,
where mothers and women can play a big role. Weak
governance, the abuse of police and armed forces in
communities, the lack of inclusion in local and national
processes and the impact of young boys are key to the
recruitment processes of the insurgents. The younger
generation does not have a place for meaningful
participation in political and Government structures,
and the lack of jobs and justice is driving thousands of
our youth to militancy and insurgency.
My organization has been documenting and
reporting on the impact of armed conflict on women
in communities. We received reports in August that
around 47 young women and girls between the ages
of 11 and 12 had been taken away by a group of ISIS
affiliates in the north to an unknown area. The families
and provincial Governments continue to deny this
disappearance because it would bring dishonour on

17-457897/37

S/PV.8147

The situation in Afghanistan

the families and call into question the ability of the
Government to protect its civilians.
As ISIS affiliates are emerging in different parts
of the country, their brutality against women and girls
has shocked us all. There are reports that last week,
French and Algerian fighters had arrived in the north
of the country to support the ISIS affiliates. That adds
to the already identified foreign fighters from Pakistan,
Chechnya and many Central Asian republics that are
fighting alongside the Taliban and ISIS.
On the peace and security sector reform, while a
negotiated settlement is the only solution for the end
of ongoing armed conflict with the Taliban, the peace
process needs to engage all Afghans from all walks of
life and social groups to ensure the sustainability of
the results. If insurgency is incentivized, many will
resort to violence to get the same incentives. While
the Afghanistan High Peace Council is mandated to
facilitate a national level peace process, the Council
itself is sidelined from the major political decisions
that are taken at the Government leadership levels.
Therefore, public trust in the High Peace Council has
not yet strengthened and the organization’s relevance
and importance is still being challenged. That was
revealed by communities during consultations in 24
provinces, carried out by the High Peace Council.
The security sector reform has started in the past
few months within the Ministry of the Interior and the
Ministry of Defence. We are seeing tangible results.
The bad news is that the participation of women is
still not the priority of reform. There are no women
in the leadership and management positions of these
institutions, when so many young women are risking
their lives for these institutions as police officers and
within the army. There is no systematic institutional
support yet. We women do not have a seat at the
Government’s National Security Council, where most
of the political and security decisions are made.
My recommendations follow. As the country is
moving towards reforms and improving institutional
capacities, the role and contributions of women should
not be ignored. The national action plan on resolution
1325 (2000), if implemented properly and adequately,
will bring women into national peace processes and
help boost trust in the Government. Women, children
and the elderly in rural areas suffer from the ongoing
violence perhaps even more than men in Afghanistan,
yet women and civil society are excluded from the peace
8/37

21/12/2017

and security processes, especially when negotiating
about the political peace being envisioned by the
leadership of the Government. Lasting peace can be
achieved only if women sit at the negotiation table with
men so that communities can become the guardians of
such an agreement. Women should be able to monitor
the impact of settlements on communities.
Civil society groups must be better supported
and resourced. The number of women’s organizations
closing is alarming, given that it these organizations are
the ones that are raising the voices of Afghan women and
that need funding and support to continue functioning.
We call on the international community and members
of the Security Council to ensure that specific funding
is allocated for women organizations as part of the
empowerment agenda and the implementation of the
national action plan. Women’s engagement in the
peace and security sector is a priority for all of us,
and the Security Council should call on the Afghan
Government and its international partners to work
alongside women’s organizations to develop clear plans
on how to increase the number of women and leadership
in the management of the security sector and how to
ensure a safe and enabling environment for women in
the police and army.
Lastly, we call on the Security Council to ensure
that the Afghan Government and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan develop, in
consultation with the female members of the High
Peace Council, clear procedures to engage and include
Afghan women in the peace negotiations with the
Taliban and other parties to the conflict at every stage
in order to ensure meaningful participation. We look
forward to our presence at the Kabul process and
meaningful participation at other international and
regional platforms from time to time.
The President: I thank Ms. Frogh for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Sir, for convening today’s debate on
the situation in Afghanistan. We are also grateful to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report,
as well as to my good friend, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
for his comprehensive briefing. We also thank United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Executive Director
17-45789

21/12/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

Yury Fedotov and Ms. Wazhma Frogh for joining us
here today.
As always, these debates provide an opportunity
to take stock of the situation in Afghanistan, progress
in related fields and challenges that remain. But above
all, it provides a clear reminder of the symbiotic
link between peace and stability in Afghanistan and
security in the global arena. We are pleased with
the new counter-terrorism focus on condition-based
support to Afghanistan and addressing regional
terrorist safe havens. That has brought new momentum
and, more broadly, an opportunity for key regional
and international partners to combat terrorism
more decisively.
As we speak, the so-called fighting season of the
Taliban and other terrorist groups has nearly ended.
Terrorists have failed to make any notable gains on
the ground and have suffered heavy losses in terms of
manpower and morale. Pressured militarily, they have
desperately resorted to soft-target attacks in urban areas.
Our security forces have proven their effectiveness
in countering terrorist elements in independently
conducted operations. We continue to clear territory in
different parts of Afghanistan from the presence of the
Taliban, Da’esh and other terrorist groups.
As of late, a significant number of senior Taliban
and Da’esh figures have been eliminated and captured,
including financiers, planners and recruiters, while
scores of attacks have been prevented and subverted.
Alongside those gains, we are now working to double
the size of our special forces and triple the size of our
airforce, with support from our international partners.
Consolidating our gains and achieving sustainable
peace requires a revamped diplomatic effort at the
regional and global levels and an inclusive process of
democratization domestically, leading our country in
the right direction. To accomplish these tasks, there is
a growing need to increase dialogue among regional
and global Powers, leading to enhanced regional
cooperation in developing mechanisms of verification
and coordination to eliminate threats arising from
terrorism and violent extremists.
In that context, Afghanistan welcomes recent
expressions of readiness on the part of President
Vladimir Putin of the Russian Federation to cooperate
with the United States in Afghanistan in the areas
of counter-terrorism and narcotics. We have always
deemed such cooperation to provide win-win

S/PV. 8147

opportunities to overcome shared challenges and
achieve common gains. We hope that this development
will help generate a new spirit of cooperation among
all regional countries, free from rivalry and competing
interests. It is our earnest hope that Afghanistan will
be seen by all partner countries outside the prism of
regional and international tensions. Let me assure the
Council of Afghanistan’s sincere intent to be a platform
of cordiality and fellowship for all.
Substantial improvements in the context
of Afghanistan-Pakistan bilateral relations and
cooperation remain an issue of crucial importance.
Recent collaborative measures, including the visit of
a senior military delegation to Pakistan and the visit
of a Pakistani parliamentary delegation to Kabul are
noteworthy developments. We are awaiting positive
outcomes on various outstanding issues, including
violations across the Durand Line, which is currently
a key hindrance to improving relations between our
two countries. Under the pretext of receiving fire
from our side, Pakistan’s violations across the Durand
Line, including indiscriminate artillery shelling,
have continued unabated throughout 2017, resulting
in the loss of innocent lives and the destruction of
villages. Our proposal for engagement and operational
coordination towards addressing those concerns has
not yet seen any response.
At the same time, Afghanistan has the will and
capacity to defend its territory and our patience should
not be tested. We believe that confidence-building
measures can be successful only when violations of that
nature come to a complete halt. In a similar vein, we are
also in communication on the imperative of addressing
terrorists’ regional safe havens, and hope to see positive
developments on that front soon. We look forward to
the upcoming trilateral meeting in Beijing next week
between the Foreign Ministers of Afghanistan, Pakistan
and China.
In the area of peace efforts, we remain focused on
providing a peaceful, dignified and fulfilling life to
all Afghans, free of conflict and insecurity. The Kabul
process, now fully operational, provides an overarching
framework to harmonize international and regional
efforts to help advance peace efforts. We look forward
to the next meeting of the process in February, at
which we will outline our renewed strategy to counter
terrorism and extremism and promote peace. That will
be an opportune moment for the Taliban to change
course, denounce violence and join the peace process.

17-457899/37

S/PV.8147

The situation in Afghanistan

Aside from regional dynamics and peace efforts,
we know that sustaining and consolidating past
achievements requires steady progress in advancing our
reform agenda and in strengthening political consensus
and national unity. To that end, the comprehensive
dialogue under way is geared towards ensuring the
credibility and transparency of future elections and
achieving common understanding on a number of
other pressing national issues, all of which bear crucial
importance for long-term stability in Afghanistan.
Success in that endeavour will require collective
efforts on the part of the Afghan Government and the
international community.
In recent times, we have seen a more proactive and
productive engagement at the highest level between
the United Nations and Afghanistan. We welcome
the Security Council’s Arria Formula meeting held
in November, held under the theme “Partners for
Afghanistan: linking security, development and peace
in the Central Asian region”, and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate’s joint meeting with
donor countries and Afghanistan, which underscored
enhanced development and counter-terrorism measures.
In the broader context of the United Nations
engagement in Afghanistan, the one United Nations
vision is steadily progressing, in collaboration with the
United Nations team on the ground. An adjusted United
Nations role will go a long way towards ensuring greater
coordination, coherence and efficiency among relevant
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, in
accordance with the reform agenda of our Government
and that of the Secretary-General.
Moreover, the adoption in November of General
Assembly resolution 72/10, on Afghanistan, once again
symbolized the international community’s strong
consensus on and support for stability and prosperity in
my country. Further, our accomplishment in the Human
Rights Council election and the successful adoption
of two Afghan-initiated resolutions countering the
threat posed by improvized explosive devices, as
well as the International Day of Remembrance of and
Tribute to the Victims of Terrorism, show our active
engagement and contribution at the global platform of
the United Nations.
In order to uphold the General Assembly’s
resolution on Afghanistan in letter and spirit, its
effective implementation is imperative. In the area of
security and counter-terrorism, the implementation of
10/37

21/12/2017

the sanctions regimes under resolutions 1988 (2011) and
1989 (2011) must improve if it is to succeed in helping
turn the tide against terrorism. Those sanction regimes
were put in place to restrict the operational capacity
freedom of movement of terrorists, as well as the flow
of material resources in the region, including illicit
arms and cash, which end up providing oxygen for
terror to thrive.
Yet, experience has shown that the sanction regimes
are lax at best and struggle to achieve the results for
which they were mandated. We hope that the necessary
adjustments on the part of relevant members of the
Security Council are made to enforce sanctions against
terrorists and extremists. Among the outstanding
issues to be addressed, the assets of former and current
Taliban leaders must be frozen so that they do not fund
the death and destruction of innocent civilians.
Furthermore, the listing and delisting of terrorist
groups and associated elements must be based on
existing evidence and proper technical appraisal,
shielded from politicization and manipulation by
certain States. We are looking forward to increasing
our engagement with the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism (OCT). A relationship of mutual
trust between OCT and the Government of Afghanistan
will be pivotal as we strengthen our reliable partnership
to eliminate terrorism in all its forms.
This year has seen major progress in the steady
implementation of mega-regional projects that have
visualized Afghanistan as a land bridge, business hub
and trade and transit roundabout between Central
Asia, South Asia, the Far East and the Middle East.
The Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan and the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process
have progressed steadily and helped elevate regional
economic cooperation and sociocultural exchanges to
new levels.
Recently, we have signed bilateral and other
agreements with various countries of the region,
including Turkmenistan, India and Uzbekistan, to
scale up the level of trade, transit and other means of
cooperation for mutual benefit. The materialization
of multiple mega-regional projects demonstrates that,
despite the continuous attempts of some to turn our
location into a destabilizing force for the region and the
world, terror cannot deter the course of development
and prosperity of our country and the region.
17-45789

21/12/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

In the area of human rights, we continue to make
strides in civilian protection and the promotion of
human rights, despite the effects of conflict. In this
regard, we welcome UNAMA’s second annual civilmilitary dialogue on the protection of civilians in
Kabul. We are gravely concerned about the increasing
attacks on mosques and worshippers. To combat this
menace, which is trying to sow discord among our
population, we have introduced measures to protect
places of worship at risk. Furthermore, the President
has endorsed an additional annex to the presidential
decree on the prohibition of torture, thereby providing
a legal avenue to victims of torture for redress.
These developments are reflective of our resolve and
commitment to upholding the rule of law for civilian
protection and the promotion of equal rights for all in
a free society.
Consistent with resolution 1325 (2000), the role
of Afghan women is becoming more prominent in
the peace process. The ongoing cycle of violence has
exacerbated conditions for internally displaced persons
(IDPs). In coordination with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the voluntary
repatriation and other programmes are providing much
needed assistance to returning refugees and IDPs.
Additionally, we are working to create economic
opportunities and to strengthen security, which would
provide incentives for people to remain in the country
and contribute to the rebuilding of their nation.
On the counter-narcotics front, we are working in
close cooperation with UNODC to implement a national
drug action that aligns law enforcement, education
and public health in the light of existing challenges.
We need a more sustained and integrated approach
to better reduce the illicit production and trafficking
of narcotics and organized crime, including moneylaundering, corruption and the financing of terrorism.
In this regard, we remain committed to expanding our
cooperation with our allies on related areas. In the
same vein, the recent increase in production should be
seen in the context of the symbiotic link between the
narcotic drug industry and the problem of terrorism
and violence. We also reaffirm the need for a holistic
approach to the drug problem that focuses on all facets,
including production, trafficking and consumption, on
the basis of the principle of shared responsibility.
Finally, as we approach the new year, let us reaffirm
our resolve to consolidate the many achievements
that have been made so far, while bearing in mind

S/PV. 8147

that collective action within the framework of a more
collaborative effort among all stakeholders, particularly
countries in our region and beyond, provides the surest
guarantee for our joint success. Let us therefore seize
the opportunity before us for the benefit of peace and
security, not just in Afghanistan, but rather for the
stability of all our societies.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto; the DirectorGeneral of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury Fedotov; Ambassador
Kairat Umarov, Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011); and Ms. Wazhma
Frogh, founding member of Women and Peace Studies
Organization and member of Afghanistan’s High Peace
Council, for their comprehensive briefings.
As the lead country of the Afghanistan file, Japan
has been seeking a broad range of opinions from
Member States, international organizations and civil
society. I appreciate our colleagues, in particular
Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal, for supporting our
work in the Council and useful inputs throughout 2017.
During our term, we have tried to facilitate the Council’s
discussion on Afghanistan, taking into account the
dynamic and changing situation on the ground. The
Council successfully streamlined the text of resolution
2344 (2017) on the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in March in order to
crystallize the Mission’s core mandate and critical
issues we should address.
The strategic review of the Secretary-General in
August provided the Council with important findings.
It is regrettable that we were not able to have an
opportunity to deeply discuss the way to incorporate
those findings into the next mandate, but Japan believes
that the next penholder and Council members will
skilfully accomplish this task. The Council’s mission
to Afghanistan, which is scheduled in January, will
give it first-hand information and fresh input conducive
for upcoming discussions towards the next mandate
renewal. We will follow these discussions with great
interest after we have left the Council.
One of the most important findings of the strategic
review is that Afghanistan is not yet in a post-conflict
situation where sufficient stability exists to focus
on institution-building and development-oriented

17-4578911/37

S/PV.8147

The situation in Afghanistan

activities. This position obviously coincides with wellused concepts, such as “self-reliance” and “Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned”. We have repeatedly expressed
our full commitment to continuing our support for
Afghanistan so that Afghanistan will achieve selfreliance to the point where donors no longer need to
announce multi-year pledges.
It was noteworthy that Special Representative
Yamamoto used the phrase “Afghan-led and Afghanowned” in the context not only of the peace process,
but also of the electoral preparations. Japan will
extend the necessary support for such Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned elections. Meanwhile, on the timing, we
strongly call on the Government of Afghanistan to hold
parliamentary and district council elections in 2018.
Sadly, the briefing by Special Representative
Yamamoto today again revealed the harsh and volatile
security situations in Afghanistan. In the short term,
the tireless efforts of the Afghan security forces to push
back the Taliban and conduct anti-terrorism operations
are crucial, but in the long run only genuine progress on
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process will
be able to provide significant security improvements.
Japan is aware of UNAMA’s potential role in the
peace process. However, we do not see unity among
regional stakeholders on this issue and are worried that
the lack of common understanding may exacerbate the
environment for the Afghan Government in advancing
the peace process. Therefore, Japan hopes that the
second round of the Kabul process in February next
year will yield tangible steps and clarify the role of
UNAMA in the peace process.
Today’s briefing by the Director-General of
UNODC was alarming. Opium poppy cultivation and
illicit trafficking of opiates fuel instability and violent
extremism. Japan has been cooperating with the
UNODC and some Member States on counter-narcotics
and will continue such efforts. We are providing support
to allow Afghans to fight poverty not with poppies but
with the revival of their legitimate agricultural sector.
We believe that Afghanistan’s expanded agricultural
productivity allows it to export products to neighbouring
countries, thereby strengthening regional cooperation.
Afghanistan possesses the potential for selfreliance. The Council and the international community
are committed to extending support for Afghanistan in
its efforts to move towards peace and stability and to
undertake institution-building and development. We
12/37

21/12/2017

should strive to see that commitment implemented and
help provide for a better future for Afghanistan and
its people.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Mr. Biagini (Italy): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Japanese presidency for organizing
this meeting and all of today’s briefers for their
comprehensive presentations.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to focus on two key areas related
to the future of Afghanistan. The first is peace and
reconciliation and the second is the upcoming electoral
deadlines, especially the parliamentary elections
scheduled for 2018.
Today more than ever, reconciliation between the
Government and the Taliban insurgency represents the
way to put an end to the Afghan conflict and ensure
sustainable peace and stability in Afghanistan. It will
therefore be essential to make every effort to create
the conditions for peace, while remaining cognizant of
the complexities involved in achieving that objective.
We are all aware of the difficulties of the current
situation in Afghan, with high levels of violence and
mounting civilian casualties. It is also clear that until
now, insurgent groups have shown no willingness to
negotiate with the Government. However, we have also
noted positive trends over the past two years in terms
of increasing ambitions for peace and reconciliation.
Intensified diplomatic activity in that regard — first
and foremost through the launch of the Kabul process,
but also through the revitalization of the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group — has shown that interest in
the subject has intensified, along with a common
understanding that achieving peace and reconciliation is
a realistic goal, despite the many obstacles that remain.
Greater ambitiousness can create the momentum
needed to pave the way for peace in Afghanistan,
especially when combined with the involvement of
a broader spectrum of international stakeholders,
particularly countries of the region. In our view, if we are
to advance the prospects for peace and reconciliation, it
will be essential to enable two elements to coalesce — the
intrinsically domestic nature of the process, which
must be Afghan-led and -owned, and genuine support
for the peace process from partner countries, especially
17-45789

21/12/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

as reflected in the desire and interest of the countries
of the region and the broader region generally to
see Afghanistan stabilized. That will also requires
effective and tangible collaboration in the fight against
terrorist groups and their activities, which constitute
one of the main obstacles to peace. In that context, the
role played by the countries of the region is key, and we
hope that that partnership can live up to its potential.
The strategy outlined by the Afghan Government with
the launching of the Kabul process — which we fully
support — must be complemented on the domestic
front by a fully inclusive outreach to all components
of Afghan society, ensuring the active participation of
women and harnessing the full potential of institutions
such as the High Peace Council.
That will help to advance a peace process that
ensures respect for the Constitution and the rights of
all Afghan citizens without distinction, and that will
also help to protect the economic and social progress
made over the past 16 years. We therefore hope that the
upcoming second meeting of the Kabul process, due to
take place in February, will result in tangible progress
in the peace and reconciliation process, with the active
support of all its Afghan partners.
Turning to my second point, next year’s
parliamentary elections are drawing closer. They
represent a major opportunity for strengthening the
legitimacy of Afghan institutions. The Afghan people
have very high expectations in that regard, and so does
the donor community. Ensuring transparent, inclusive
and credible elections is therefore crucial. To that end,
the relevant Afghan institutions must be able to urgently
resolve all outstanding issues in the area of electoral
reform, avoiding any further delays in promoting the
broadest possible consensus within Afghan political
parties and society as a whole. That also entails
ensuring the tangible implementation of the National
Unity Government’s wider reform agenda, of which
electoral reform is a key component. The continued
fight against corruption and efforts to promote human
rights, especially the rights of women, need a particular
injection of a sense of urgency.
In conclusion, I would like to affirm Italy’s full
support and friendship to the Afghan Government
and its people in the pursuit of peace, stability and
development. First and foremost in that effort is our
active participation in the NATO-led Resolute Support
Mission, our development cooperation assistance
and our support for all diplomatic initiatives that can

S/PV. 8147

make a positive contribution to the resumption of the
peace process.
Lastly, I would like to underline the key role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in
the framework of the partnership between Afghanistan
and the international community, and to recognize the
tireless efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan and his staff, who
operate in very challenging conditions.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks you, Mr. President, for convening this debate on
Afghanistan. I would also like to thank Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan, Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, and Ambassador Umarov, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), for their briefings. I welcome the presence in the
Council today of Ambassador Saikal of Afghanistan.
China also listened attentively to Ms. Frogh’s briefing.
Afghanistan is facing multiple challenges in critical
economic and social sectors. China appreciates the fact
that the Afghan Government has made a number of
efforts to maintain security and stability in the country,
promote its national reconciliation and advance
economic development. We value the important role
of neighbouring and regional countries in resolving
the Afghan issue, and hope that the international
community will continue to provide support and
assistance to Afghanistan.
First, the international community should continue
to support the capacity-building of the security forces
in the country, as well as security-sector reform,
with a view to combating the threats of terrorism,
transnational crime and drug trafficking. The
international community should step up its cooperation
in combating terrorism and support the efforts of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and other regional
actors in playing an active role.
Secondly, promoting national reconciliation is
fundamental to settling the Afghanistan issue. All
Afghan parties should prioritize the country’s longterm interests and the well-being of its people by
actively participating in the reconciliation process. The
international community should promote the realization
of broad and inclusive political reconciliation that is
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned, and should also engage
in with the relevant parties in Afghanistan with a

17-4578913/37

S/PV.8147

The situation in Afghanistan

view to launching peace talks as soon as possible. We
welcome the assistance provided by regional countries
and relevant mechanisms in that regard.
Thirdly, enhancing the capacity of the Government
is an important element in ensuring Afghanistan’s
development. China welcomes its efforts in the area
of anti-corruption reform. The political parties in
Afghanistan should work for greater unity and seek
to resolve their differences through dialogue and
consultations. The international community should
fully respect the Afghan people’s right to choose their
political system and their own path to development
independently while providing assistance to the
Government targeted to improving governance on the
basis of their own national development strategy and
concrete needs.
Fourthly, the international community should
honour its commitment to assisting Afghanistan and
supporting its economic and social development.
With the advantages represented by its geographical
location and natural resources, there is great potential
for Afghanistan’s participation in regional economic
cooperation. The relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and General Assembly highlight the fact that
parties should work to build a community of common
destiny for humankind, in the spirit of win-win
cooperation, and promote economic development
through the One Belt One Road and other initiatives.
China applauds the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and hopes that it
will continue to respect Afghanistan’s sovereignty and
ownership of its future, while continuing to promote
the peace and reconciliation process and the economic
development of the country. China has always played a
constructive role in the Afghan peace and reconciliation
process and in regional peace and stability. In June,
Mr. Wang Yi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of China,
visited Afghanistan and Pakistan and encouraged
all three countries to establish a trilateral dialogue
mechanism between their Foreign Ministers. The first
round of the China-Afghanistan-Pakistan trilateral
Foreign Ministers’ dialogue will be held in Beijing
on 26 December. Foreign Minister Wang Yi will be
attending the event, which is the first dialogue to be
held between the three Foreign Ministers. We hope that
the meeting will enable them to build trust and reach
a consensus that will help to improve the relations
between Pakistan and Afghanistan. The aim is also
to promote cooperation between all three countries
14/37

21/12/2017

so that they can work together to achieve peace,
stability and development in the region. Together with
the international community, we are ready to work
tirelessly to achieve peace, stability and development
in Afghanistan as soon as possible.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank Special
Representative Yamamoto and other briefers for their
important contributions.
While we align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union,
I would also like to make some observations in my
national capacity.
We take positive note of the Afghan National Unity
Government’s recent accomplishments in addressing
the country’s challenges.
First, the Government has prioritized the Afghanled and -owned national peace and reconciliation
efforts involving regional stakeholders. We regard the
Kabul process, launched this June under the initiative
of President Ghani, as a unique forum for Afghanistan,
its neighbours and the international community to
discuss ways for achieving peace in this country.
Secondly, the Government has taken concrete
measures to move forward the national reform agenda
through the National Peace and Development Framework.
We stress the importance of focusing particularly on
promoting good governance, anti-corruption measures
and security-sector reform. The Government’s efforts
to create an environment conducive to holding
future parliamentary and presidential elections, by
strengthening electoral institutions and improving the
relevant legislation, are encouraging.
Thirdly, the Government is determined to take
effective measures to fulfil its obligations under
international human rights law in connection with its
election to the United Nations Human Rights Council.
We congratulate Afghanistan on its achievement and
are ready to work side by side with their delegation to
advance common objectives.
Fourthly, the Government is devoting considerable
efforts to implementing the national action plan on
women, peace and security throughout Afghanistan,
which is crucial to creating a stable future for the
country by eradicating gender-based violence and
elevating women as full and equal partners. The
upcoming 2018 elections should be taken advantage of
17-45789

21/12/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

as a perfect occasion to increase women’s leadership
and participation in Afghanistan’s political life.
Fifthly, the Government has strengthened effective
regional cooperation aimed at stabilizing Afghanistan,
with initiatives designed to shape the country as a trade,
transit and transport hub and promote investment and
infrastructure projects aimed at improving its economic
capacities. These are welcome steps.
The other side of the coin is the importance of
confronting the threat posed by terrorism, which remains
a major destabilizing factor for the security situation,
especially with the Taliban gaining strength and the
affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
affiliates expanding their presence in Afghanistan.
We encourage Afghanistan’s regional partners to
continue to redouble their efforts to suppress terrorist
organizations and activities, especially with help of the
NATO-led Resolute Support Mission. A key aspect of
those efforts will be to continue improving the overall
capabilities of the Afghan National Security Forces.
Eradicating terrorists’ sanctuaries and depriving
them of sources of financing, especially from the
narcotics trade, is vital. With regard to the latter, the
recent findings of the Afghanistan Opium Survey 2017
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
are extremely alarming, since poppy cultivation and
opiate production have skyrocketed this year. The
revenue boost allows the Taliban to spend more on the
insurgency and to hire fighters and equip them better.
Without concerted counter-efforts and with demand on
the rise worldwide, poppy cultivation will remain an
attractive source of income for Afghans.
Another related complex challenge in Afghanistan
continues to be the protection of civilians, among whom
casualties continue to be extremely high. We urge the
Government of Afghanistan to effectively implement
its recently approved national policy on the prevention
and mitigation of civilian casualties in order to prevent
indiscriminate shelling and bombing from creating
collateral victims, especially among women and
children. Moreover, with the deepening displacement
crisis in Afghanistan, the national authorities and
humanitarian aid donors should address the needs of
internally displaced persons and returnees in order
to provide access to basic services and support their
sustainable reintegration.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Ukraine’s
full support to Afghanistan’s unity, sovereignty and

S/PV. 8147

territorial integrity, and to its endeavours to combat
the scourge of international terrorism. Ukraine
also greatly values the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
helping Afghanistan to cope with its security, economic
and development challenges and enact national reforms
aimed at creating a sound foundation for peace, security
and prosperity, both in the country and the wider region.
In that regard, we would like to reiterate our strong
support to the Secretary-General’s efforts to strengthen
the Mission’s mandate, in line with UNAMA’s strategic
review (S/2017/696), so as to enable it to carry out its
responsibilities effectively.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
would first like to thank all our briefers, particularly
Ms. Wazma Frogh, who embodies the voice of women
and civil society that is so essential to building a lasting
peace in Afghanistan.
France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.
I will limit myself to four main comments. I would
like to begin by stressing France’s great concern about
the persistent tragically high level of violence and
suffering in Afghanistan and the presence of terrorist
groups in the country, particularly Da’esh. That state
of affairs and its consequences are worrying and
should compel us to redouble our efforts to put an end
to them. As the report (S/2017/1056) of the SecretaryGeneral points out, it is civilians, particularly women
and children, who are suffering and continue to pay the
heaviest price. The Afghan forces, whose commitment
and determination I should commend once again, are
fighting the Taliban and the terrorist groups bravely
and striving to better protect civilians. However, the
continued armed clashes and terrorist attacks are still
severely destabilizing to the entire country. France takes
the establishment and proliferation of terrorist groups,
particularly Da’esh, in Afghanistan and the region. We
fully share the determination of the Afghan authorities
and our allies to combat terrorism and its financing.
This anti-terrorist effort, if it is to be successful, must
be supported by all countries in the region.
My second comment has to do with the importance
of ensuring that the Afghan Government continues
the reforms it has begun with the aim of establishing
democratic governance that can better serve the
population. This relates in particular to electoral
reform. Progress has been made in this area and

17-4578915/37

S/PV.8147

The situation in Afghanistan

preparations for the parliamentary elections have
begun, in particular through the Independent Electoral
Commission. Nevertheless, much remains to be
done in order to ensure the crucial goal of holding
free and transparent elections in 2018 in accordance
with the official schedule, as Mr. Yamamoto has just
emphasized. France encourages the Afghan authorities
to continue those efforts, with the support of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
The reforms aimed at combating corruption are
also going in the right direction. However, I would like
to take advantage of Mr. Fedotov’s presence today to
briefly discuss the narcotics problem. Drug trafficking
continues to fuel the illicit economy, fund the Taliban
insurgency and terrorist groups and threaten the health
of many Afghans. The latest Afghanistan Opium Survey
2017 of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
highlights some disturbing trends that Mr. Fedotov also
just mentioned. Despite progress in the programmes
for eradicating poppy production in a growing number
of provinces, the report estimates that the area under
cultivation has increased and that this year’s potential
opium production, at around 9,000 tons, is almost
double that of last year. France calls on the Afghan
authorities to redouble their efforts in that area, with
the support of the international community and the
United Nations. In that regard, the Paris Pact Initiative
continues to be the preferred forum for exchanges
among all countries affected by the trafficking of drugs
produced in Afghanistan.
On the human rights front, the situation of women
and children remains very precarious. The Afghan
Government must not relax its efforts to implement its
commitments to women’s rights. With a view to the
parliamentary and presidential elections, to be held
in 2018 and 2019, respectively, the full participation
of women in the electoral processes as voters and as
candidates will be essential.
My third comment concerns the pursuit of a
negotiated political solution to the conflict and the
long-term stabilization of Afghanistan. France hopes
that Afghan actors will re-engage in the peace process
as soon as possible, with the support of the countries
of the region and of the international community. The
sincere commitment and unambiguous support of all
Afghanistan’s neighbours to peace are essential to this
work. We ask everyone to make a renewed effort in
that regard, as well as concrete commitments. France
took note of the announcement of a new meeting of the
16/37

21/12/2017

Kabul process early next year and hopes that that will
make it possible to bring together existing initiatives
under the authority of the Afghan Government.
My fourth and final remark relates to the
importance of strengthening United Nations support
to Afghanistan, and in particular that of UNAMA,
around the four pillars reaffirmed in this summer’s
strategic review — first, helping to establish peace in
Afghanistan; secondly, facilitating the involvement of
countries in the region; thirdly, guiding the dialogue
between the Government and the Afghan political
forces; and fourthly, coordinating international
assistance. During the Security Council’s visit, a
few weeks from now, France looks forward to the
opportunity to discuss with the Afghan authorities and
the actors on the ground the ways that the international
community can continue to support Afghanistan.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate France’s full
support to the Afghan Government and the efforts of
the United Nations in their pursuit of lasting peace for
all Afghans. Lastly, I would like to commend Japan’s
work and leadership on this issue throughout the year.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We are very grateful to the briefers,
Mr. Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and
Mr. Umarov, Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan,
for their thorough analysis of the evolving situation
in Afghanistan. Their briefings constitute a good
basis for today’s discussion. We note the selfless
work being done by the entire United Nations team in
Afghanistan. For our part, we would like to make the
following comments.
The Government, the armed forces and the people
of Afghanistan continue their courageous efforts to
overcome the challenges to their security, both old and
new. Having suffered a crushing defeat in the Middle
East, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
is moving to other regions. The main centre where the
terrorists are concentrated is now Afghanistan. There
are clear signs that ISIL is putting down roots in the
country. A recent result of ISIL’s strengthened presence
was the seizure by militants of new areas in the north of
the country. Additional ISIL groups are moving into the
area. The secret to the jihadists’ successful infiltration
is material and military support coming from outside
sponsors. We call on the Afghan authorities and
17-45789

21/12/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

the leaders of foreign presences in the area to take
determined steps to rid the country’s northern regions
of terrorist elements, which represent a serious threat
to the security of our partners the Central Asian
States. This cannot be tolerated. It is important that
Kazakhstan, as a member of the Security Council, is
drawing general attention to the developing situation
on the ground.
We are also very concerned about the deteriorating
drug situation in Afghanistan. As Mr. Fedotov rightly
noted, the figures in UNODC’s most recent report
are confirm that unfortunate trend. We are seeing an
increase in drug crime and terrorist activities. The
situation requires an immediate ramping up of efforts
on the part of the international community. We urge
everyone to consider the robust efforts of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization in that regard.
The efforts to counter terrorism in Afghanistan have
been going on for 16 years, but the situation remains
difficult and military personnel and civilians are still
dying. The task of ensuring sustainable development
has become harder. The entire system of international
efforts there should be rebuilt, based on the principles
of cooperation and good-neighbourliness. Counterterrorism efforts should be supplemented by robust
steps aimed at national reconciliation.
We wholeheartedly support the view of the
Secretary-General that there can be no military
solution to the conflict in Afghanistan. The emphasis
must be on negotiations to pave the way for rapid
national reconciliation. However, that will be possible
only through collective, mutually respectful efforts.
There is no place here for competition, hidden
agendas or mutual reproaches. We must refrain from
unilateral projects, or the situation will deteriorate
into a vicious circle. We support the efforts of all
initiatives to renew peace negotiations between the
Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban leaders
and to achieve national reconciliation in the country,
led by the Afghans themselves. But the evolution of
the political and military situations means that with
the surge in terrorist threats emanating from Afghan
territory, it will be esesntial to include the country’s
neighbours, including the Central Asian States, in the
reconciliation mechanisms. In our view, the Moscow
format has in fact achieved that in practice, along with
the revived mechanism of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group in its new
format. The principle of an honest, equal partnership,

S/PV. 8147

based on the efforts of such forums, can help to achieve
the desired goals.
Afghanistan is at the threshold of a new electoral
cycle. We sincerely hope that the elections will take
place in a secure, united atmosphere. Afghan society
cannot be allowed to become polarized. The elections
should lead to consolidation and enable the country to
close this bloody chapter in its history.
To sum up, we want to note that Russia and
Afghanistan are historically linked through friendship.
President Putin has emphasized clearly that the
central Government in Kabul needs the support of the
international community, and we are ready to provide
that support, including by helping to train national
personnel in law enforcement and the armed forces and
in establishing essential arms and military technical
systems. In that context, we are open to cooperating
actively with the United States and other international
and regional parties.
Russia
has
contributed
significantly
to
Afghanistan’s development on every front as a major
donor and a consistent supporter of the Afghan people’s
efforts to find lasting peace. We have a deep-rooted
interest in ensuring that Afghanistan becomes a source
of stability, prosperity and sustainable development,
which accords with our national interests and with
regional stability.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would like
to thank Special Representative Tadamichi Yamamoto,
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Ambassador Kairat Umarov and
Ms. Frogh for their informative briefings today.
Bolivia welcomes the progress made by the National
Unity Government of Afghanistan, which continues to
promote reform measures and emphasize security-sector
reform and the national dialogue process. We note the
complex situation in which the electoral preparations
are taking place and the willingness demonstrated by
the various political groups, which continue to come
together around the holding of parliamentary and
district council elections. We understand the difficult
prevailing political equilibrium; however, we trust in
the commitment to democracy demonstrated by the
people of Afghanistan to date.
On the other hand, Bolivia expresses its deep
concern at the instability in the security situation,
in particular the increased number of armed clashes

17-4578917/37

S/PV.8147

The situation in Afghanistan

between Government and anti-Government forces.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/1056), during the reporting period the number
of such confrontations increased by 62 per cent as
compared to the same period in 2016.
We also find it alarming that, as the report states,
it was only recently that one of the most violent weeks
occurred, where four complex attacks were carried
out by the Taliban throughout the country using sportutility vehicles as suicide bombs. These caused the
deaths of more than 100 people, including members of
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces and
Afghan civilians. In that regard, we wish to highlight the
prioritization by the Government of the implementation
of its four-year plan for security sector reform as a key
component of its overall security strategy. We would
also highlight the efforts of the Government and the
people of Afghanistan in general in their fight against
terrorism and Da’esh.
With regard to the issue of internally displaced
persons and refugees, it is hardly encouraging that,
during the reporting period, approximately 33,000
people were displaced by the conflict. To date, the overall
number of displaced persons exceeds 318,000. We call
for joint efforts to assist the return and reintegration
of those who have been displaced to their places of
origin. We hope that international organizations will
continue to provide effective and tangible aid, bearing
in mind that the repatriation of refugees and internally
displaced persons must be voluntary, safe and in
dignified conditions, all while observing the principles
of international law.
Along the same lines, we highlight the work being
carried out by mine removal personnel, under the
leadership of the Afghan Directorate for Mine Action
Coordination and the United Nations Mine Action
Service. They have declared 15 communities free of
mines, which has allowed more than 230,000 people to
move freely within their communities and facilitated
the improvement of agricultural activities and access to
markets. We reiterate that anti-mine action, especially
in the area of defusing and removing anti-personnel
mines and other explosive remnants of war, is essential
for the displaced civilian population to be able to return
to their homes.
Bolivia also wishes to echo the Secretary-General’s
observation that the only path to lasting peace and
stability in Afghanistan is a negotiated solution with the
18/37

21/12/2017

constructive participation in diplomatic efforts for peace,
with a view to promoting the interests and welfare of all
Afghans. In that regard, we call on regional partners
to reinforce their commitment to robust cooperation in
promoting stability and prosperity, thereby fostering
an environment conducive to dialogue. Along the
same lines, we are encouraged by the statements made
during this past period at the meetings held in various
cities, such as Ashgabat, Baku, Brussels, Moscow and
Samarkand, among others. The importance of regional
cooperation was underscored, along with the need for a
peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan.
Similarly, Bolivia considers it very important to
carry out a Security Council visit Afghanistan so that
this organ can gain first-hand information, allowing it
to strengthen its cooperation with Afghanistan.
Finally, we wish to express our support for the
political dialogue in Kabul. We are convinced that
this process must be inclusive and guided by and for
Afghans, making it clear that there is no military
solution to the conflict.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
align myself with the statement to be made later on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
Let me begin by thanking Special Representative
Yamamoto,
Executive
Director
Fedotov
and
Ambassador Umarov for their comprehensive briefings.
Let me also extend a special welcome to Ms. Frogh and
thank her for bringing the voices of Afghan women into
the Chamber today.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1056)
underlines the continuing instability and volatility that
affect the lives of the Afghan people on a daily basis.
At the same time, as Special Representative Yamamoto
pointed out today, opportunities exist to break the
cycle of violence that has afflicted the country for four
decades. I would like to make three points today.
First, only the Afghan people, working together,
will determine the future for Afghanistan. An Afghanowned and Afghan-led peace process remains essential.
We therefore welcome the Afghan Government’s
strong commitment to engage in the political process.
The upcoming meeting in the Kabul process will be
an important step towards creating an environment
conducive to that. We strongly encourage the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to actively support the efforts of the Afghan Government
17-45789

21/12/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

to ensure that the Kabul meetings result in a sustainable
peace process.
During her visit to Afghanistan in October, the
Swedish Foreign Minister met with representatives
from all parts of society and underlined the importance
of an inclusive peace process. Ensuring that the whole
population — meaning both men and women — can
participate effectively is vital for the achievement
of sustainable peace, as is the active participation of
civil society.
The regional context is important, as many of
the challenges facing Afghanistan cannot be dealt
with in isolation. We urge all stakeholders, especially
Afghanistan’s neighbours, to assume responsibility and
to work together towards a political settlement. There is
tremendous potential in increased regional cooperation,
and we welcome the engagement of the Central Asian
States in that regard.
It is imperative for Afghanistan’s future stability
that parliamentary elections take place in 2018 and
presidential elections in 2019, as announced, and that
the elections be conducted in an inclusive, credible and
transparent manner. Every effort must now be made to
ensure that difficulties are overcome and that elections
take place. We welcome to the Secretary-General’s
emphasis in his report on women’s participation in
elections. We urge the electoral management bodies and
the Afghan Government to take all the necessary steps
to ensure women’s full participation in the elections, as
both voters and candidates.
Secondly, respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law is vital to the achievement of
sustainable peace. We congratulate Afghanistan on its
election to the Human Rights Council. As an elected
member of the Council, we expect Afghanistan to
uphold the highest standards in the promotion and
protection of human rights.
We deplore the recent execution of five prisoners,
and urge the Government to reinstate the de facto
moratorium on the death penalty with a view to
abolishing this cruel and inhumane punishment.
We appreciate the efforts of UNAMA in the area
of human rights, not least pertaining to its work on
children and armed conflict and civilian casualties. We
encourage them to continue that important work.
Attacks against humanitarian and development
workers, health-care professionals, medical transport,

S/PV. 8147

hospitals and other medical facilities, as well as
schools, continue and are deeply concerning. Such
attacks not only impede efforts to aid the people of
Afghanistan, but infringe upon their enjoyment of the
right to education, health and life, which are crucial
in building sustainable peace. In addition, civilians
continue to bear the burden of the conflict, with women
and children increasingly under threat. We are equally
deeply concerned about the increased recruitment of
children by armed groups, in particular by the Taliban,
and call for an immediate end to that practice.
Finally, I would like to reiterate our strong support
for the outcome of the strategic review of UNAMA and
the Secretary-General’s recommendations. It is now
important that the recommendations be implemented
without delay. With its unique field presence, UNAMA
can contribute to making a tangible difference on the
ground and provide important support for efforts to
attain lasting peace. An integrated United Nations
approach, linking together peace, development and
human rights work in Afghanistan, is crucial to
delivering results. Our expectations for UNAMA in
that regard are high.
Sweden’s assistance to the people of Afghanistan
has remained steadfast for over four decades.
Afghanistan is Sweden’s single-largest developmentcooperation partner, and our support will continue,
including for reform efforts aimed at building strong
and independent institutions. The Afghan people can
count on our continued backing as they advance their
efforts to build a peaceful, stable and inclusive future.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Representative Yamamoto and Under-SecretaryGeneral Fedotov for their informative briefings. We
highly appreciate the commitment and steadfastness of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in working in such a complex environment.
Despite the measures taken by the Afghan
Government and the international community, the
security situation in Afghanistan remains fragile. As
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1056)
indicates, this year has seen an increase in the number
of armed attacks by various terrorist groups. One area
of particular concern for the Central Asian States is the
increasing level of terrorist activities by the Afghan
faction of the Islamic State in the northern provinces
of the country. The increase in drug production in the

17-4578919/37

S/PV.8147

The situation in Afghanistan

country in 2017 is alarming as well, because it has a
negative effect on the entire region, besides fuelling the
operations of terrorist groups.
Kazakhstan welcomes the adoption of the Afghan
national peace and reconciliation strategy presented by
Afghanistan’s High Peace Council, as well as the steps
taken by the Government to implement the national
action plan on women and peace and security. We
welcome the remarks made in that regard by Ms. Frogh.
Our delegation also welcomes the intensified efforts
of the Afghan Government and its regional and
international partners to achieve a political settlement
and durable peace in the country. Those efforts include
the Kabul process and the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group, which is made up of Afghanistan, Pakistan, the
United States of America and China, on the Afghan
peace and reconciliation process. Of equal significance
is the work of the International Contact Group, the
Moscow consultations and other initiatives. We
should also acknowledge the steps taken by regional
organizations, such as the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Conference on Interaction
and Confidence-building Measures in Asia, the Central
Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre,
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, and the Resolute
Support Mission in Afghanistan.
As we have maintained, the nexus between security
and development is clear. In that regard, Kazakhstan
remains an ardent supporter of a regional approach and
integration. My country actively invests in developing
regional transport infrastructure and provides
humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan. Approximately
56 railcars of humanitarian goods are to be delivered
at the end of this month. We are confident that close
economic cooperation among the countries of the
region will facilitate the integration of Afghan citizens
into the reconciliation process, thereby reducing their
involvement in organized crime and opium production.
All of that will have a positive impact on the situation
in the country and in the region as a whole.
Expanding cooperation between Afghanistan
and the Central Asian States would also significantly
strengthen the country’s potential, thereby contributing
to economic growth, increasing trade and creating
more opportunities. The economic integration of
Afghanistan is therefore the key to the prosperity and
security of the region. In that regard, we commend the
seventh Regional Economic Cooperation Conference
20/37

21/12/2017

on Afghanistan, held in Ashgabat in November,
during which the measures to promote the peaceful
development of Afghanistan and strengthen a mutually
beneficial economic partnership in the region were
reviewed. The conference in Samarkand was also quite
constructive in that regard.
We welcome the signing of the Lapis Lazuli Corridor
Agreement by Afghanistan, Turkmenistan, Azerbaijan,
Georgia and Turkey. The new route will connect
Afghanistan with Europe and create trade, transit and
investment opportunities. We also commend the work
on the extension of the Kazakhstan-Turkmenistan-Iran
railway to Afghanistan; the railroad project of China,
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan and Iran; as well
as the establishment of a tripartite agro-industrial
consortium involving Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and
Afghanistan. We support China’s One Belt One Road
initiative, which will bring not only economic growth
and prosperity to our region, but also more security.
I would like to end on the positive note: the close
partnership that exists between UNAMA and the
Afghan Government, which is absolutely necessary for
ensuring sustainable peace and stability. Let me once
again reiterate our full support for the Government and
the people of Afghanistan in achieving lasting peace
and reconciliation, and offering solidarity with their
aspirations for progress and prosperity.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): I wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto; the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov;
Ambassador Kairat Umarov; and Ms. Wazhma Frogh
for their briefings. I also thank Ambassador Mahmoud
Saikal for his comprehensive statement.
As stated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/1056), Afghanistan continues to face multiple
political, electoral, economic and security challenges,
which require a unified vision and greater efforts
to achieve a political solution to the conflict. For
that reason, the support of the United Nations and
the international community to the National Unity
Government of Afghanistan continues to be crucial for
the long-desired consolidation of peace in the country.
Uruguay reaffirms its support for the Government
of Afghanistan, as well as for a peaceful, Afghan-led
resolution to the conflict. In that respect, we continue
to encourage that Government to persist in its efforts
17-45789

21/12/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

to achieve lasting peace based on the principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity.
The lack of dialogue and progress towards a peace
agreement between the Afghan Government and the
Taliban continues to wreak havoc on Afghan society.
The conflict in Afghanistan has no military solution.
The parties should come together to find political
alternatives. It is necessary to continue to make every
effort to put an end to the cycle of violence and to take
the path to establish dialogue between the Government
and the Taliban. Without the firm will of all the parties,
there can be no end to this long and cruel conflict.
The Kabul process, which is intended to bring about
genuine reconciliation among the Afghan people,
requires the support of the international community.
We therefore recognize this process of cooperation for
peace and safety, as well as the interest demonstrated
by Afghanistan’s partners in its execution.
We encourage the Afghan Government to continue
with programme of reform, with a focus on ensuring
strong and independent institutions and a solid
democratic process. The consolidation of democratic
institutions with a view to achieving the stability of
the country is fundamental. In that context, we must
highlight the role of Afghan women and their direct
participation in the peace process and security and
development reform efforts. To ensure that discussions
in the realm of decision-making reflect the concerns
and needs of the whole population, the voices of women
should be heard.
It is worrying that the humanitarian and security
situation, as well as the violence, that are affecting
the Afghan civilian population continue to cause
instability and serious consequences. The protection
of civilians, especially of women and children, is a
priority and demands respect for their ability to enjoy
their fundamental rights. All parties to the conflict
should respect humanitarian principles, human rights
and international humanitarian law. In that respect,
Uruguay reaffirms its call for full compliance with the
provisions of resolution 2286 (2016) concerning the
protection of the wounded and the sick, and medical
facilities and personnel. Those responsible for such
crimes should not continue to enjoy impunity. Anyone
who commits such crimes should be held accountable
for their actions.
It is crucial that the Government of Afghanistan
and the international community continue to work
together to counter the challenges facing the country

S/PV. 8147

and to build a peaceful, stable and prosperous future.
Afghanistan needs the ongoing support of the United
Nations, of Member States and of all concerned parties
in the interest of improving the security situation of
the country. It is also crucial that efforts to counter the
threat of the terrorism currently afflicting the country
be stepped up. To promote the stability, security,
development and prosperity of Afghanistan, and the
entire region of Central Asia, greater cooperation and
regional integration are also necessary.
Uruguay wishes to express gratitude for the work
carried out by the United Nations in Afghanistan in
particular. Furthermore, we acknowledge the dedication
and work of the Special Envoy and all UNAMA staff
to promote inclusive peace initiatives and to support
the Afghan people, under very difficult circumstances.
Lastly, Uruguay wishes the upcoming Security
Council mission to Afghanistan, led by Kazakhstan,
every success.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to thank Special Representative Yamamoto and the
other briefers.
Earlier this week, President Trump unveiled a new
United States national security strategy, which embodies
the concept of principled realism. Nowhere is that
approach more evident than with this Administration’s
regional strategy towards Afghanistan. The strategy
demonstrates clearly this Administration’s commitment
to Afghanistan and to a peaceful future for the region.
The American people are justifiably impatient with the
conflict in Afghanistan, which has been ongoing for 16
years now. The President’s policy makes it clear that
the United States does not seek a permanent military
presence in Afghanistan.
We will continue to support the Afghan
Government and security forces in their fight against
Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
and the Taliban. We will continue to work to ensure
that terrorists do not exploit Afghanistan’s territory
as a safe haven. But, critically, our support will not
come with an artificial time limit. We will instead base
our support on a realistic assessment of conditions
on the ground. The additional military resources and
authorities ordered by President Trump are having an
impact on the battlefield.
The United States, working closely with our Afghan
partners, has made significant progress against ISIS
in eastern Afghanistan. Together we have maintained

17-4578921/37

S/PV.8147

The situation in Afghanistan

persistent pressure on ISIS, while significantly reducing
its territory and eliminating one third of its fighters.
Enhanced United States support has also bolstered the
confidence and ability of our Afghan partners. For the
first time since 2014, the fighting season has passed
without the Taliban threatening to seize a provincial
capital. The United States does not intend to prolong the
war through its military games, but rather to accelerate
the peace.
We are committed to an Afghan-owned peace
process. Our strategy recognizes that the path to
peace is through negotiations. The Taliban and other
spoilers cannot win on the battlefield. Our actions on
the battlefield make that plain. Peace will come only
through political settlement that results in the Taliban
abandoning violence, cutting ties with international
terrorism and accepting the Afghan Constitution. In
other words, the United States, the Security Council
and the international community stand united in their
pursuit of the same overarching goal in Afghanistan — a
durable political settlement that leads to a lasting peace.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan will play an important role in the process.
As the Mission has done so much to document, it is the
Afghan people who continue to pay the highest price for
the war. United Nations support for civilians, including
electoral reforms, strengthening Afghan institutions,
human rights and women’s issues, will continue to be
critical in the years ahead. Afghanistan’s neighbours
must also help.
Our South Asia strategy recognizes that there
can be no enduring peace in Afghanistan without its
neighbours being fully engaged and actively committed
to that goal. The United States has reinvigorated
regional diplomacy to support our commitment to a
negotiated settlement. We stand ready to work with any
nation ready to play a constructive role in Afghanistan.
We will partner with any Member State willing to
contribute to Afghanistan’s security, stability, economic
development and fight against terrorism.
It is also clear that there remains much to be done
to combat opium production, which fuels instability
in Afghanistan. We share the Secretary-General’s
deep concern about the shocking 63 per cent increase
in poppy cultivation in Afghanistan between 2016
and 2017. Increased poppy-growing means increased
revenue for the Taliban and extremist groups to wage
their insurgency. The United States supports the Afghan
22/37

21/12/2017

Government’s efforts to curtail opium production,
bolster law enforcement and expand alternative
economic opportunities for the Afghan people. We call
on all nations to join in that effort.
As our President stated, America will lead. We
will not impose our way of life but we will champion
our values, without apology. We will seek partnerships
based on those values. We will seek alliances based
on cooperation and reciprocity. We will hold our own
partners in the Afghan Government to account for
implementing the reforms and taking the steps necessary
to lay the foundation for a comprehensive peace. That
is our contribution to finding a political solution in
Afghanistan. We share the world’s impatience to end
the conflict there. But that impatience can be an asset,
if it is directed towards renewed efforts to bring peace
to the people of Afghanistan.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation would like to begin by
thanking you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting on
Afghanistan, given the leading role that your country
plays in Afghanistan.
I would also like to thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA); Ambassador Kairat Umarov,
Permanent Representative of Kazkhstan and Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities; Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; and Ms. Wazhma Frogh, founding
member of the Women and Peace Studies Organization
and member of Afghanistan’s High Peace Council, for
their clear briefings. I would also like to welcome our
colleague and friend, Mr. Mahmoud Saikal, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, whose detailed
statement was of particular interest to my delegation.
My delegation remains concerned about the fragile
situation in Afghanistan, which is becoming increasingly
tense because of the upcoming legislative and local
elections to be held in July 2018. The preparations
for those elections are plagued by organizational
challenges. I would like to take this opportunity to
call upon Afghanistan’s political stakeholders to work
towards peace and to do what is necessary to prevent
the situation from spiralling out of control. They must
guard against the worsening of the country’s security
17-45789

21/12/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

situation, which is already dire given the lack of progress
in talks held with armed groups and ongoing clashes in
much of the country between Government forces and
such groups, including, regrettably, terrorist groups.
Civilians, including Afghan Turks, remain the main
targets of the asymmetrical attacks carried out by the
Taliban and the fighters of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant. It is clear that the high level of violence has
claimed numerous lives, in particular among the civilian
population, including many women and children, and
has an adverse effect on the country’s human rights,
humanitarian, economic and social situations. In that
environment, we commend the vital presence and
efforts of the international forces in Afghanistan.
The efforts of the Afghan Government to promote
national dialogue, combat insecurity and protect
civilians are equally important, as evidenced by the
recruitment of 2,500 guards to protect places of worship.
My delegation also welcomes the progress in the
fight against torture, and we encourage Afghan troops
to increase and improve their efforts concerning
women’s participation and empowerment, including
access to justice. The convincing plea that was just
been made by Ms. Frogh on increasing the participation
of women and young people is worthy of a great deal
of interest. We believe that the Afghan authorities,
together with their multilateral and bilateral partners,
including UNAMA, must provide the greatest possible
support for the implementation of the 2025 Afghanistan
national action plan on women and peace and security.
On the humanitarian front, the situation is
improving, with 30,000 displaced persons this year.
That is why we commend the joint efforts of the United
Nations and its partners towards ensuring regular
delivery of humanitarian assistance, although that
has sometimes been at the expense of the lives of the
personnel involved, to whose memory we pay tribute.
On the economic area, Senegal welcomes the
positive progress in the fight against corruption, which
has significantly contributed to the healthy economy,
thanks to the efforts of the Afghan authorities, which we
encourage and congratulate. We echo the satisfaction
that has also been voiced in international forums.
However, we must continue to fight against drug
trafficking, an area in which indicators have even
worsened, according to the relevant Afghan ministry
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. The

S/PV. 8147

report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1056) indicates
that there has been an increase of 63 per cent in areas
under cultivation and an increase of 87 per cent in opium
production. That is all the more concerning given that
illegal trafficking in opium constitutes a significant
source of financing for armed groups and terrorists.
I would like to specifically mention UNAMA and
all United Nations personnel, and take note of their
tireless efforts to promote national dialogue and to
protect women and children.
Senegal’s mandate on the Security Council is
coming to an end, and I would like to reaffirm the
hope of my country to see Afghanistan involved in a
political process that is as inclusive as possible, with
a view towards ending a conflict that has devasted the
country for so long, which would end the suffering of
its people and resolutely propel Afghanistan towards
peace, stability and sustainable development. That hope
is based on the effectively charting and implementing
the Kabul process, which is a process that Senegal
strongly supports, as it constitutes a unique framework
for coordination, integration and alignment of the many
and varied initiatives — be they national, bilateral
or multilateral — that are currently under way in, or
planned for, Afghanistan.
For only the Government and the people of
Afghanistan can, and should, be the masters of their
destiny by integrating and taking ownership of the
fruitful opportunities in the region and the international
community generally. I am certain that the Group
of Friends of Afghanistan, in which the Japanese
delegation plays a driving role, and the Security Council
members, will help to make the Kabul process the main
platform for seeking peace, security and sustainable
development in Afghanistan.
Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my profound appreciation
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Yamamoto, for his very
clear and enlightening briefing.
Because of the interest in, and demand for, stability
between Central Asia and the Middle East, Egypt
commends the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan
in combating terrorism, as well as its relentless efforts
to establish sovereignty over its territory. At the same
time, we welcome the preparations that are under way
for the mid-2018 elections. We also support the Afghan

17-4578923/37

S/PV.8147

The situation in Afghanistan

authorities in their social and political efforts to uphold
security and promote development. However, we would
like to emphasize the following areas.
First, at the heart of security there is a collective
commitment to fighting terrorism in all its guises,
within the framework of an international counterterrorism strategy, and to fighting extremist ideologies,
particularly given the escalation of unprecedented
security incidents and terrorist attacks in Afghanistan
this year. With that in mind, we encourage partners
to engage in close cooperation at the national and
international levels with the Afghan authorities in order
to combat drug trafficking, especially trafficking in
opium. Those efforts must go hand in hand with efforts
to combat terrorism, as drugs are a major source of
financing for terrorist organizations and armed groups.
My second point concerns development in the
light of economic and investment initiatives that are
undertaken by neighbouring countries and regional
and strategic projects. At the head of those initiatives
are the Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference and the
Brussels Conference on Afghanistan concerning the
economy and cooperation.
Thirdly, in political terms, there must be support
for the Afghan Government to uphold internal peace
and reinforce national dialogue, particularly within the
Quadripartite Coordination Mechanism.
Fourthly, with regard to international affairs, a
strategic review was recently conducted of UNAMA to
evaluate the Mission and its effectiveness. The review
corroborated the central importance of UNAMA.
With that in mind, we welcome the crucial mission
undertaken by the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia.
Fifthly, on regional issues, particularly the role
of organizations and regional entities in Central Asia,
such as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, it is
important to connect efforts with the positive results
of the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan held last
year, and as a follow-up to the commitments that were
a result of the Conference.
I would be remiss if I did not stress the importance
of moving towards the definition a United Nations vision
that is integrated and that includes all of the elements
that I have just outlined, in order to uphold peace and
stability and to ensure development and prosperity in
Afghanistan and the region of Central Asia.
24/37

21/12/2017

Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): I would like to
start by thanking the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2017/1056) on the situation
in Afghanistan and the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We
appreciate the briefing by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Yamamoto. We recognize the critical
role played by UNAMA, United Nations agencies and
the international community in supporting the Afghan
people and the National Unity Government. We are also
grateful to Ambassador Umarov, Executive Director
Fedotov and Ms. Wazhma Frogh for their briefings.
Afghanistan still faces multiple and complex
challenges to its security, stability and development.
Its people continue to pay a heavy price because of
the instability and violence affecting the country. We
note from the report of the Secretary-General that
the security situation remains highly volatile. That is
further compounded by the increasing activities of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in the country,
which has claimed responsibility for numerous attacks
over the past three months.
With regard to the political situation in the country,
we note the continued and cooperative relationships
among the top leadership, and the efforts of the
National Unity Government in building credibility
around its reform agenda are commendable. In that
context, the important measures taken by the National
Unity Government to fight corruption and enhance
accountability and electoral reforms are encouraging.
The holding of peaceful and democratic parliamentary
and district council elections within the set time frame
is indeed important. We note the activation of the
Independent Election Commission and progress made
in the preparations for the elections. Furthermore,
we appreciate President Ghani’s increased political
outreach aimed at enlisting opposition movements so
as to ensure greater political inclusion.
However, the fact that there have been no
significant steps in efforts to move the peace process
with the Taliban forward remains a source of concern.
Undoubtedly, the long-term security and stability
of Afghanistan can only be ensured through a
comprehensive and inclusive Afghan-led and Afghanowned reconciliation and political process. We
welcome the National Unity Government’s bilateral
and multilateral engagement with neighbouring
countries and the international community with a view
to making the regional environment more conducive
17-45789

21/12/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

to facilitating the peace process. In that regard, the
efforts of UNAMA aimed at promoting and supporting
peace-talk initiatives, reconciliation, dialogue and
support for social and economic development with full
respect for the country’s sovereignty and leadership,
remain very important.
Without sustaining inclusive economic growth and
development, the peace and security challenges faced
by Afghanistan cannot be effectively addressed. That is
why the National Unity Government needs coordinated
and comprehensive support from the international
community in order to move its political reform and
national development priorities forward, as envisaged
in the Afghanistan national peace and development
framework. It is vital that the international community
sustain its engagement and deliver on its various
commitments in that regard.
Lastly, concerning the engagement of the Security
Council, we welcome the recent visit by the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011) to Afghanistan and the Chair’s engagement with
the leadership of the country. Next month, under the
Kazakh presidency, the issue of Afghanistan will be
high on the agenda of the Council, and we look forward
to the high-level ministerial discussion on the matter.
I should like to conclude by once again expressing
our support for and solidarity with the people and the
Government of Afghanistan in their Herculean task of
addressing the many challenges and threats facing their
country, as well as in the difficult process of fostering
peace and stability through reconciliation, dialogue,
inclusive growth and development.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank the SecretaryGeneral and Mr. Yamamoto, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
for the latest report on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2017/1056). I also thank all of our briefers.
As the Secretary-General’s report acknowledges,
Afghanistan continues to face many challenges to its
peace and stability. However, it is important to recognize
the significant progress that has been made. Some
6.4 million children now attend school, the country
has a democratic Government, and Afghan security
forces are fighting to protect their fellow citizens. We
remain committed to supporting the Afghan people on
their path towards peace and prosperity bilaterally and
through the United Nations. The United Kingdom will

S/PV. 8147

spend up to $1 billion by 2020 to support the Afghan
Government’s work to improve security, the quality of
life and access to education.
I will take this opportunity to focus on three
important elements of peacebuilding in Afghanistan:
the holding of timely elections, the Afghan-led peace
process and the protection of human rights.
First, credible, inclusive and timely elections are
essential for long-term stability. We remain committed,
together with the international community, to
supporting the Afghan Government’s efforts to deliver
parliamentary and district elections in 2018. We call on
the Government and the electoral management bodies
to deliver the elections that the Afghan people deserve.
There is no purely military solution to the conflict
in Afghanistan. The only viable option for achieving
lasting peace and stability is an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace process. The Taliban must
choose to engage with that process. We welcome the
actions taken by the United Nations, including by the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, to
act on the recommendations in the strategic review of
UNAMA, which recognized the importance of placing
peace efforts at the forefront of the United Nations work.
The Kabul Process for Peace and Security Cooperation
will convene its second meeting in early February, and
we call on all parties to engage constructively with the
Afghan Government through that process so as to give
Afghanistan the best hope of achieving peace.
It is also encouraging that human rights remain
an essential part of UNAMA’s mandate, and I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto for highlighting the United Nations work to
support the meaningful participation of women in the
upcoming elections. In that regard, I would like to thank
Ms. Wazhma Frogh for her compelling briefing, and we
pay tribute to her many years of tireless activism in
support of women’s rights in Afghanistan. Her invitation
to brief the Security Council today demonstrates the
importance that we place on those issues.
The United Kingdom is supporting Afghanistan so
as to prevent violence against women and girls, improve
girls’ education and ensure women’s full participation
in political and economic life. We are also mentoring
the trainers of future female leaders at the Afghan
National Army Officer Academy. The Council’s
adoption of resolution 2344 (2017) ensures that women
and peace and security remain at the heart of the United

17-4578925/37

S/PV.8147

The situation in Afghanistan

Nations work in Afghanistan, and we welcome the
Afghan Government’s work on its national action plan
on women, peace and security, while urgently calling
for its full implementation.
With Afghanistan’s recent election to the United
Nations Human Rights Council — on which we
congratulate that country once again — we look
forward to working with Afghanistan to promote and
protect human rights around the world, including
through the fulfilment of its international human
rights commitments.
Looking ahead to next month, we fully support
Kazakhstan’s decision to prioritize Afghanistan and
Central Asia during its presidency of the Council. We
look forward to working with Kazakhstan, Council
members and regional and international partners
to support the efforts of Afghan President Ghani
and his Government to build peace and security,
with a particular focus on regional connectivity and
sustaining peace.
The instability in Afghanistan inflicts tremendous
suffering upon the Afghan people. The international
community can help to change that. If we work together,
the people and the Government of Afghanistan can build
the harmony and prosperity that have been inaccessible
for many decades.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Germany.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I thank you, Sir, for
giving us the opportunity to participate in today’s
debate. I would like to take up what you said earlier
in your national capacity with regard to Afghanistan,
namely, that, first and foremost, the peace process and
elections have to be driven by Afghanistan and Afghanowned. I fully support that.
I thank Mr. Yamamoto, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
for his briefing. I want to join my Italian colleague in
commending Mr. Yamamoto and his team for working
in circumstances that are not easy, and we are full
of admiration and support. We therefore support his
agenda with regard to reforming the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, as well as the
priorities that he is setting — as he explained earlier
this morning — with regard to concentrating on the
elections, which will be key. We share his belief that the
26/37

21/12/2017

goal of holding transparent, fair, credible and inclusive
elections is essential to strengthening trust in Afghan
democratic institutions. They will be indispensable for a
peaceful and stable future. Furthermore, in that context,
as others said earlier, including my French colleague,
I support the Special Representative’s emphasis on
women’s participation in the elections. Holding the
elections as quickly and smoothly as possible will also
be very important so as to provide the opportunity for
the comprehensive political process to succeed, and
that is where he placed his second priority, which we
fully support.
We appreciate that Afghanistan has taken the
lead in efforts to bring about peace by launching the
Kabul Process for Peace and Security Cooperation.
We fully support a credible, comprehensive and
inclusive political process. Once again, I believe it is
very important that women, youth and civil society
be included, in the peace process. Furthermore, it is
very important that regional players are involved. In
that regard, I would like to congratulate my Kazakh
colleague for his activities and increased regional role
and for his intention to put that situation at the centre
of his presidency of the Security Council in January,
including through a trip to the region.
I would also like to return to what the briefers said.
I was struck, as were many others, by the fact that both
Mr. Fedotov and our Kazakh colleague in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) highlighted the increase in
opium production. That is a very serious development.
If that trend continues, it will have even more
detrimental effects on terrorism, organized crime and
corruption, and it will undoubtedly impact the peace
process, because, of course, Da’esh and, in particular,
the Taliban benefit from it. I can therefore only support
what the Ambassador of Kazakhstan said in appealing
to Member States to play a more active role in listing
persons who are responsible for the opium industry.
I would like to echo my British colleague in
recognizing the work of and statement by Ms. Wazhma
Frogh. I can only support what she said in strongly
highlighting the need for greater women’s participation
in Afghan public life. Their stronger participation
in Government, the National Security Council, the
armed forces and all institutions is key. The Afghan
Ambassador mentioned that they are working hard
on getting more women into Government, but I think
much more can still be done. I can only point to my
17-45789

21/12/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

own country as an example, where women serve as the
Chancellor and as the Minister of Defence. Perhaps in
a few years we will see the same thing in Afghanistan.
The second point raised by Ms. Frogh regarded
children. We are witnessing, as we have in other areas
such as Iraq and Syria with the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIS), that the Taliban are recruiting
children. That is something that we have to stop. We
must see to it that we create alternatives so as to ensure
that children receive education and are not drawn
into terrible tasks. We know the brutality of the ISIS
fighters. We know that from the fate of the Yazidis.
Likewise, with regard to violence against women: what
we now see in Afghanistan, we have already seen to
a terrible degree in Iraq. I would therefore commend
the Afghan Ambassador for what his Government has
achieved. My British colleague just highlighted all the
progress that they have achieved. I can only commend
that and yet encourage them to improve in a number
of areas, such as Afghan-Pakistani relations, which are
very important and should be further improved.
I would also like to highlight and commend
Afghanistan’s election to the Human Rights Council.
What the Ambassador said in that context was very
encouraging. There are, however, two concrete points
that I would like to make in that regard: Afghanistan
should abolish the death penalty, and it should join the
Convention against Torture. Though the Ambassador
said that a lot is being done in that context, I believe
that formally subscribing to that Convention would be
an important development.
I should like to turn briefly to my country, Germany.
We will remain very committed to Afghanistan. Our
Ministers of Defence and for Foreign Affairs just
visited Afghanistan. We continue to be a major troopcontributing country to NATO’s Resolute Support
Mission, with 1,000 German troops on the ground. In
that context, I would like to explicitly commend the
United States for its renewed engagement, which is
key, as is what was said with regard to not setting an
artificial timeline. That is key because such timelines
encourage the Taliban to simply watch the clock waiting
for us to leave. That is very important. We continue to
support the Afghan Police. We have spent considerable
sums on stabilization efforts, contributing $250 million
annually for development and more than $20 million
for humanitarian aid.

S/PV. 8147

Germany remains firmly committed to advancing
stability, peace and development in Afghanistan and
the region. We co-hosted the Arria Formula meeting in
November. We work with the Afghan Government and
national partners but, at the same time, I would also
like to say that we need to see more, visible progress
so as to convince our people in Germany to continue to
commit soldiers and money to Afghanistan.
In conclusion, I would like to align myself
with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Another year has passed,
another year has come to a close, yet the suffering of
the people of Afghanistan continues. Indeed, during
the past year, as the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/1056) observes, Afghanistan continues to face
multiple political, economic and security challenges in
an exceedingly uncertain and fraught environment.
Lest we forget, I recall that the war and the violence
and terrorism that afflict Afghanistan and threaten
the stability of the entire region are the consequence
of foreign military interventions, occupation and
imposed wars.
The peoples of Pakistan and Afghanistan are bound
by the unbreakable ties of history, faith, blood and
language, as well as mutual interdependence. When
the people of Afghanistan needed refuge, the Pakistani
people opened their homes and their hearts to them.
Close to 3 million Afghans still reside in my country as
refugees. The peace and stability of our two countries
are intertwined. My country has a vital interest in a
peaceful, stable, united and prosperous Afghanistan.
Pakistan stands ready to support the Government
of Afghanistan in its efforts to address the multiple
challenges it faces.
In order to strengthen relations with Afghanistan in
all spheres — political, economic, defence, education
and culture — Pakistan proposed a comprehensive
Afghanistan-Pakistan action plan for solidarity last
month. The action plan aims to promote constructive
and meaningful bilateral engagement through the
establishment of working groups on political, economic,
military, intelligence and refugee issues. It is evident
that securing the Pakistan-Afghanistan border and
preventing cross-border terrorism is essential for

17-4578927/37

S/PV.8147

The situation in Afghanistan

both countries, the region and the world. That can be
achieved only through constant vigilance, effective
management and real-time communication. Nor should
terrorism be allowed to provoke clashes between our
border security forces.
We need regular contact between the armed forces
and intelligence agencies of the two countries so as to
prevent any violent incidents along our long and porous
border. It is to that end that the Armed Forces of Pakistan
and Afghanistan have agreed to place Liaison Officers
in each other’s army headquarters and establish ground
coordination centres. The success of such initiatives
requires reciprocity, trust and good will. We hope the
Afghan Government will work constructively with us
to address the challenges that endanger our collective
security and stability.
Apart from the conflict between the Afghan
Government and the Taliban-led insurgency, a new and
toxic threat has emerged in Afghanistan: the presence
of a number of terrorists from various parts of the
world: the Taliban Movement of Pakistan, members of
which have fled my country, the East Turkestan Islamic
Movement, the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan and
other groups, which have all now adopted the umbrella
of Da’esh.
Those terrorists are now located in the 40 per cent
of Afghan territory that, according to a recent United
States Department of Defense report, is either out of
Kabul’s control or is contested. It appears that Da’esh’s
core, under pressure in Iraq and Syria, may be relocating
to these ungoverned spaces in Afghanistan. According
to the Secretary-General’s own report (S/2017/1056),
Da’esh remains resilient in Afghanistan, having claimed
responsibility for recent attacks in Kabul.
We are deeply concerned at the presence of Da’esh
in the Afghan provinces bordering Pakistan, Iran and
Central Asia. This poses a threat not only to Afghanistan
but also to all its neighbours. It is the responsibility of
the Afghan Government and the international coalition
to root out Da’esh and associated terrorists from Afghan
territory and prevent them from launching attacks
against Afghanistan’s neighbours.
The growing nexus between illicit drugs and
terrorism is an additional dimension of the security
threat to the Afghans and to the country’s neighbours.
There has been an unprecedented and alarming rise in
drug cultivation and production in Afghanistan. The
latest report of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
28/37

21/12/2017

Crime refers to a record rise in poppy cultivation and
opium production. The Afghan Government and the
international coalition must endeavour energetically to
eradicate drug production and its links with terrorism.
But the central question in Afghanistan today is the
following: do we choose the path of war, or do we opt
for the path of peace? The international community is
unanimous in its view, and so is the Secretary-General,
that sustainable peace is achievable only through a
negotiated end to the long war.
Pakistan has long proposed this as the most viable
course to end decades of conflict and suffering in our
neighbouring country. Sixteen years of war, waged by
the world’s most powerful forces against an insurgency
of irregulars, has not yielded a military solution.
This failure cannot be explained away by alleging the
existence of safe havens for the insurgency across the
border. There are no such safe havens. The only havens
that exist for the insurgents and for Da’esh and other
terrorists are within the 40 per cent of Afghan territory
that is outside the control of Kabul.
Peace will not be restored by the continuing resort
to military force. Indeed, it is evident, after years of
war, that neither Kabul and the coalition nor the Afghan
Taliban can impose a military solution on each other.
The promotion of a political settlement and the pursuit
of a military solution are mutually contradictory and
mutually incompatible. You cannot kill and talk at the
same time.
Another resort to the military option will not
produce a result different from the past. It will not break
the impasse, much less yield a political settlement.
Priority therefore must be given to efforts to achieve
peace through dialogue and through reconciliation.
We urge the Taliban to abandon violence and enter
into a dialogue to seek a negotiated settlement. But
the other side, too, must display a genuine desire for
dialogue and not expect to bludgeon the insurgency
into an enforced settlement. While the international
community, including Pakistan and Afghanistan’s other
neighbours, can help in promoting a peace process,
obviously the principal responsibility to revive or initiate
a dialogue rests on the Afghan parties themselves. Peace
cannot be achieved until the Afghan parties themselves
conclude that there is no military solution to the conflict
and commit themselves to pursuing a genuine dialogue
for peace and reconciliation. This quest for peace
through negotiations must be the priority objective for
17-45789

21/12/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8147

the Afghan Government, for the Afghan Taliban, for
Afghanistan’s neighbours and for the United Nations.

also solidified the basis for regional cooperation by
bolstering trade.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.

Last but not least, we acknowledge and appreciate
the important role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
standing with the Afghan people and coordinating the
efforts of the international stakeholders in Afghanistan.
Turkey will continue to support UNAMA’s activities
and efforts in this regard.

Mr. Begeç (Turkey): I would like to express our
appreciation to the briefers for their comprehensive
presentations as well as to His Excellency Ambassador
Saikal for his statement. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2017/1056).
Today I will focus on five points.
First, we would like to emphasize the need to
consolidate the achievements of the past 16 years in
Afghanistan. The Afghan Government and people need
the international community’s sustained support. It is
vital to deliver on the commitments that we made in
this regard.
Secondly, we attach importance to the functioning
of the National Unity Government. Unity among every
segment of Afghan society is key to the success of our
endeavours to achieve peace, security and stability in
Afghanistan. Further fragmentation of Afghan society
would be detrimental to both the Afghan Government
and the interests of the international community.
Thirdly, we must bear in mind that Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation efforts are key
to lasting peace and security in the country. Turkey
will maintain its contributions to the security and
development of Afghanistan as well as its support to
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace efforts. We will
continue to support the Afghan Government as long as
our help is needed.
Fourthly, increased cooperation among the
countries of the region is imperative for success in
Afghanistan. We firmly believe that this cooperation
can be secured only through dialogue and stronger
engagement. Accordingly, Turkey will continue to
contribute to regional cooperation, including through
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, of which we will
assume the co-chairmanship in 2018. Our vision for
Afghanistan is that of a peaceful and stable country
that enjoys good and cooperative relations with its
neighbours and the world, as it is at the centre of major
regional projects.
On this understanding, we believe that the signing
of the transit and transport cooperation agreement, the
Lapis Lazuli agreement, in Ashgabat last month has

In concluding, I would like to underline that the
Afghan people deserve a better future. Our continued
commitment and support will renew the hopes of the
Afghan people on this path.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uzbekistan.
Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): First of all, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this quarterly debate on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as
well as the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Tadamichi Yamamoto; the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Yuri
Fedotov; and the Ambassador of Kazakhstan for their
informative briefings.
We in Uzbekistan are closely following the
situation in Afghanistan, because the prospects of
stable and sustainable development in Central Asia
are inextricably linked to the achievement of durable
peace in that country. We therefore fully support the
notion that there is no military solution to ensuring the
stability of Afghanistan. The only way to peace is a
direct dialogue among the central Government and the
main domestic political forces, without preconditions.
An Afghan-led inclusive peace process under the
auspices of the United Nations is essential for achieving
long-term peace and stability in the country.
We in Uzbekistan also agree that today the
international community should look at Afghanistan not
as a source of regional problems, threats or challenges,
but as a strategic opportunity that could serve as a solid
foundation for promoting multifaceted cooperation that
will be conducive to our common prosperity and wellbeing.
Uzbekistan continues to support and actively
participate in all current international formats of
dialogue aimed at facilitating the improvement of
the situation in Afghanistan and its socioeconomic

17-4578929/37

S/PV.8147

The situation in Afghanistan

development. In particular, over the past year highlevel delegations from Uzbekistan have taken part in
various events pertaining to Afghanistan, including
the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan, in Ashgabat; the Heart of Asia — Istanbul
Process, in Baku; the Moscow-format meetings and
the Kabul Process; and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization Afghanistan Contact Group, in Moscow.
Uzbekistan recently also supported the creation
of a new consultative meeting format, Central
Asia+Afghanistan, to discuss a wide range of regional
issues as well as to develop joint measures for ensuring
peace and sustainable development in our region.
For the past year, the new Government of
Uzbekistan, under the leadership of President Shavkat
Mirziyoyev, has also intensified bilateral dialogue with
Kabul. This year alone the two Heads of State met
several times on the sidelines of international forums.
Three weeks ago, President Ghani paid an official
visit to Uzbekistan. As a result of that visit, more
than 20 documents were signed. Those documents
are aimed at the expansion of cooperation in political
affairs, trade, economic, investment, transportation,
communication, education and other areas. Among
those documents were documents that provided for
the creation of a joint commission on security issues,
the construction of a railroad from Mazar-e-Sharif to
Hairatan, the construction of an electric transmission
power line, collaboration on transporting cargo, as well
as other projects.
In addition, the parties involved have also concluded
more than 40 contracts, which include provisions on
supplying Afghanistan with electricity, agriculture and
pharmaceutical products, as well as with construction
materials, means of transportation and others goods
from Uzbekistan. Today, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Uzbekistan visited Kabul and had a meeting
with officials from the Government of Afghanistan to
discuss issues related to how practically to implement
the agreements that were reached during President
Ghani’s aforementioned visit to Uzbekistan.
Last month, regular flights between Tashkent and
Kabul started to operate with a view to facilitating
bilateral exchanges. The two countries have also agreed
to open an Afghan consulate in the Uzbek border city
of Termez. The Government of Uzbekistan has also
been taking coherent steps to galvanize the support
30/37

21/12/2017

of the international community to efforts to integrate
Afghanistan closely into regional economic networks.
In particular, last month, Uzbekistan hosted
an international conference on ensuring security
and sustainable development in Central Asia. That
conference was hosted under the auspices of the United
Nations. Foreign Ministers from the five Central
Asian States and Afghanistan, as well as high-ranking
officials from other countries, the European Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and various international organizations participated in
that forum, which contributed to its success. In the final
communiqué, representatives supported initiatives
aimed at backing the peace process in Afghanistan,
promoting the reconstruction of socioeconomic
infrastructure and more actively integrating the
country into global economic networks. Participants
also supported the proposal for the Central Asian States
to draft a mutually agreed-upon General Assembly
resolution on enhancing regional and international
cooperation aimed at ensuring peace and sustainable
development in the region and the active involvement
of Afghanistan in that process.
Currently, given the importance of developing
a transportation and communication network for
developing the economy of Afghanistan, Uzbekistan
is planning to convene an international conference
on the situation of Central Asia within the system of
international transport corridors, which will provide
strategic perspectives and help seize unrealized
opportunities. That conference will take place in
Tashkent next year. We hope that those two initiatives
will receive the support of all Member States.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that in
Uzbekistan, we strongly believe that Afghanistan must
remain at the heart of the global agenda. Its integration
into regional and global economic networks is a key
prerequisite for establishing durable peace and stability
in the country. Uzbekistan therefore reaffirms its
readiness to continue with its close collaboration with
all Member States, both in bilateral and multilateral
forums, in order to bring about peace and stability
in Afghanistan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Bonser (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary
General for Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, as
17-45789

21/12/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8147

well as the other briefers, for their engaging briefings.
There are three themes that I will address today.

Canada looks forward to participating in the next Kabul
process meeting in February 2018.

First, the full and equal participation of women in
all facets of Afghan society is essential. The future of
Afghanistan rests on the potential of its people, and
durable peace and security cannot be achieved without
the active and substantive participation of all members
of society. Although there has been progress in
women’s rights, women continue to be at a disadvantage
in Afghanistan.

To conclude, I would be remiss if I did not mention
Canada’s deep concern over the deterioration of
security in Afghanistan, particularly the impact of
that instability and insecurity on women and children.
We look to Afghanistan’s neighbours and partners to
continue to work with the Government of Afghanistan
with a view to increasing gender equality, economic
integration and regional stability and to advancing
peace negotiations. All of that is vital to the pursuit of
peace and security in Afghanistan.

(spoke in English)
As we look forward to 2018 and the forthcoming
elections, I am sure that we can all agree on the
importance of encouraging and supporting the
meaningful participation of women, both as candidates
and as informed voters. It is essential that the election
process be inclusive, transparent and fair if it is to
yield credible results. That goes hand-in-hand with
strengthening of the representation of women in
governance structures. For political stability, economic
progress and development, Canada strongly supports
the view that women must join men at the centre of
decision-making at all levels of Afghan politics, society,
and economy.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.

That brings me to my second theme: the importance
of economic development. There are many mechanisms
that seek to support economic progress and regional
integration in South and Central Asia. The Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process and the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan are two of
them. Co-hosted by Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan,
which I sincerely thank for their efforts, both events
are illustrative of the important role that regional and
international actors can play alongside our Afghan
counterparts in promoting our common interests, in
particular regional stability, economic integration
and, ultimately, the creation of conditions for peace
and prosperity.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

My third and final theme is the peace process
in Afghanistan. Fighting in Afghanistan intensified
in 2017, taking an unacceptable toll on the civilian
population. Peace negotiations between the Afghan
Government and the armed opposition, especially
the Taliban, are necessary. Canada fully supports an
Afghan-led, Afghan-owned peace process. It is my
hope that the Kabul Process will bear fruit and that the
level of violence that we have seen of late will diminish.

Ms. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): First of
all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for Japan’s
excellent contribution as the penholder in our discussion
on Afghanistan. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is
honoured to be the new penholder, starting in January
2018. We are looking forward to working closely with
Security Council members, Afghanistan, regional
countries, donors and others in order to ensure that our
contribution will be meaningful, and we hope to build
on the excellent work of Japan.

I would like to thank Special Representative
Yamamoto and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Fedotov,
for their dedicated work, as well as Mr. Umarov,
the Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan, and
Ms. Wazhma Frogh for their valuable briefing. We also
thank Ms. Frogh for her meaningful contributions to
the High Peace Council.
We appreciate the thorough report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2017/1056).
Many people have spoken today of the developments
described in that report, such as the continued threat
of terrorism, the steep increase of the cultivation of
drugs and the lack of meaningful progress on the peace
process, all of which underline the need to stay focused
on supporting peace and stability in Afghanistan. I will
not repeat what has been said by many already, but I
would like to focus today on three issues for today’s
debate, in the spirit of the important work carried out
by Ms. Wazma Frogh on women, peace and security.

17-4578931/37

S/PV.8147

The situation in Afghanistan

First of all, I want to focus on the leadership of the
Afghan Government with regard to the empowerment
of women. Secondly, I want to focus on the role of the
United Nations, including the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), in strengthening
the position of women in Afghanistan. Thirdly, I
want to focus on the commitment of the Kingdom
of the Netherlands to promote peace and stability in
Afghanistan, with a special focus on women’s rights.
Two months ago, a team of six Afghan girls
visited the Netherlands to participate in the artificial
intelligence summit, where they presented a self-built
solar-powered robot that can help farmers in the field.
The difference couldn’t be greater between now and
the era defined by the Taliban’s rule, when women
were marginalized to the point of complete invisibility.
Today, Afghan women can, and indeed do, become
engineers, police officers, judges, politicians, civilsociety activists and teachers.
But the potential of Afghan women is far from
fulfilled. Increasing women’s participation in all
aspects of Afghan society will contribute significantly
to a more stable and prosperous Afghanistan. We
therefore welcome the personal leadership of both
President Ghani and First Lady Rula Ghani, who made
women’s empowerment a top priority. We particularly
welcome the national action plan on women, peace
and security, and the national priority programme
for women’s economic empowerment. We call on the
Afghan Government to continue to fund and implement
those programmes with much vigour and determination
and to continue to consult civil-society organizations
in that process.
Secondly, I would like to address the role of the
United Nations. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
agrees with the Secretary-General that the international
community’s support to Afghanistan should remain
focused on peace and stability, as he outlined in his report
(S/2017/1056). Here, the role of women is again of great
importance — their voices should be heard and will
add value to the process. An Afghan-led and Afghanowned peace process can achieve lasting results only
when women and youth can participate in a meaningful
way. In that respect, the United Nations should lead and
inspire by example. We encourage UNAMA and the
Council to follow up on the recommendations of the
Council’s Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security, which met on 5 December. In particular,
32/37

21/12/2017

we call on UNAMA to redouble its efforts to increase
the number of female local staff in the Mission.
Thirdly, allow me to turn to our lasting commitment
to Afghanistan. Sixteen years ago, Afghanistan became
one of the Kingdom of the Netherlands’ closest partners
in security and development cooperation. The position
of Afghan women has been and will remain a major focus
of our partnership in a decade of increasing Afghan
ownership and leadership. To support the Afghan
national action plan on women, peace and security, we
have contributed to its local implementation through the
€2 million Saf he-Jaded programme, which contributes
to increased security and justice for women and girls.
Let me conclude by reaffirming, once again, our
continued support for Afghanistan and our readiness
to contribute to the work of the Council on supporting
peace, security and development in Afghanistan during
our membership in 2018.
The President: I now give the floor to the Chargé
d’affaires ad interim of the delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Ms. Adamson: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine and the Republic
of Moldova, align themselves with this statement.
The EU strongly acknowledges the crucial role
played by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and all the United Nations
agencies in supporting the Afghan people, encouraging
peace and reconciliation, monitoring and promoting
human rights, and helping to improve the credibility,
integrity, inclusiveness and sustainability of electoral
processes, as well as in coordinating the international
community’s assistance. The EU wishes to have the
closest and strongest relationship with UNAMA, in
a spirit of transparent and open cooperation on the
ground and in international formats for the ultimate
benefit of Afghanistan.
The European Union remains fully committed to
supporting an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process. The EU takes note with interest that the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan Peace
and Reconciliation Process, consisting of Afghanistan,
China, Pakistan and the United States, has started to
reconvene for the first time in more than a year and
17-45789

21/12/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

welcomes the preparations for the Kabul Process
meeting, scheduled for 1 February.
The EU supports the Kabul process on peace and
security and other meaningful international efforts
feeding into the Kabul process initiative aimed at
establishing a genuine Afghan peace and reconciliation
process. The EU expects the Kabul process meeting
on 1 February to yield concrete results and pave the
way towards further constructive discussions. We also
welcome all initiatives mounted in close coordination
with the Kabul process aimed at creating a conducive
environment for such a process, and the EU calls on all
parties, including the regional stakeholders, to engage
in working towards constructive solutions.
On 16 October, the Council of the European
Union adopted a new EU strategy on Afghanistan,
setting out our vision of how the European Union
will support Afghanistan, both in addressing its
formidable challenges and in bringing about positive
change in the lives of ordinary Afghans. The strategy
lays out a path for a coherent, ambitious and forwardlooking strategy for EU engagement and partnership.
It focuses on four priority areas critical to achieving
progress, namely, promoting peace, stability and
regional security; reinforcing democracy, the rule of
law and human rights and promoting good governance
and women’s empowerment; supporting economic and
human development; and addressing challenges related
to migration.
The new EU strategy is one of several steps taken
to reinforce the European Union’s strong commitment
to Afghanistan more than a year after the Brussels
Conference on Afghanistan, held in October 2016. In
addition, the provisional application, as of 1 December,
of the EU-Afghanistan cooperation agreement on
partnership and development establishes a formal
bilateral relationship between the EU and Afghanistan.
As the United States has also recently adopted a
new strategy on Afghanistan and South Asia, let me
emphasize that the EU will continue to work together
with the United States and the international community
in support of lasting peace, security and stability in
Afghanistan. Respect for human rights and democratic
elections continues to be a focus for the dialogue
between the EU and the Afghan authorities and for the
actions of the EU in the country. In that regard, the EU
congratulates Afghanistan on its election to the Human
Rights Council.

S/PV. 8147

The EU maintains close contact with human rights
defenders in Afghanistan. In general, the EU has a high
expectation of the Afghan authorities that they will
seek to advance the protection of human rights. In that
context, however, the EU is extremely concerned by the
execution of five prisoners on 29 November — the first
executions to take place in Afghanistan since February
2015. We therefore call on Afghanistan to re-establish
its moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing
the death penalty. Human rights will be, from now
on, part of the structured dialogue between the EU
and Afghanistan under the cooperation agreement on
partnership and the development framework that I have
just mentioned.
With regard to elections, the EU and its member
States welcomed the announcement by the Independent
Electoral Commission of the date for the parliamentary
elections in Afghanistan, which are to be held in 2018.
That announcement was reassuring for both the Afghan
people and the international community as a sign of
the further democratization of the country. However,
there are signs that the process has been slowed down
by both technical and political difficulties. All efforts
must be deployed now to resolve those difficulties and
make those elections possible in the announced time
frame, and ensure that they are held in a democratic,
inclusive, transparent and credible manner. The EU
and its member States remain committed to supporting
the Afghan electoral process. The EU has committed
€15.5 million to assist the parliamentary and district
elections, alongside other members of the international
community and under the coordination of UNAMA.
Regional cooperation is key to lasting peace and
stability in Afghanistan and the region. Threats of
terrorism affecting all countries of the region can only
be confronted with increased political, economic and
security cooperation. Such cooperation is indispensable
for sustainable development. Afghanistan continues
to engage with its neighbours through international
forums, such as the Ministerial Conference of the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process and the regional
economic cooperation conference on Afghanistan.
The EU supports such regional forums aimed at
facilitating economic and political cooperation among
all regional stakeholders.
In June 2016, Federica Mogherini, Vice-President
of the European Commission and High Representative
of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
presented the global strategy for the European Union’s

17-4578933/37

S/PV.8147

The situation in Afghanistan

foreign and security policy. Its main objective is to
strengthen the relations of the EU with a “connected
Asia”. It is noteworthy that, through the deepening of its
trade relations, the EU is becoming the largest market
for a number of Afghanistan’s neighbouring countries.
The EU also stands ready to accompany the efforts
of the Afghan authorities to develop international
trade and investment, including with the EU and its
member States.
The EU and Afghanistan continue to engage
in a comprehensive dialogue on migration. The
implementation of the EU-Afghanistan joint way
forward is part of that discussion, with several planned
common actions related to the fight against smuggling
and trafficking in human beings and awareness-raising
activities on illegal migration. Discussions are also
under way to take stock of the implementation of the
reintegration assistance programme adopted in 2016,
with a view to ensuring a sustainable reintegration of
returnees from both the EU and neighbouring countries.
By the end of this year, the total amount of €78 million
allocated to Afghanistan will have been mobilized, and
the activities will have been launched.
The EU support will be soon complemented by
a new regional programme on migration and forced
displacement with a budget of about €200 million,
of which — as in 2016 — Afghanistan is the main
beneficiary. It will include activities at both the country
and the regional levels to address the challenges of
migration and forced displacement, including support
for Afghan refugees, internally displaced people
and returnees.
In October 2017 UNAMA reported a six per cent
decrease in the number of civilians killed and wounded
in the conflict this year, compared to the first nine
months of 2016 — a year that saw record highs in harm
to civilians. However, beyond those horrific figures,
it is extremely worrying that the proportion of women
killed and injured is on the rise, and extreme harm to
civilians continued to be inflicted amidst a worsening
toll from suicide attacks and a greater impact on
women and children. We call on all parties to protect
the civilian population, especially women and children,
in line with international humanitarian law and human
rights standards. We also need to continue to protect the
vital role played by humanitarian agencies and respect
their impartiality and humanitarian space as they work
to address the most urgent needs of the most vulnerable.
In view of the threat posed by the many mines and
34/37

21/12/2017

improvised explosive devices to the population, the EU
also encourages Afghanistan to maintain the current
demining pace.
Insecurity and instability are also fuelled by the
illicit cultivation and production of and trafficking in
narcotics. We have seen alarming United Nations figures
indicating significant increases in opium production.
We encourage the Government of Afghanistan to
continue to forcefully implement its national drug
action plan, with the full support of the international
community and in close cooperation with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other relevant
regional frameworks, such as the Paris Pact initiative.
In conclusion, the EU continues to consider
UNAMA to be a key partner in efforts to achieve
a lasting peace in Afghanistan. UNAMA has an
invaluable role to play in ensuring the broadest possible
international support for an Afghan-led and Afghanowned process. The EU will continue to support those
efforts with all the means at its disposal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to express my appreciation to Japan for organizing
this debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I also thank
the Ambassador of Afghanistan for his statement.
Finally, I would like to thank Mr. Yamamoto, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his briefing
and for presenting the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral, as contained in document S/2017/1056.
Unfortunately, security and instability remain
the major challenges for Afghanistan. According to
the Secretary-General’s latest report, despite a minor
four per-cent decrease in incidents, the security
situation has remained highly volatile, as conflicts
between Government and anti-Government forces have
continued throughout most of the country. The report
also highlights one of the most violent weeks in recent
times, when terrorist elements staged coordinated
attacks in several locations.
Iran continues its full support for the promotion of
security, stability, and comprehensive and sustainable
development in Afghanistan. The security situation
in Afghanistan has a direct impact, in our view, on
the security of our borders and the region. Iran also
17-45789

21/12/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

reiterates its support for any Afghan-led, Afghanowned, Afghan-controlled reconciliation and peace
process and stands ready to participate as a regional
actor in all such ongoing processes.
The Afghan National Unity Government is at the
forefront of the fight against terrorism, in particular
against the Taliban, Al-Qaida and Da’esh and its
affiliates, as well as other terrorist and extremist
groups and criminals, including those involved in the
narcotics trade. Greater sustained support on the part
of the international community is needed to support the
Afghan Government in that fight, as well as to address
its complex security, economic and political challenges.
Strengthening our regional cooperation with
Afghanistan is a priority and represents a major step
towards consolidating peace and economic activity
in the region. We welcome and urge further efforts
to strengthen the process of regional economic
cooperation, including measures to facilitate regional
connectivity, trade and transit. In that context, we
welcome the first consignment of goods from India to
Afghanistan through Chabahar Port in November 2017.
Afghanistan and Iran also continued their bilateral
efforts to finalize a comprehensive partnership
agreement, with a second round of working committees
taking place in Kabul on 8 October. Water, security,
and refugee and migrant issues have been discussed at
the deputy ministerial level.
The challenges facing Afghanistan and our
region are interconnected. We are very concerned
over the findings of the Afghanistan Opium Survey
2017 of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, which indicate an 87-per cent growth in opium
production in the course of this year. That information
is especially alarming when we take note of the fact
that narcotics serve as a major source of income for
the terrorist groups. The international community
needs to support the relevant international and regional
projects and activities, including those carried out by
Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan
within the framework of the triangular initiative to
counter narcotics.
For more than three decades Iran has hosted
millions of Afghan refugees, sharing our resources
and services with them, including basic commodities,
public health and public education at all levels. Iran
continues to participate in the work of the Tripartite
Commission in order to plan for the voluntary, safe,

S/PV. 8147

dignified and gradual repatriation of Afghan refugees.
Success in voluntary repatriation depends, first and
foremost, on providing for the reasonable needs of
repatriated refugees in Afghanistan and underscores the
necessity for mobilizing more international support for
that purpose. A stronger coordinated approach between
the Government, donors and the United Nations, and an
overall strategy for addressing the combined needs of
the displaced and returnees are crucial in making the
repatriation of Afghan refugees more effective.
We support UNAMA and other United Nations
agencies in their efforts to provide development and
reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through
a comprehensive plan. Sustained ownership and
partnership with the Afghan Government are needed in
order to best utilize UNAMA and the United Nations
system for the delivery of necessary services in priority
areas, as advised by the national Government.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Lal (India): Thank you, Sir, for organizing
this debate. We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Yamamoto and the other briefers
for their insights into the continuing difficult situation
faced by Afghanistan.
The deterioration in the security situation in
Afghanistan over the past few months is a matter of
serious concern. Terrorists continue to attack the most
vulnerable, including the sick in hospitals, children in
schools, worshippers in mosques and even mourners at
funerals. Terrorist groups have also gained territory.
The continued resilience shown by the Afghan people
and security personnel has been exemplary, but the
better future that people hope for still appears distant.
Our regular consultations and the work done by the
Council have not been enough to effectively reverse the
situation on the ground. It has been painfully clear for
a long time that the security situation in Afghanistan
has implications, not only for the region, but also for
the entire world. It is not simply a local problem. While
new threats emerge from Da’esh, the Security Council
cannot even decide whether to list the new leaders of
the Taliban or to freeze the assets of the slain leader of
the group more than a year after the issue was brought
to its attention.
The support for terrorist organizations like the
Taliban, the Haqqani network, Da’esh, Al-Qaida and

17-4578935/37

S/PV.8147

The situation in Afghanistan

its designated affiliates, such as Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and
Jaish-e-Mohammed from outside Afghanistan, must be
forced to stop. All safe havens and sanctuaries available
to such groups outside Afghanistan’s borders must end.
The Security Council has an important responsibility
in that regard in our collective interest.
The rise in opium production and the increase in
the areas under opium cultivation in Afghanistan, as
highlighted in the report of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, are cause for serious concern,
especially given their role in perpetuating the cycle of
terrorism. This drug trafficking is not a local concern.
The international networks that control this illegal trade
have to be identified and tackled. The problem needs to
be addressed through verifiable measures and actions.
The Security Council can effectively utilize the
sanctions regime under resolution 1988 (2011) in
the context of funds that the terrorist networks are
generating. This has not happened. We welcome the
recent visit of the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) to Afghanistan
and the upcoming visit by the Security Council to
the country early next month. We need to go after
the leaders of the terrorist organizations. We need to
investigate and designate the illicit drug-trafficking
business in the country.
Support for an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned and
Afghan-controlled peace and national reconciliation
process, within the framework of Afghanistan’s
Constitution, has to be pursued with all sincerity. Any
meaningful progress requires the cessation of violence,
the renunciation of links with international terrorism,
and respect for the rights of common Afghan people,
especially women and children. While the international
community’s commitment to Afghanistan is renewed
every year through various international efforts,
including those of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, respect for Afghanistan’s
sovereignty and its direction and ownership of the
peace processes should be paramount.
We congratulate Afghanistan on its recent,
first-ever election to the Human Rights Council.
Afghanistan’s active engagement at the United Nations
on various issues of importance continues to grow.
Development cooperation is one of the most
significant aspects of our long-standing friendship
with Afghanistan. Recent visits to India by President
Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah
36/37

21/12/2017

in the past three months have provided impetus to the
wide-ranging new development partnership that both
our countries launched in September. This covers
diverse areas, including education, health, agriculture,
infrastructure, renewable energy, drinking-water supply
and human resource development. Our people-topeople contacts extend from colleges and cricket fields
to trade and investment.
The importance of connectivity and transit for
trade and energy linkages to bring peace and prosperity
in Afghanistan, a land-locked country, is clear.
Regrettably, normal overland transport and transit
access between Afghanistan and a large economy like
India’s have been blocked for many years. This hurts
the welfare of the Afghan people. We are working with
our partners to address this issue. Last month, the first
consignment of wheat-grain assistance from India
reached Afghanistan through Chabahar port in Iran.
This marks the beginning of a new era of enhanced,
reliable and robust connectivity for Afghanistan.
The challenges are well known. The tools available
to the Council and the international community to
address them need to be utilized effectively. This
requires collective will and targeted action.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Australia.
Mr. Yardley (Australia): I thank Special
Representative and all the briefers today for their
valuable briefings.
Australia congratulates Afghanistan on overcoming
significant security, political and humanitarian
challenges in 2017, and notes the progress made on
key reforms, particularly on anti-corruption and in the
security sector. We encourage sustained attention to the
challenges of the security environment, establishing a
credible peace process and the response to continuing
high levels of internal displacement.
We welcome the Afghan Parliament’s recent
confirmation of 11 ministerial nominees to bring more
certainty to domestic politics, but were discouraged by
the failure to gain confirmation for the single female
nominee. Conducting parliamentary elections in 2018
will be crucial for political credibility. We encourage
Afghanistan to continue to work towards timely, free
and fair elections, and welcome the United Nations
commitment to providing electoral support.
17-45789

21/12/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

The worrying trend of increased drug production
identified in the recent report of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime will also require increased
attention in order to avoid undermining security and
development gains.
While the security and political phases of transition
are important, it is essential that Afghanistan’s
economic transition not be neglected. It is critical to
long-term stability. We are encouraged by growing
regional economic cooperation, which has seen
Afghanistan build closer trade partnerships with
its neighbours through 2017. We look forward to the
Kabul process meeting in February 2018 as a means of
continuing to draw together different peace initiatives
into a coherent and comprehensive Afghan-owned and
led peace process. We would also welcome enhanced
engagement between Afghanistan and Pakistan and
urge that priority be given to strengthening this bilateral
relationship, which is vital to regional stability.
Australia continues to work with partners in
support of the international response to Afghanistan’s
challenges. We welcomed renewed international

S/PV. 8147

commitments to Afghanistan in 2017, including the
United States and European Union strategies on
Afghanistan and the bolstered commitment of NATO
and its partners. Australia also contributed to that
effort, modestly increasing our military contribution to
the Resolute Support mission during 2017.
This has been a year of reflection and realignment for
the international community’s approach in Afghanistan.
We urge full implementation of the recommendations
of the strategic review of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and inclusions flowing from
these in the Mission’s renewed mandate — especially
initiatives that address gender issues.
Australia appreciates the significant contribution of
United Nations agencies and their staff in Afghanistan,
and we would like to thank them for their close
cooperation as development and diplomatic partners
throughout 2017. As we move into 2018, we look
forward to a refreshed approach. We have a window
of opportunity to use the momentum of 2017 and see
tangible progress for Afghanistan.
The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.

17-4578937/37
