TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

14 DECEMBER 1973

YORK

CONTENTS

Page
.... ,. . .,. .. . ...,.,. ....... , ..

1

.......,.....,............,..,...,....

1

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in Cyprus
(S/l 1137) . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1759)
Adoption

of the agenda

S/PV.1759

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securiry Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FIFTY-NINTH

Held in New York on Friday, 14 December
President: Mr. HLJANG Hua (China).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 759)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

2. Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/5488): report by the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Operation in Cyprus (S/l 1137).

MEETING
1973, at 10 a.m.

follows the wording of the Council’s previous resolutions
on this question. As it appears from my consultations that
this text is generally acceptable, it is my intention to put it
to the vote now, as the Council has often done in the past,
and to call upon representatives to take the floor after the
voting has been completed, in accordance with the order of
their inscription on the list of speakers.
3. Accordingly, I shah now put to the vote the draft
resolution contained in document S/l 1154.
A vote was taken by show of hands:
In favour.’ Australia, Austria, France, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Yugoslavia.
Against: None.

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/5488): report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation
in Cyprus (S/l 1137)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese): The
representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and Greece, in letters
addressed to the President of the Security Council, have
requested to be invited to participate, without the right to
vote, ,in the discussion of the question on the agenda. In
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and with
the established practice of the Council I propose, if there is
no objection, to invite the representatives of Cyprus,
Turkey and Greece to take places at the Council table and
to participate, without vote, in the Council’s discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Z. Rossides
fCyprus), Mr. 0. Olcay (Turkey) and Mr. C P. Panayotacos
(Greece) took places at the Security Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT [interpretation from Chinese): Before
this meeting was scheduled, I engaged in consultations with
all members of the Council, as well as with the representatives of the parties concerned, with a view to preparing
a draft resolution which could be placed before the Council
at this time. As a result of those consultations, a draft
resolution has been circulated in document S/l 1154, which

Abstaining: China.
The draft resolution was adopted by I4 votes in favour,
none against, with 1 abstention. 1
4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese): The
fist name on the list of speakers is that of the representative of Cyprus, on whom I now call.
5. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): Mr. President, I should like at
the outset to thank you and the members of the Council
for inviting my delegation to participate in this meeting. I
should also like to express to you our congratulations upon
your assumption of the office of President of this august
body. We are happy that the deliberations on this subject
today will be guided by the representative of a great nation,
which is an ever-living inspiration in respect of its ancient
civilization and its modern achievements. Your country is
one of the greatest in size, population and power with a
historic past of enormous value. My country, on the other
hand, is one of the smallest and weakest in terms of power
in this Organization, but one also having its own cultural
history and past civilization. It is because of the benevolent
influence of the Charter of the United Nations that it has
become possible for our two countries to work together
constructively in many fields on the basis of the Charter
and the principles of equality, non-interference and friendly
co-operation between countries, Iarge and small, principles
which are the cornerstone of the Charter.
6. We have before us the report of the Secretary-General
[S/11137] reflecting the situation in the island and the
1 See resolution 343 (1973).

activities of the United Nations during the last six months.
As appears from the report, the situation has remained
practically unchanged since last June. The new element in
the report is the reduction of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus. My Government, in its desire to
render easier the task of the Secretary-General, has repeatedly declared that it would agree to any decision of the
Secretary-General regarding the numerical strength of the
Force. My Government is ready now and at any time to
co-operate closely with UNFICYP, as it has steadfastly
done in the past, in order to achieve the purposes under its
mandate by virtue of Security Council resolution
186 (1964) of 4 March 1964. However, it has to be made
clear that my Government will not consent to any change
in the mandate of UNFICYP under that resolution or to
any action in disregard of the sovereign rights of the
Republic of Cyprus, which cannot be made the subject of
discussion. Those rights are clearly defined in the said
resolution. Nor can my Government agree to the injection
of third parties in the functions of the United Nations
Force, whose presence in the island is by the consent of the
Government of Cyprus alone. It is our hope that the
endeavours made by the Government in co-operation with
UNFICYP towards normalization and the creation of a
better climate of relaxation will be enhanced by the
willingness, understanding and goodwill of all sections of
the people of Cyprus, so that this further reduction of
UNFICYP may be safely facilitated.
7. In any case, I want to make it crystal clear that we are
co-operating entirely in the sense of a reduction of the
Force, with due regard, of course, to the circumstances
prevailing in the island, which we hope will develop in a
positive way towards better normalization, towards improved confrontation and towards a relaxation of tension
that will make the conduct of the talks more fruitful in the
sense of co-operation and a common purpose.

blocking of a number of public and main communication
roads by Turkish Cypriots from the enclaves still contirlues,
with the result that the Greek Cypriot people, constituting
the overwhelming majority of the population, still suffer
the inconvenience and the hardship of a deprivation and
curtailment of their freedom of movement for their daily
needs. This is a peculiar anomaly at a time when the
Turkish Cypriots enjoy full freedom of movement. All of
them, whether they have been part of the fighting force-or
whatever it is-have complete freedom of movement
throughout the island; and this has been going on for a
number of years, particularly since 1968 when, because of
the lack of response from the Turkish Cypriot
side
concerning the proposals for the bilateral removal of
check-points, the President of Cyprus and the Government
took the initiative for a unilateral measure in that direction
by lifting all check-points unilaterally at great risk to
internal security at the time. And this step was in some
quarters criticizcd as very perilous, but it was done in a
spirit of goodwill and, as a result, since that year, the
Turkish Cypriots enjoy full freedom of movement.
11. There has been no response, I said. However,
the
Government adheres steadfastly to its policy of peaceful
development towards normalization. It is true that, under
resolution 186 (1964), which provides that the Government
of Cyprus has responsibility for the maintenance and
restoration of law and order and a return to normal
conditions, UNFICYP has the corresponding task of contributing towards that maintenance of law and order;
therefore, the Government had the right to use any means
for restoring law and order. Yet, as I said, it adheres
steadfastly to its policy of avoiding the use of force at all
times for any reason and pursuing a peaceful policy through
close co-operation with UNFICYP.
12. The result of this anomaly is that although the
majority has no freedom of movement whereas
the
minority has such freedom over the whole island, this does
not, however, in any way affect the policy of my
Government. It continues in its goodwill and hopes that,
through UNFICYP and through better counsel, this
anomaly will be removed with the resulting reIaxation of
tension.

8. Renewed and commendable efforts have been made by
UNFICYP towards a measure of relaxation in the unnecessary armed confrontation between the two sides. The
reports of the Secretary-General for a number of years now
have repeatedly emphasized the uselessness of that confrontation and the irritability that it inevitably creates,
particularly by reason of its closeness.

13. It must be said, however, that when this unilateral
lifting took place, although there was no response, there has
been a rewarding satisfaction in having taken that step,
from the very fact that it was the occasion for the
PtifYing feeling in observing, as the Secretary-General said
in his report of 9 March 1968, “the ease with which
ordinary people of both communities were beginnigrg to
resume their former
amicable relations”
(s/8&q
Para. 1491. This is a very strong indication of the need to
encourage these trends.

9. My Government, needless to say, has always demonstrated its readiness to co-operate with UNFICYP from the
very beginning and to comply with its proposals for total or
partial deconfrontation. However, regrettably, the Turkish
Cypriot side has not agreed SO far even in the renewed
efforts of UNFICYP towards such deconfrontation. We
believe that deconfrontation is perhaps the first element
required for the reduction of the United Nations Force; and
in this respect we hope that a more reasonable approach to
this problem will be taken by the Turkish Cypriot
leadership so that the efforts of UNFICYP in this regard
may become more fruitful. I know very well that UNFICYP
is devoting great efforts in that direction and has made a
number of proposals. I hope that within the next period
those efforts will materialize.

14. In that report the Secretary-General
referred
to
normalization measures by the Government of Cyprus as
deserving of “special mention”. These measures, he said,
“have contributed to the relaxation of tension”,
par.
titularly after they were extended to the main Turkish
Cypriot enclave in Nicosia.

10. Similarly, on normalization and freedom of movement
time has been again no appreciable change. The forcible

15. The situation resulting from the Government’s action
has demonstrated unmistakably, as the report points out,

2

that ordinary Greek and Turkish people desire to live in
peace and harmony and already seem prepared to accept
and support reasonable compromises.
16. Regrettably, the natural progress towards conciliation,
friendliness and co-operation-the
essential elements required for the solution of the problem-has been interrupted and impeded in its natural and automatic expression
by the persistent imposition upon the Turkish Cypriot
people of a policy of divisiveness and alienation, against the
better judgement and wishes of those people themselves. As
emphasized in a number of the Secretary-General’s reports,
the continuing restriction of freedom of movement is one
of the most serious irritants to Cypriots of both-and I
repeat both-communities.
Indeed, both the illogical continuation of close armed confrontation and the unjustified
restrictions on the freedom of movement are instrumental
factors in preventing relaxation of tension and the creation
of a better psychological climate towards more positive
progress in the talks. It is hoped, however, that the futility
of the negativeness of such a policy will eventually be
realized by the Turkish Cypriot leadership in the better
conceived interests of both sides.

19. There is ample authority as to the meaning and scope
of local government. In the talks, the Greek Cypriot side
has gone to all possible lengths towards granting a liberal
interpretation of local government, giving more rights to
local government within, of course, the framework of the
unitary State and the essential definition of local government, for going beyond these generally accepted terms
would inevitably disrupt the cohesion of the State by
creating a State within a State.
20. As to the unjtary State itself being the agreed basis of
the talks, there has been some attempt tp cast a doubt on
this being the basis. There can be no reasonable doubt,
however, in the light of the explicit statements to that
effect in the reports of both Secretary-General U Thant and
of his successor, Secretary-General Waldheim. This was the
basis since the very start of negotiations in 1968, when the
structure of the State was first discussed; thereafter
negotiations proceeded on the basis of a unitary State in
every respect. No reservations were made at the time the
talks originally started or at any relevant time thereafter.
An attempt to change position from that agreed basis at
this late stage would appear to be an act that would not be
compatible with the importance and seriousness of the
subject under discussion. We therefore dismiss that eventuality as being improbable, if not impossible, and in any
case, unacceptable.

17. However that may be, my Government will continue
with patience and tolerance in its policy of peaceful
development towards normalization and towards positive
progress in the talks. These talks, which originated in 1968,
went through various stages and a number of agreements
appear to have been reached on legislative, judicial and
executive aspects. ‘From the beginning, they were conducted on an agreed basis of a unitary State for an
independent and sovereign republic of Cyprus. This is
shown also in all the areas of agreement reached on
constitutional structure. They were all on the basis of a
unitary State. According to the report,

21. It must in this respect be remembered that, as I said
before, the fundamental structure of the Republic of
Cyprus from the very start of its establishment was
admittedly that of a unitary State, and it could not have
been otherwise in view of the realities of the geographical
distribution of an intermingled population throughout such
a small island, without any pattern of natural territorial
separation, as was so categorically observed by the eminent
constitutional authority, Lord Radcliffe, who was commissioned by the British Government to deal with the subject
shortly before independence. Moreover, Mr, Gala Plaza,
who was appointed Mediator under resolution 186 (1964),
which is the chief resolution on this subject, took exactly
the same view and elaborated more emphatically. He said,
in his report of 26 March 1965, that “The establishment of
a federal regime requires a territorial basis, and this basis
does not exist.” [S/6253, paru. 1501. This was because of
the island-wide intermingling of the population. Federation,
according to Mr. Galo Plaza, would involve the disaster of
“a compulsory movement of. . . many thousands [of
persons], contrary to all the enlightened principles . . , of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights” [ibid.,
para. 1531. It would, furthermore, “entail. . . economic
and social disruption which could be such as to render
neither part of the country viable” [ibi.dJ. He also stated
“In fact, the arguments for the geographical separation of
the two communities under a federal system of government
have not convinced me that it would not inevitably lead to
partition” [ibid., para. 1541. Thus a claim to federation is
but a disguised claim for partition.

“ . . . the intercommunal talks have proceeded cautiously and slowly towards the common goal of reaching
a satisfactory accord on the outstanding constitutional
problems and. . . even though a large measure of concurrence has already been reached. . . a great amount of
detailed work still needs to be done.“[S/11137, Para. 76.j
18. These talks seem to have run into difficulties on the
aspect of local government. It should be remembered that
in the 1959-1960 Constitution of Cyprus, which is still in
force, there is no provision for local government. Therefore,
this is a new element. There has been no objection to
having this element introduced in the existing unitary State
of Cyprus. The differences seem to arise chiefly with regard
to the extent of the local government within the framework
of a unitary State. The question of interpretation of local
government has arisen; however, it could not in fact create
any difficult problem regarding interpretation, for local
government is a well-defined legal term, one of constitutional law, that could not admit of misinterpretation. There
are various forms of local government, but all fall within
the definition of local government in its main characteristics. To try to dispute the definition of so well known a
term is merely an effort to introduce an element of
confusion, perhaps as a means of escape, but this does not
help the positive progress of negotiations.

22. Similarly, the report of Lord Radcliffe dismissed both
the view of partition and that of federation as being wholly
inapplicable in Cyprus. Yet, very recently we heard a
discreet but sufficiently audible sound about a federated
3

system in Cyprus. I hope that it is not a prelude to a louder
call and, perhaps, a further shift of positions.

over by the representative of China. 1 consider it one of the
greatest sources of satisfaction in my diplomatic career to
have had a modest role in the establishment of relations
between our two friendly countries. I should also like to
thank all members of the Council for having allowed me to
take part in its deliberations.

23. But, as we had occasion to remark in another context,
partition is the worst calamity that can befall any nation.
The experience of the world over the past two decades has
amply demonstrated that partition, like splitting the atom,
creates the most explosive and devastating situation of
endemic war and human suffering, posing, moreover, the
gravest threat to international peace and security. Even in
cases where territorial separation made partition appear
possible, it afterwards proved a great destruction to that
State. Whether it be in Asia, the Middle East or Europe, the
evils of partition are now manifest. They compellingly call
for persistent efforts towards reunification, and we are
happy to welcome the positive progress in such endeavours
in the historic Irish nation where now an all-Ireland council
is being discussed in respect of this country.

31. The Security Council has once again extended the
mandate of UNFICYP for another period of six months. We
are grateful to the Governments concerned for their
continued support of this operation, which contributes to
the maintenance of an atmosphere in which negotiations
are made possible in Cyprus. The rather academic argument
that the extended presence of the Force does not encourage
or accelerate an agreed solution is fallacious. It is only witll
a reduced level of intercommunal tension that any meaning.
ful negotiation can take place.
32. In paragraph 92 of the report of the Secretary-General
[S/11137]
it is stated that “Although the talks have
continued . . . in a constructive atmosphere, only limited
progress has been made on the outstanding basic issues.”

24. In order to move forward from the present impasse in
the talks in Cyprus it must be made clear and be realized by
the parties concerned that progress towards solution cannot
be sought through increasing division but only through
growing unity, not through accentuated antagonisms but
only through developing co-operation, not by always
lingering on differences but on embracing common interests, not by moving against but with the positive trends of
an interdependent world.

33. In paragraph 93 the Secretary-General
express the opinion that:

“ . . . with mutual goodwill and understanding and with
concessions on both sides, an agreed accommodation can
in fact be arrived at within the framework
of the
intercommunal talks that would protect the vital interests
of all parties.”

25. This is the position of my Government in respect of
the question before the Council and I venture to express
the hope that by the next meeting of this Council we may
have more positive results in a new move forward towards
the essential elements of solving the problem, towards the
needed co-operation and spirit of adjustment.

I should like to underline the words “concessions on both
sides”. As stated in paragraph 78 of the report, the Turkish
community has indicated its willingness to make certain
concessions in respect of its rights as embodied in the 1960
Constitution in return for local autonomy. To arrive at an
accommodation, however, reciprocal concessions are necessary. They are also required in order to preserve the
bi-communalnature of the State, as well as the independenceand territorial integrity of Cyprus. I shallcome back
to this point in a moment.

26. Before concluding I should like once again to exercise
the pleasant duty of expressing our sincere and deep
feelings of gratitide to our eminent Secretary-General and
his collaborators, both here at Headquarters and in Cyprus,
for their untiring efforts and their devotion in promoting
the principles of the Charter and the objectives of the
United Nations in Cyprus, and particularly the objectives of
Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964
under which this Force was established in Cyprus.

34. Everyone familiar with the historical backgroundof
the Cyprus question for the last 20 years will recall the
original Turkish position and the point to which it has
evolved. Turkey must insist now, however, on preservation
of the bi-communal State basedon the partnership of the
two communities in the independence,sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of Cyprus. With theseremarks,
I should like to associatemyself with the hope and
expectations expressedby the Secretary-Generalwith regardto the enlargedintercommunaltalks.

27. I wish to assure the Secretary-General, as well as
Mr. Guyer, Mr. Urquhart, Mr. Osorio-Tafall, General Chand,
and all those associated with them in this endeavour in
Cyprus that we are fully cognizant of the magnitude of
their contribution and deeply appreciate it.
28. Our sincere gratitude is due also, and particularly, to
the Governments of the countries which, through a noble
sense of responsibility and of devotion to the concept of
peace keeping through the United Nations, make the
6peration of UNFICYP possible by means of their generous
contributions in men and money.
29. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from
now call on the representative of Turkey.

goes on to

35. On the pessimisticside, I have to put on record OUT
renewedapprehensionsabout the revival of intentions for
the clandestineimportation of arms among some Greek
Cypriot quarters. The Greek Cypriot House of Representatives,at its meetingon 29 October 1973, discussed
the
question of arming the Greek Cypriot National Guard with
modern weaponry without further delay, ostensibly ‘%I
order that the National Guard can be ready and able to
meet any danger”. Coming from none other than
Mr. Glafcos Clerides, the President of the House; that

Chinese): I

30. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): Mr. President, it is particularly
agreeable to be allowed to participate in a meeting presided
4

formulation, innocent as it sounds, cannot, however, dispel
doubt about the existence, in certain quarters at least, of
less innocent intentions. At that meeting it was decided
that these discussions and preparations should be continued
in closed session.

the presenceof larger armed forces on the Government’s
side, whose mobility is not constrained as is that of the
Turkish Cypriot fighters. The vioIent incidents within the
Greek Cypriot community resultingfrom an argument over
when and by whom enosisshouldbe realized, hardly create
an atmosphere conducive to dispelling this feeling of
insecurity on the part of the Turkish community.

36. The importation of arms which may ultimately be
used against the Turkish community cannot be regarded by
my Government simply as ‘an innocent measure for selfdefence. In the light of experience, and against our deep
concern for the security of the Turkish community, such an
act can only be considered as a serious breach of the status
quo. In this connexion, I should like to put on record that
the local newspapers referred to in paragraph 46 of the
Secretary-General’s report do not belong to the Turkish
community.

41. At any rate, it shouldbe borne in mind that it is the
Greek community which started the threat and which has
the capacity to maintain it or ceaseit. The necessarily
defensiveposition of the Turkish Cypriot community, after
10 years now, shouldnot be forgotten.
42. The United Nations Peace-keepingForce in Cyprus
had a further usefulness,that of being in the areawhen the
United Nations Emergency Force was established by
Security Council resolution 340 (1973) on the situation in
the Middle East. The existence of such a force, with vast
accumulated experience and dedicated personnel, facilitated the establishmentof UNEF without delay, We have
watched with great admiration the efficiency and speed
with which the Secretary-Generalwasable to transfer the
Austrian, Finnish, Irish and Swedish contingents serving
with UNFICYP to the Middle East as an urgent interim
measure.We also deeply appreciate the prompt replacement of the Austrian, Finnish and Swedishpersonnel in
UNFICYP. In this connexion, I would like to join the
Secretary-Generalin expressingour gratitude to the Irish
peace-keepingcontingent whose servicesdedicated to the
noble causeof peacearenow required elsewhere.

37. My pessimistic list again, unfortunately, includes many
items in the area of activities towards a return to normal
conditions. The Secretary-General himself indicates that
“only slight progress has been made in extending essential
public services and restoring others to Turkish Cypriots”
[ibid., para. 601. Electricity, water, social insurance, postal
services, grain subsidies, and even the issuance of birth
certificates to the Turkish Cypriots born since 1964 are
among the outstanding issues. Although a slight increase in
Turkish Cypriot participation in projects sponsored by the
United Nations Development Programme is reported, the
fact remains that the Turkish community’s share in the
benefits of United Nations technical assistance is far from
satisfactory or proportionate.
38. To this picture must be added the 15,000 Turkish
Cypriot displaced persons who still live away from their
homes and villages. In a forum where it has, unfortunately,
come to be customary to talk about human suffering in
terms of millions, this figure of 15,000 may seem small at
first glance, but not relievingly so, considering that Cyprus
itself has a total population of about 600,000. In speaking
about the sufferings of the 15,000 Turkish Cypriot displaced persons, this fact should never be lost sight of; it is
like having 15,000 refugees in a small town. The limited
number of displaced persons who have been permitted to
resettle their villages, mentioned in paragraph 65 of the
report, must in turn be compared against this total number
of 15,000. Even in the case of the few villages that have
been resettled, the hardships created and conditions
imposed by the Greek Cypriots must also be noted.

43. It is with the greatestadmiration and esteemthat my
Government regards the UNFICYP operation, We are
grateful to the Secretary-General, his Special Representative, the Force Commanderand all the membersof
UNFICYP for their efforts and devotion. The SecretaryGeneralsuggests
a secondphaseof reductionsin UNFICYP.
We do not think that the circumstancesin Cyprus arc
opportune for sucha reduction. For us,the security of the
Turkish community, which is at stake, remains the predominant consideration, and under no circumstancescan
we forego this consideration.Any reduction in the security
of the Turkish community will necessarilyresult in an,
increasein our concern.Having saidthis, and although we
have doubts as to the timeliness of such a reduction, I
believe that the Secretary-General and the Force Commander may be relied upon to decide, after consultation
with the parties, whether they find it possibleto go ahead
with the secondphaseof reductionswithout compromising
the security of the Turkish community. For our part, we
can only reiterate the readinessof the Turkish community,
which has no voice of its own here, to co-operate with
UNFICYP, asin the past.

39. All these factors are witness to the conditions of
extreme hardship and deprivation which have persisted for
10 years now in the daily lives of the Turkish Cypriots.
After such a decade of suffering, one conclusion must now
be clear to everyone: the Turkish community is determined
not to give up its right to exist as a distinct community, no
matter how much deprivation it has to put up with. It is
against this background that the minor inconvenience
mentioned by AmbassadorRossideswith regardto restrictions of movementin someareasvital to the security of the
Turkish Cypriots shouldbe considered.

44. I had originally intended to conclude my statement at
this point. But some of the remarks of Ambassador
Rossideshave constrainedme to add a few of my own.
45. I am sorry that every time in responseto Ambassador
Rossides,I have to repeat myself in saying that I am most
reluctant to enter here into discussionof the form of
government or State in Cyprus, which is currently the
subject-matterof the intercommunaltalks, becauseI do not

40. On the subject of deconfrontation, I would point to
paragraph 38 of the report in which it is stated that the
Turkish Cypriots feel that their security is threatenedby
5

believe in the usefulness of such an academic discussion and
I do not feel that my knowledge of administrative or
constitutional
law is up to the standard required to
maintain such a high level of discussion here.
46. I wish Ambassador Rossides could bring himself to
feel the same. Apparently he cannot help it. He has to score
some points in the absence of a Turkish Cypriot repre.
sentative here. In response to what he has said, I need only
point to the Turkish position in the intercommunal talks
which makes it abundantly clear that neither the Turkish
community nor Turkey can accept Ambassador Rossides’
unitary State.

matter. The legal arguments, as I have had occasion to say
both today and earlier, belong to those who are discussing
the matter in Cyprus with a view to reaching an agreed
solution, which we are all hoping for and which will take this
subject outside this body once and for all.
51. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from
now call on the representative of Greece,

Chiflese): 1

52. Mr. PANAYOTACOS (Greece): I should like to begin
by thanking the members of the Security Council for giving
my delegation the opportunity of participating in this
debate on Cyprus. May I also offer you, Mr. President, oar
sincere congratulations as you preside over the Security
Council this month and our appreciation of the skill wit11
which you have prepared the ground for this debate.

47. I would also like to add-and this is based on personal
knowledge-that
it has never been the agreed basis of the
talks. I think I have as much right to go back and dig into
my own memory as Ambassador Rossides regarding the
so-called “unitary
State” as a basis for discussion. I
remember my many negotiations on this subject in my
various capacities and never recall having agreed to such a
definiton of the terms of reference. Nor do any of my
predecessors.

53. Bearing in mind the trying times the Council has just
experienced with a major and chalIenging question, I shall
try to limit my statement strictly to essentials. After all, to
use Shakespeare’s phrase, “brevity is the soul of wit”,
especially in this forum.
54. The extension for the twenty-fifth
time of the
mandate of UNFICYP has just been decided, on the basis of
the Secretary-General’s carefully balanced and informative
report on the present state of the United Nations peacekeeping operations in Cyprus in accordance with Security
Council resolution 186 (1964). In this context I should like
once again to express our deep appreciation of the beneficial
results of the constant interest and tireless endeavours of
the Secretary-General and his able assistants, the UnderSecretary-General, Mr. Guyer, and his Special Repre.
sentative in Cyprus, Mr. Osorio-Tafall. I wish also to express
our gratitude to the Commander of the United Nations
Force in Cyprus, Major-General Chand, and the officers and
men under his command for their painstaking efforts, their
impartiality, goodwill and patient work to prevent any
deterioration of the situation.

48. One of the elements in Ambassador Rossides’ speech is
the fact that, regrettably, he speaks of tolerance, of
understanding, almost-not
perhaps in so many words-of
magnanimity towards the Turkish community. Nowhere is
there mention of their constitutional rights as one of the
co-founders of the Republic some 13 years ago. The main
problem we are being faced with in this Council, and in
other forums, is that we are being told by the Greek
Cypriots that no State is respectable unless it is unitary and
that no other form is viable. I am thinking of all those
among the membership of the United Nations, even of this
august body of the Council, that do not conform to this
pattern, and I almost shudder.
49. Ambassador Rossides has also mentioned that there
are shifts-he has said in fact further shifts-of position on
the part of the Turkish Government or the Turkish Cypriot
community. There is, unfortunately,
one position which
has never shifted: that-not even disguised-of very eminent
Greek Cypriot statesmen who have never brought themselves to agree to denounce or deny enosis. The reason why
Ambassador Rossides cannot have a unitary State is not
here, but in Cyprus. He need not look elsewhere than in
Cyprus. There cannot be a unitary State in the definition
that he seems to give to it because there is no unitary
nation in Cyprus. States are the reflections of the needs of
nations. Where there are two nations there cannot be a
unitary State. As I mentioned earlier, the United Nationsand even this Council-is
full of examples. Cyprus came
into being as a bi-communal State and it will remain so
because that is the wish of one of the communities mainly
responsible for its independence. One should not forget
that the Turkish community in Cyrpus is the reason why
Cyprus is an independent State. If it were otherwise, if it
were a one-community State, a one-nation State, obviously
it would be part of Greece. The preservation of the
bi-communal State is therefore an essential guarantee for
the maintenance of the independence of Cyprus.

55. The successful carrying out of their mandate has been
proved beyond any doubt by the very fact that the Security
Council, by its resolution 340 (1973) of 25 October 1973,
concerning the sending of a new United Nations Emergency
Force to the Middle East, unanimously agreed to a proposal
by the Secretary-General that, as an urgent interim meas.
ure, the bulk of four contingents serving with UNFICYP
should at once be airlifted to Egypt.
56. We find grounds for encouragement in the fact that
this temporary though subsrantial reduction of the strength
of UNFICYP has been made possible without any objection
by those directly concerned. It constitutes additional and
corroborative evidence that the general situation in Cypnrs
has improved during the last six months, thanks mainly to
the relaxed atmosphere and the optimism created by the
reactivated intercommunal talks.
57. On the other hand, it should be remembered that
Council resolution 186 (1964) also recommended the “re.
turn to normal conditions” in the island. In this respect,
however, we are witnessing the fact that the interlocutors,
in spite of their sincere efforts to reduce the areas cf
discord, will still have to take more steps along the road tc

50. Having said all that, I have not really put forward any
legal arguments. I have just spoken of the facts of the
6

an agreed accommodation by displaying a spirit of courage,
mutual goodwill and understanding. On this point we share
the Secretary-General’s view that the parties directly
concerned must first of all refrain from any action or any
hasty individual or collective initiative that might stir up
passions and misunderstandings, thus rendering a solution
difficult. We do believe that, under the auspices of the
United Nations, men of goodwill can work towards the day
when the rule of law and justice will replace the danger of
military confrontation in the island.
58. From the very beginning Greece has envisaged, and has
made known again and again, even very recently, that it
considers the reactivated intercommuna1 talks to be the
only chance and the best procedure for arriving at a viable
solution, taking into consideration the well-being and the
vital interests of the people of Cyprus as a whole, as well as
the independence, integrity and unity of the Republic. We
are therefore firmly convinced that the procedure now
being followed must be continued until its successful
consummation. However, we cannot but expressour regret
&at the Greek Government’s well-known views on the very
basis of the intercommunal talks have been passedover in
silence in the Secretary-General’s report.
59. With regard to the implementation of a new reduction
of the United Nations commitment in Cyprus, in terms
both of finance and of manpower, which the SecretaryGeneral has been obliged to consider as the so-called second
phase of the economy measures, I should like to emphasize
the following points in order to facilitate the task of the
Security Council and without any prejudice to the sovereign rights of the Government of the Republic of Cyprus.
60. First, the Greek Government reiterates its commitment to maintain and strengthen, in close co-operation with
UNFICYP,
its present policy of ensuring that significant
intercommunal
incidents are prevented. Secondly, it fur.
thermore expresses the hope that the proposals for measures
of deconfrontation,
submitted to the parties directly
concerned by Mr, Osorio-Tafall in July 1973, may be
agreed upon by the parties. Thirdly, Greece will continue to
pay its substantial share of the financing of UNFICYP.
61. My delegation cannot, however, but express once
more its disappointment that so few members both of the
Security Council and of the Organization have so far been
contributing
to the financial needs of the peace-keeping
operation in Cyprus, the more so since, as I said earlier,
UNFICYP has by no means outlived its usefulness, not only
in the island but also in a wider context, by providing the
nucleus of the newly created United Nations Emergency
Force.
62. Regarding more particularly the latter, we have witnessed with gratification the willingness of the Security
Council members to accommodate and harmonize their
positions for the benefit both of the parties in dispute and of
the international
community. This happy development was
ma& possible thanks to their constructive efforts to work
out adequate solutions. It has furthermore led to a new
consensus regarding the financing of the United Nations
Emergency Force, for which a special scale of assessments
to share the cost among all the Members of this Organization has been successfully devised.

63. It seems desirable, therefore, that in order to keep
UNFICYP workable as long as it is needed, all members of
the Security Council should agree to take seriously into
consideration the proposal made by the representative of
Canada in his statement of 28 November in the Special
Political Committee, regarding guidelines for United
Nations peace-keeping operations. I should like to quote
some relevant parts of that important statement:
“There had been, in the past, protracted disagreements
over the matters of operation and financing for peacekeeping missions. Those disagreements had also led to
considerable disruption in the activities of the United
Nations and had placed it in a financiaI situation from
which it had not yet fully recovered. . . . Members should
seize the present opportunity and the new mood in the
Security Council and the General Assembly to examine
how methods of financing other peace-keeping operations, such as UNFICYF’, might be reviewed in order to
put them on a firmer and more equitable footing.“2
64. In concluding, allow me to say that my delegation
believes that this is as good a moment as any to remind
ourselves that we all share jointly and severally the
responsibility to fulfil the mandate of the Charter and make
the United Nations a really workable instrument of world
peace. In our opinion, this could be better achieved in the
framework of a generally agreed equitable system of
financing United Nations peace-keeping operations, including UNFICYP, thus contributing effectively to the maintenance of international peace and security in the strifetorn Eastern Mediterranean area.
65. Mr. FAKIH (Kenya): My delegation voted in favour of
the resolution that the Council has just adopted, having
three considerations in mind.
66. Firstly, during the last six months UNFICYP has
played, as usual, a constructive role and helped create a
period of peace and tranquillity in Cyprus.
67. Secondly, the Force is still regarded as necessary, as
the report of the Secretary-General indicates in paragraph
98, by the Governments of Cyprus, Greece and Turkey. So
long as the Council is in a position to influence or provide a
framework through which a mutually acceptable settlement
can be reached, it should not fail to play such a role. We
believe in the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus
and the security of all its peoples.
68. Thirdly, our vote is an expression of thanks and
confidence in the efforts of the Secretary-General, the
Force, and all concerned, for the efforts they are making to
searchfor a solution of the Cyprus question.
69. I would like to recall the good service that the
presence of the Force in Cyprus gave this Council in its
hours of dire need, pursuant to the adoption of resolution
340 (1973) on the Emergency Force for the Middle East.
70. My delegation is grateful that the Government of

Cyprus, the other Governments involved, and the Govern2 see ojpcigl
Session, Special

Records of the General Assembly,
Political Committee,
899th meeting,

Twenty-eighth
wa. 12.

ments from which the contingents were drawn,
agreed to the Force serving in the Middle East.

permanent solution of this sensitive issue, a solution that
can safeguard the integrity and sovereignty of Cyprus as an
independent non-aligned country, enabling all groups of the
people of Cyprus to live in peace, unity and harmony,

readily

71. Peace has a price and the cost of maintaining the
Force for the next six months has been estimated at $6.5
million. To cover this amount and the accumulated deficit,
we shall need $29.6 million. No wonder that in paragraph
15 of the Secretary-General’s report, he informs us that the
Force has been reduced by 439 men of all ranks.

78. In conclusion, my delegation would like to express its
great appreciation to the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative, the Force Commander, and members of
UNFICYP, for their efforts and dedication in assisting the
groups in Cyprus in their search for an agreed solution of
their problem.

72. The previous report of the Secretary-General on
Cyprus (S/10940/ six months ago, was very optimistic on
agreement being reached in four months. We note, unfortunately, that no agreement has yet been reached, But we
must keep on trying.

79. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia): Let me first say
that my delegation wishes once again to praise the efforts
of the Secretary-General and his staff, the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative, Mr. Osorio-Tafall, the
Force Commander of UNFICYP, General Chand, and the
troops and police under his command, to bring about the
settlement in Cyprus called for by this Council in its
resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964. We believe that the
tireless and patient work of all those concerned deserves the
Council’s highest praise and commendation. The fact that
their efforts have not so far been rewarded to the extent we
would all wish can in no way be attributed to lack of
determination or application on their part,

73. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): The Security Council
has again decided to renew the mandate of the United
Nations Force in Cyprus on the basis of the report of the
Secretary-General. On a previous occasion my delegation
already stated its views on this matter and subsequent
developments in Cyprus have not persuaded my delegation
to change its stand.
74. Although certain positive developments have occurred,
the overall situation in Cyprus still necessitates the presence
of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in the island,
not only to continue its peace-keeping efforts, but also to
enable peace-making efforts to reach a positive and final
conclusion. My delegation, however, continues to be
disturbed by the question as to how long this situation is
going to linger on.

80. The Secretary-General has once again provided us with
a comprehensive and frank report on the present state of
the United Nations operation in Cyprus; and once again he
has been forced to conclude that the prevailing circumstances on the island call for the continued presence of
UNFICYP. My delegation has carefully studied the situation as described in the report, and agrees with the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that the mandate of
UNFICYP be extended for a further period of six months.
We have accordingly voted in support of the draft resolution just adopted. In doing so, we have been mindful of the
fact that in the period of the present mandate the
Secretary-General has felt able to effect reductions in the
United Nations commitment by implementing phase I of a
proposed two-phase restructuring and redeployment of the
Force. These changes, which were foreshadowed in the
Secretary-General’s previous report, are welcomed by my
Government, not only because of the restraining effect they
will have on the mounting costs of the Organization, which
is a source of continuing concern to all of us, but also, and
more importantly, because the existing degree of stability
and security in the intercommunal situation would appear
to be such as to allow for these reductions without
jeopardizing the effectiveness of the force in discharging its
mandate.

75. Therefore, in supporting the decision of the Council to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Force in Cyprus,
my delegation wishes to piace on record its sincere hope
that increased efforts will be undertaken by afl parties
concerned with regard to the search for solutions of the
frustratingly complex problems of the island, so that the
operations of UNFICYP may come to a positive end within
a reasonable period of time.
76. My delegation is happy to note that the recent
deployment of UNFICYP to the Middle East did not
adversely affect the comparatively peaceful situation in
Cyprus. We see’it as a fortunate omen for further developments which will enable us seriously to consider reducing
the manpower of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force,
as well as streamlining and reorganizing its operations. My
delegation is prepared to lend its support to efforts which
could lead to the reduction of the United Nations commitment in terms of finances and manpower, without, however, jeopardizing the effectiveness of UNFICYP.

81. For the same reasons, we support and endorse the
Secretary-General’s more far-reaching proposals for phase II
reductions in the force outlined in chapter I, section B, of
his report. Given that the prevailing conditions on the
island are maintained, my delegation is in favour of the
early implementation of these proposals and will hope that
these reductions, provisionally scheduled for the spring
rotations of 1974, can be put into effect at that time. As
far as the Australian civilian police are concerned, it is our
intention to maintain a contingent in Cyprus for the period
of the extended mandate. At the same time we would have
no objection to accepting reductions in the size of our

77. My delegation continues to be concerned by the
controversy that still surrounds the interested parties with
regard to the concept of an independent, sovereign and
unitary State of Cyrpus. This controversy proved to be the
insurmountable barrier for the two communities to reach
agreement on the constitutional
framework
that will
provide for the adequate participation of the two communities in the Government of the Republic of Cyprus, My
delegation hopes that the two communities may find
themselves able to exert further efforts in order to achieve a
8

86. The Secretary-General’s report on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus over the past six months clearly shows,
in those sections which deal with the situation in the island
and the attempts to promote settlement, that the role of
the United Nations Force continues to be of great value.
My delegation once more wishesto record its gratitude to
the Secretary-General and his collaborators in the Secretariat, to his Special Representative in Cyprus, to the Force
Commander, and to all those who contribute to UNFICYP.
My delegation remains convinced of the requirement for
the United Nations Force to maintain a close watch on
developments in the island and to help to prevent confrontations and to promote harmony.

contingent along with those of other countries, and we shall
be ready for further consultations on this with the
Secretary-General and with other contributing Governments.
82. The Secretary-General’s report again reveals the inherently tense .and restless nature of the situation in Cyprus.
Although the military situation seems to have remained
quiet over the period under review, we note with regret that
there has been little progress towards military deconfrontation and that the proposals submitted by UNFICYP to the
Government and to the Turkish Cypriot leadership have not
secured the necessary degree of agreement of both groups
to enable them to be put into effect. Continuing allegations
of illegal or clandestine importation of arms for use by both
sides and the recurrence of incidents serious enough for
UNFICYP to consider breaches of the cease-fire are also
disturbing.
We note, too, that by no means all violent
incidents were intercommunal in origin but were the result
of activities within the Greek community which, becauseof
their effect on the Turkish community, may themselves
have threatened to impede the process of deconfrontation
and reduction of tension on the island.

87. My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General that
progress in the direction of removing the problem of
military confrontation could do much to reduce tension.
We are disappointed that he was unable to report progress
in this field during the past six months. We look to those
concerned to facilitate the efforts which the SecretaryGeneral and his representatives continue to make. My
delegation likewise hopes that the remaining problems
under discussion in the intercommunal talks will be
overcome. We have noted, from the statements made after
the last meeting between Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktash,
that the tempo of their work has been stepped up. We agree
that the remaining difficulties should be capable of solution.

83. AS I had occasion to say in June [1727th meeting],
while there continues to be a significant degree of economic
activity within each of the two communities, the disparity
in their respective rates of progress remains and, as the
Secretary-General
notes, the tendency towards separate
development of the economic life of the Turkish Cypriot
community
is stitl evident. My Government continues,
therefore, to believe that the best prospect for some
permanent accommodation between the two parties, and
with it hopefully a diminution of the mutual suspicion
which seems to characterize their relation, lies In the
intercommunal talks that continue to take place with the
participation
of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative and the constitutional experts made available by
the Governments of Greece and Turkey. Progress in the
talks has been manifestly slow, but perhaps not unexpectedly, given the magnitude of the problems involved and
the caution from which both sides seem unable to escape.It
is gratifying
at least to note that the Special Representative
feels that there are no insurmountable obstacles that would
prevent
a constitutional
accommodation from being
reached between the two communities. We can only urge
the two parties to continue their efforts to reach a
satisfactory agreement.

88. At the 1727th meeting of the Council on 15 June, my
delegation welcomed the Secretary-General’s intention to
achieve economies in the United Nations operation in
Cyprus. We were glad to take part in the consultations
which were held in October and we welcome the reductions
which have already been made as mentioned in paragraph
15 of the report.
89. The question also arises whether a further reduction in
the size of the Force is possible. In the view of my
delegation a further modest reduction is not only possible
but also, for financial as well as other reasons, necessary,
provided, however, that the situation in Cyprus does not
undergo any significant deterioration. We say this because,
whatever those concerned are or are not prepared to say,
we believe that they all have the good sense to regard a
further reasonable reduction in the size of UNFlCYP on the
scale suggested by the Secretary-General as a positive step
and the goodwill not to allow incidents to grow. And in any
case, a substantial Force, some 2,300 strong, would still
remain in Cyprus to help even after the completion of the
second phase of the reductions.

84. In conclusion, I would like to couple my delegation’s
appreciation
with that of the Secretary-General for the
timely and invaluable assistance rendered by the Governments of Austria, Finland, Ireland, Sweden and the United
Kingdom in the establishment of the United Nations
Emergency Force. At a time when speed and efficiency
were supremely important, both qualities were admirably
shown by all those concerned in UNFICYP.

90. My delegation also felt that the Council might find it
useful to include some reference to further reduction in the
size of UNFICYP in the resolution adopted today. As
members of the Council will be aware, my delegation has in
the last few days been having discussions on this matter and
we had hoped that we would be able to suggest suitable
wording to our colleagues in the Council. Unfortunately,
partly because for reasons outside our control time has
been a little short, it has not been possible to arrive at
agreement on suitable wording. However, I think it is fair to
add that our consultations revealed that there was no
substantive objection to the basic idea that the Secretav-

85. Mr. JAMIESON
(United Kingdom): As we have
demonstrated
by our vote in favour of the resqlution, the
United Kingdom delegation supports the extension of the
mandate
of the United Nations Force in Cyprus for a
further six months. I propose to confine my remarks this
nloming
principally to questions arising from the renewal
of the mandate.
9

Council can draw any satisfaction after nine years. It is
good, however, that the activities of United Nations
specialized agencies are providing a useful medium, though
very modest, for fruitful co-operation between the two
communities.

General should proceed, at the earliest appropriate opportunity, with the reduction of the Force to a total of about
2,300. For our part, we very much hope that the political
situation in Cyprus will not deteriorate-on the contrary,
that it will improve-and that the appropriate opportunity
for the Secretary-General to proceed will be found to be
the occasion of the next troop rotation.

95. I am drawing attention to that because we note in the
report that certain modest progress has been made in the
co-operation between the two communities in the irnpiementation of the activities of United Nations specialized
agencies.

91. Since we support the extension of the mandate of the
Force, my Government pledges to maintain our troop
contingent in Cyprus for the period of the mandate and
also to maintain our logistic support to the Force.

96. It will be worth while, however, to consider seriously
the possibility of promoting
understanding and cooperation between the two communities by increasing and
intensifying the activities of United Nations specializcd
agencies through a phased and planned reduction in the
United Nations Force and transferring all, or a great
portion, of the funds so saved to these activities. It is no
doubt a slow process, and like all human experiments it
will be so, but ultimately it will produce better and more
durable results than the continued stationing of forces.

92. Finally, the need for further reductions in UNFICYP
is underlined by the financial burden carried by those who
are contributing to the operation, either with troops or
finances, and indeed underlined also by a further deterioration in the financial situation of the operation as a whole,
which is revealed in chapter VI of the Secretary-General’s
report. As far as my own Government’s contribution is
concerned, there has been another significant increase in
the cost which we bear. This is now estimated to be running
at an annual rate of nearly g2.5 million. My delegation
must therefore continue to advocate stringent budgetary
control to ensure that the present-and future-reductions
in the size of UNFICYP will bring about a corresponding
fall in the financial burden of the contributing countries.
We are not unaware of the efforts made by the SecretaryGeneral and his staff to control costs and indeed we pay a
tribute to what they have done, but we must urge the
Secretary-General once more to keep the size of UNFICYP
under continuing review and to ensure all possible economies in its operation.

97. Although the aforementioned
experiment can be
considered on a long-term basis, it is interesting and
revealing to observe that the two communities, as well as
the Government, have shown sufficient capacity for selfrestraint and a sense of responsibility during the first phase
of the reduction of the Force and the sudden transfer of an
appreciable number of troops to the Middle East. As this
reduction has generated a sense of responsibilty
and
self-restraint in the parties concerned, it will be reasonable
to assume that perhaps more and more responsibility will
be encouraged. If the funds so released from a Force
reduction are to be transferred to the activities of United
Nations specialized agencies, as suggested earlier, a motive
for further understanding and co-operation between the
communities will be provided.

93. Mr. ABDULLA (Sudan): On studying the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in
Cyprus [S/11137],
we are pleased to note that the
intercommunal talks have continued and that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General participated in the
exercise of the Secretary-General’s good offices. In the
period under consideration, 14 such meetings have taken
place. We agree with the Secretary-General that, in the
circumstances prevailing in Cyprus, these talks remain the
main hope for understanding between the Turkish and
Greek communities. We cannot, however, draw full satisfaction from the fact that these “talks have proceeded
cautiously and slowly towards the common goal of reaching
a satisfactory accord on the outstanding constitutional
problems” (ibid., para. 761. The report draws the conclusion that “the successof the intercommunal talks cannot as
yet be taken for granted” [ibid, para. 771. One of the main
difficulties would still appear to be the mutual suspicion
and mistrust of the two communities, according to the
report. However, we hope that the continuation of the talks
will help to replace mistrust by understanding.

98. In venturing to advance these ideas my delegation is
motivated by the very good relations which my Government and my people entertain with the Government and
people of Cyprus. We are therefore not only well-wishers,
but it is also our profound hope and our policy that Cyprus
will be master of its own peace. It is in the interest of my
country and of the region to which my country belongs,
that the people of Cyprus should freely unite and that the
country will accede to independence and sovereignty# as a
non-aligned State.
99. Finally, in this spirit my delegation voted in favour of
the resolution just adopted in the hope that the Council
will see fit to consider promoting confidence and cooperation between the two communities by intensifying the
existing concrete United Nations activities as an ultimate
alternative to maintaining a Force. As the process of
increasing United Nations activities through its specializcd
agencies is linked to the reduction of forces and is phased
out, an orderly reduction should lead to smooth total
withdrawal of the United Nations Force. It is hoped that by
then complete normalcy will prevail in the island.

94. Turning to the actual situation that prevails in the
island, we learn from the report that few incidents have
taken place between the two communities and that the
intercommunal situation has been quiet during that period.
Meanwhile, we regret to note that there has been no
significant progress towards a return to normal conditions,
which is a focal point in two resolutions adopted by the
Council in 1964. This is not a result from which this

100. Before I conclude, my delegation wishes to express
its deep appreciation of the positive and dedicated efforts
10

_

-. .”.._ __

of the Secretary-General and his collaborators at Headquarters, of his Special Representative, and of the Commander of the Force and his men towards the promotion of
peace and tranquillity in Cyprus.

it a resolution just adopted to extend for six months the
stay in Cyprus of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force.
In voting in favour of this resolution, my delegation
supported the view that the presence of the United Nations
Force in Cyprus remains necessary for the maintenance of
peace in that island.

101. Mr. BOYD (Panama) (interpretation j?om Spanish):
The Panamanian delegation is in agreement with the
resolution just adopted which extends for a further period
ending 15 June 1974 the stationing in Cyprus of the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force that was originally established
under Security Council resolution 186 (1964). We take this
position for the following reasons.

108. However, as it emerges from the report of the
Secretary-General, there has been practically no progress.
since our meeting in June 1973. In the report, the
Secretary-General stressesthat:
“During the period under review there has . . . been no
significant progress towards a return to normal conditions.
The tendency towards separate development of the
economic life of the Turkish Cypriot community is still
evident, and only slight progress has been made in
extending essential public services and restoring others to
Turkish Cypriots”. [S/11137, para. 60.1

102. On 18 December 1965, Panama was a sponsor of
General Assembly resolution 2077 (XX) since we considered that that was the best way of reaffirming the
national unity of Cyprus without in any way interfering
with or diminishing or reducing its position and capacity as
an independent State. We are highly sensitive to this
problem, for Panama together with Cyprus also had a
rt?gime of tutelage imposed upon it that was against all
norms of international law, in exchange for guarantees of
our independence. The only solution that we find to the
Cypriot problem lies in the consolidation of a united and
indivisible nation in which the rights of minorities are
guaranteed.

109. My delegation sincerely regrets that the efforts at
mediation have remained deadlocked since the presentation
of the last report because of very clear-cut differences
between the two sides. Paragraphs 78 and 79 of the report
refer to certain facts which merit our attention. Indeed, we
understand the concern of the parties to achieve a situation
that would safeguard the Iives and goods of Cypriots. We
note with satisfaction that:

103, As the danger of a confrontation between Turkish
Cypriots and Greek Cypriots receded, thanks, largely to the
presence of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force, so we
come closer to the ideal of Cyprus as a free, Independent
and united State.

“Mr. Clerides has reiterated his agreement to constitutional arrangements that will (a) ensure security of life
and property, not only for the Turkish Cypriots but for
all the people of Cyprus, because these are fundamental
human rights; (b) secure, without discrimination, a fair
participation of the Turkish Cypriot community in the
affairs of the State; (c) assist in that community’s
economic development; and (d) establish a political
structure that would give to the Turkish Cypriots, in
addition to the autonomy in communal affairs embodied
in the 1960 Constitution, a measure of local selfgovernment.” [ibid., para. 79.1

104. During this year when throughout the world we
especially celebrate human rights, my delegation expressed
the hope that all inhabitants of the island of Cyprus will
speedily be able to enjoy all freedoms and liberties without
restriction, in a spirit of reconciliation and peace. The
voices of wisdom and moderation that we have heard this
morning frbm the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and
Greece regenerate our hopes for a speedy understanding
among the inhabitants of Cyprus.

He also stressesthe fact that:
105. I would like to state that Panama will always
advocate respect for the territorial unity and integrity of all
States, and particularly of those States which, like Cyprus
and Panama, suffer from attacks that undermine and
weaken our sovereignty and national unity. To those who
have voIuntarily contributed to the maintenance of the
United Nations Force, we address Panama’s appreciation, as
well as our thanks to the Secretary-General and, parUnder-Secretary-General,
Mr. Guyer,
the
ticularly,
Mr. Osario-Tafall, and all those whose efforts have contributed towards improving the situation in the complex
question of Cyprus.

“he strongly opposes a virtually total autonomy for the
Turkish Cypriot community that would include functions
which in his view are within the exclusive competence of
the State.” [ibid.]

106. I would not conclude my statement without expressing our acknowledgement of the goodwill and sacrifice
made by the military contingents stationed on Cyprus when
they were dispatched urgently to the Middle East to carry
out another peace-keeping mission.

110. That opinion is perfectly in accord with that of my
delegation, devoted as we are to the principles of unity and
respect for the integrity and sovereignty of every State in
our support of all peoples struggling to attain these goals. It
is within this framework that we support Cyprus, a
non-aligned country like Guinea, in the legitimate claims set
forth in certain parts of the report. We reaffirm, together
with the Secretary-General, that the reactivated intercommunal talks are the best instrument for achieving a
satisfactory, lasting and agreed solution based on the
concept of an independent, sovereign and unitary State
with the adequate participation of the two communities,

107. Mrs, Jeanne Martin CISSE (Guinea) (interpretation
front French): Once again the Security Council has before

111. The statements made by the representatives of
Cyprus, Turkey and Greece give us hope that at an early
11

a

contribute to the establishment of a climate of reduced
mistrust in relations between the two communities. Furthermore, we have every hope that the Greek and Turkish
Governments will bring to the implementation of the
Secretary-General’s aims the support and backing required
of them, which must stand as a guarantee for the parties
directly concerned.

date, thanks to the positive co-operation among the three
parties concerned, the Council will succeed in settling this
problem which has for so long-since 1964, in fact-been a
matter of concern to it.
112. My delegation approves of the reduction of forces
proposed by the Secretary-General in paragraphs 15 and 16
of his report, and expresses the firm conviction that such a
reduction will in no way be detrimental to the effectiveness
of the Force in the performance of its task as defined in
resolution 186 (I 964,).

117. Thirdly, the intercommunal taIks are marking time.
Last June, they seemed to be developing favourably, since
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General went so
far as to say that it was possible for a satisfactory
conclusion to be reached within four months. Today,
however, as the report shows, the assessment made is
extremely reserved, since the success of the intercommunal
talks cannot as yet be taken for granted, although, at the
present juncture, there are no insurmountable obstacles,
That differences of view should exist on such fundamental
questions as the safeguarding and protection of the identity
of each of the communities, or the establishment of viable
and effective institutions, is perfectly normal. That difficulties should arise when it comes to deciding upon
specific ways of implementing certain accepted principles
can surprise no one. The stakes are too high, and indeed too
vital, for the parties concerned, with all the experience they
have had, to accept blurred compromises. At the same time,
the status quo must not be taken as a lesser evil, as a
comfortable haven that does away with the fear of the
unknown to which new constitutional arrangements would
give rise. The intercommunal talks, accepted by all parties
concerned, have been encouraged by the Security Council
ever since they were resumed. Having for a long time
assumed special responsibilities regarding peace and security
in Cyprus, the Council cannot now be complacent over the
threat of deadlock in the talks. While it is true that it is the
communities themselves that must find a solution to the
constitutional problems dividing them, it is nevertheless our
duty to warn them against the long-range effects of
excessive procrastination which might lead us to reconsider
the terms of our own commitment.

113. Before concluding, we should like to convey our
congratulations to the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative on their efforts in Cyprus. Furthermore, we
should like to thank the personnel of the United Nations
Force in Cyprus and express our gratitude to the Governments concerned for the valuable assistance they have been
giving the international community in the maintenance of
peace in Cyprus.
114. Mr. LECOMPT
(France)
(interpretation
from
Rench): This being a question that the Security Council
has dealt with at least twice a year for 10 years, I shall limit
myself to referring very briefly to the most significant
developments of the last six months. The general situation
iri Cyprus not having changed too much in that period, it
does not, in fact, seem necessary to dwell further on its
main aspects, even though they continue, unfortunately, to
give rise to legitimate concern. In reading the extremely
interesting report of the Secretary-General, three comments
come to mind.
115. First of all, despite the temporary detachment of
personnel from the Force itself in response to the urgent
needs of the Middle East, no confrontation
or serious
incident has taken place between the two communities,
which have given manifest proof of a high sense of
responsibility by maintaining close co-operation with the
Force in order to avoid any incidents during these
exceptional times. This demonstration of goodwill deserves
special stress.

118. The French delegation eagerIy hopes that the proof
of wisdom and goodwill shown in the last few weeks by
both communities will help overcome the mistrust and
suspicions dividing them and will lead to establishment of
the indispensable psychological conditions conducive to a
harmonious coexistence which we wholeheartedly expect
and hope for.

116. Secondly, in accordance with the intentions expressed in his last report, the Secretary-General has outlined
a very specific programme for reducing the Force which
meets the desires expressed repeatedly by the Council. We
wish to convey our thanks to him for this. The first stage
has already been accomplished without the conditions for
use of the Force having had to be modified. The second
phase, however, will call for a reorganization and change in
methods. There are certain risks inherent in this second
phase which explain the precautions the Secretary-General
wishes to take. Basing ourselves on the experience of the
last few weeks, we do not expect any difficulties. The
co-operative attitude required of the parties directly concerned is actually quite in keeping with the trust they have
traditionally shown in the Force and its commanders. This
is logical, since the operation is being carried out for the
benefit of the two communities, as all its past action
attests. It is, furthermore, reasonable that there should be
such an attitude since it relies on the assistance precisely of
those who are responsible for the security and weIfare of
the two communities. It is a welcome step, because it may

119. Mr. JANKOWITSCH (Austria): On the basis of the
report by the Secretary-General and, specifically, the
recommendations contained in paragraph 98 thereof, the
Security Council has just renewed the mandate of the
United Nations peace-keeping operation in Cyprus and thus
extended once more the stationing of the United Nations
forces on the island for a further six-month period.
120. As I said on previous occasions at meetings of the
Council on this subject, Austria remains deeply committed
to bringing about a just and lasting solution to the problems
of the island of Cyprus, a sovereign and independent State
Member of the United Nations and a country with which
Austria has long-standing and close ties of friendship. This
commitment finds its first and foremost expression in
12

Austria’s continued participation in this peace-keeping
operation of the United Nations, which, at least for the
time being, seems to hold the only promise of maintaining
general calm on the island and in this way undoubtedly
provides the most adequate basis for the acceleration of the
search for a political settlement.

fully completed, and pledges its continued support and
CO.OperatiOn
in implementing phase one. As I have indi.
cated before, our support for phase two is related to the
satisfactory realization of the prerequisites of paragraph 18
of the report. Such prerequisites, once fulfilling the
judgement of the Secretary-General, could, in our opinion,
achieve a double goal. This goal would not only clear the
way for a reduced United Nations commitment-including
a
relatively small, but badly needed, financial relief for the
operation-but perhaps one even more important: the
prerequisites could be a very significant and importaat step
on the road towards achieving a further general military
deconfrontation on the island.

121. In expressing the appreciation of my delegation to
the Secretary-General for his clear and comprehensive
report, I wish to say at the outset that my delegation fully
shares his view-as stated on several occasions in the
report-that
the intercommunal talks hold the b&t and
most constructive prospect of coming to a Solution acceptable to both communities on the island. At the same time,
my delegation too, like previous ones who spoke this
morning, cannot refrain from noting disappointment over
the fact that these talks are progressing at a pace which still
permits US to entertain doubts as to their ultimate success.

125. In renewing my Government’s support for this
peace-keeping action of the U&ted Nations-both in continuing to provide troops as well as financial support-I
wish, at the same time, to express our sincere hope, and
perhaps even expectation, that developments towards a
lasting political solution may progress in such a way as to
make this kind of commitment unnecessary in the not too
distant future.

122. Only the most efficient peace-keeping operation of
the United Nations can, to a high degree, guarantee the
maintenance of general calm and prevent the outbreak of
renewed hostilities. What the United Nations involvement
alone will not be able to bring about is to change a situation
which is still fundamentally unstable, This can only be done
if a political
solution, geared to command the active
support-or
at least the acceptance-of both communities,
can be achieved. In this connexion we are encouraged by
the fact that the role the United Nations, through the
Secretary-General
and his Special Representative,
Mr. Osorio-Tafall, to whose untiring efforts we should once
again like to pay a tribute, was again able to play in Cyprus
went beyond one of just keeping the peace in the sense of
merely preventing the outbreak of renewed hostilities. All
the efforts by the Secretary-General and Mr. Osorio-Tafall
to contribute to the political settlement, therefore, deserve
OUT full support and our high appreciation.

126. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): My delegation has voted
for the resolution just adopted by the Council, guided by
the same considerations as on three previous occasions in
1972 and 1973, during our present term as a member of
this Council. Namely, the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus continues to remain a basic instrument and
major presence on which the maintenance of peace in the
island still largely depends: It provides, together with the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative, a calming influence, a kind of mediating agency
that can, and does, contribute necessary additional energy
for the more active pursuance of such important approaches as the intercommunal talks for the final and just
settlement of difficult problems between two communities,
and thus for the normalization of the situation in and
around Cyprus which we all desire and support. We do so in
the hope that this normalization will soon come after so
many efforts invested by all interested parties in that
direction, and also after the many efforts made by the
Security Council itself which, up to taday, has adopted in
all 28 resolutions and two consensus statements concerning
the question of Cyprus and United Nations peace-keeping
forces in Cyprus.

123. It has already been pointed out this morning by
other speakers that one chapter in the report of the
Secretary-General is of particular significance as far as the
Force itself is concerned. I am referring to the paragraphs
dealing with the plans for the reduction and possible
restructuring
of the Force. The Secretary-General has
devised a two-phase plan, according to which a total
reduction
of the Force of about 25 per cent will be
achieved, as compared with its former strength in May
1973. This plan, once fully implemented, will not only be
significant in terms of savings in manpower and fmancial
expenditure,
but could eventually have a corresponding
impact on the basic modus operandi of the Force. This is
precisely why, in the view of my delegation, a cautious
approach may commend itself. It is understandable that
those countries which, like mine, are directly participating
in this operation by providing troops and financial support,
have a special interest in all the plans and undertakings
relating to a reduction and eventual restructuring df the
Force. We, therefore, find ourselves also in agreement with
the line of thinking’ of the Secretary-General and support
the statement of necessary prerequisites which appears in
paragraph 18 of the Secretary-General’s report.

127. Consequently, UNFICYP, which is under permanent
supervision and control of the Security Council, remains an
element of stability in the wider and very sensitive area of
the East Mediterranean, for which the independence,
territorial integrity and security of the Republic of Cyprus,
an active non-aligned State and an equal Member of the
United Nations, free from any interference in its own
sovereign, internal affairs, are the essential prerequisites.
128. Here I should like to express our appreCiatiOn
Of dl
those factors which made it possible to have UNFICYP lend
urgently its most pressingly needed contingents and services
for the initial phase of the deployment of the United
Nations Emergency Force in the Suez Canal area, which
represented a tremendous contribution by the United
Nations.

124. My Government has co-operated with the SecretaryGeneral in carrying out phase one, which is now success13

129. The Secretary-General’s report gives us a mixed
picture of some positive aspects of the situation since our
last semi-annual consideration of the matter, such as the
absence of any major intercommunal incidents, some
progress in the intercommunal talks and some reduction of
the Force-actually by 416 in the first phase-and some
negative aspects, such as lack of progress in the military
deconfrontation in the island, lack of substantial progressin
the integration of the economic life of the two corn
munities and, of late, a loss of momentum in the progressin
the intercommunal talks, explained in the report by
developments outside the Republic of Cyprus.
130. In the debate of June of this year we stated that a
gradual reduction in UNFICYP was both necessary and
desirable. The excellent performance of the Force, of all its
ranks, officers and commanders of all national contingents,
especially in the trying circumstances of serving as a crucial
stop-gap UNEF operation, indicates that this is eminently
possible; and here we think that, while attention must be
paid to prevailing circumstances in and around the island in
deciding on the further stagesin the reduction of the Force,
reductions cannot, on the other hand, come out of some
ideal situation. Rather, we think, it should be at least partly
the other way around and the definite knowledge that
reductions are going to take place should serve to all those
directly concerned as an added reason for more and better
co-operation in the solution of the problems.

134. We have often pointed out that the settlement of this
question should be based on observance of the freedom and
respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus as a State Member of
the United Nations which pursues a policy of peace,
non-alignment with any military bloc and the development
of friendship and co-operation among peoples. It is quite
clear that the normalization of the situation in Cyprus, the
strengthening of its security and the expansion of cooperation on an equal footing with other States will
promote the growth of the international authority of that
State as an important factor for the stabilization of the
situation in the eastern Mediterranean.
135. The solving of the internal problems of Cyprus is a
matter for the Cypriots themselves, and in this regard the
legitimate rights and interests of every Cypriot, irrespective
of national origin, must be observed and respected.
136. The Soviet Union has always been and will continue
to be against attempts to solve the Cyprus question by
means of outside interference, against attempts to infringe
upon the sovereignty of the Republic and against any
intention to solve the problem counter to the will of the
people of Cyprus, to the detriment of their vital interests or
the advantage of outside imperialist forces. It is, of course,
extremely important for ensuring the independence, integrity and sovereignty of the Republic that all foreign troops
should be withdrawn from its territory and that all foreign
military basesin Cyprus should be removed.

131. We want to see a strong, flourishing, peaceful Cyprus,
with its two communities enjoying a well-integrated life,
fmally-and soon-emerge from the divisions and confrontations that weigh upon it so heavily. The present state of
affairs, if allowed to drift or to freeze indefinitely, could be
used as a device for entrenching a de facto separation. We
hope that the Greek and Turkish populations of Cyprus,
the Greek and Turkish Cypriots, and their two communities
will find a way of living in their sovereign, independent,
united and unified State, enjoying equal rights and on the
basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions of 1964,
in which the sovereign rights of the Government of Cyprus
are recognized. The usual experience of such situations is
that when communities like the Greek and the Turkish
people of Cyprus find a way of standing together with their
rights and interests anchored in the strong, independent
policy of their own State, their own Republic, any
manipulation of them by and for any outside interests
whatsoever becomes more and more difficult.

137. Having studied the Secretary-General’s report on the
situation in Cyprus for the period 1 June to 1 December
1973, we have noted as a positive element the information
given on the intercommunal talks. We have also noted, with
some regret, that only limited progress has so far been made
in these talks. We cannot, therefore, help but agree with the
conclusion in paragraph 93 of the Secretary-General’s
report to the effect that “with mutual goodwill and
understanding and with concessions on both sides, an
agreed accommodation can in fact be arrived at within the
framework of the intercommunal talks that would protect
the vital interests of all parties”.

132. It is because of my country’s abiding interest in the
peace and security of the whole Mediterranean region, in
keeping with the normal friendly relations and historic
traditions that we have and seek with our neighbours,
Greece and Turkey, and because-and I want to emphasize
this particularly-of
the especially close relations and
friendship that Yugoslavia and Cyprus, our two Governments and our two Heads of State have developed,
particularly in the framework of non-alignment-because of
all those important reasons, that we want the mission of
UNFICYP to be successfully accomplished and completed
as soon as possible.
133. Mr. MALIK

by the Security Council of a new resolution on the Cyprus
question, the delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics would like to state that the Soviet Union has
always believed that the problem of Cyprus should be
settled by peaceful means in the interests of the people of
Cyprus by the Cypriots themselves and in such a way as to
further the cause of relaxation of tension in this important
part of the world.

138. In this regard the delegation of the USSR would like
to express the hope that all the remaining difficulties will
be overcome in future talks and that the talks will be
successfully concluded in the interests of the people of
Cyprus and for the benefit of the strengthening of peace in
this important area.
139. We have also noted in this regard the proposal of the
Secretary-General for a reduction of the strength of the
United Nations Force in Cyprus. While supporting this idea
in principle, the Soviet delegation would like first to know

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translation porn Russian):In connexion with the adoption

14

the views of the Government of Cyprus itself on the matter.
In any event, it is quite clear that this idea should be
implemented in such a way as to avoid prejudicing the vital
interests of either community and bringing about a general
deterioration of the situation in Cyprus. It goes without
saying that an essential condition for undertaking such a
measure must be the concurrence of the Government of the
Republic of Cyprus, which bears the full weight of
responsibility for ensuring normal conditions so that the
Cyprus problem may be resolved.

peace-keeping efforts
circumstances there.

in Cyprus

into line with

present

145. Six months ago, the United States delegation strongly supported the intention of the Secretary-General to
make a thorough study of means to reduce the United
Nations financial and manpower commitment in Cyprus.
My delegation is grateful for the excellent beginning he has
made. Reductions already made as a part of phase I of the
Secretary-General’s plan, together with those contemplated
in phase II, are an important first step in achieving needed
economies and in adapting the United Nations presence to
current realities in Cyprus.

140. In this connexion, we cannot but agree with the view
and the conclusion of the Secretary-General that pursuant
to the urgent decision adopted by the Security Council to
dispatch a United Nations Emergency Force to the Middle
East, the United Nations Force in Cyprus played a
significant positive role, since it was precisely this Force
which formed the advance elements of the new detachment
of the United Nations Emergency Force. In these troubled
times in the Middle East the rapid transfer of United
Nations troops from Cyprus to Cairo did not lead to any
complications in the situation on the Island. However, on
the basis of this alone it is hardly feasible to draw a hasty
conclusion about a further immediate reduction of the
United Nations Force in Cyprus.

146. The more difficult stages in the Secretary-General’s
plan involve the restructuring of the Force, as contemplated
in paragraphs 19 and 20 of his report. The United States
supports the report’s premise that the primary function of
the United Nations Force in Cyprus is preventive action;
that is, conciliation and persuasion rather than the interposition of military force. In practice, UNFICYP has been
playing this role for some years.
147. We note and appreciate that the Secretary-General
has avoided prejudging the size of any such redefmed and
restructured force. For our part, we believe that this
essentially mediator/observer
role of UNFICYP can be
accomplished with substantially fewer personnel. Accordingly, we most strongly urge the Secretary-General and his
colleagues to examine closely all reasonable opportunities
for additional phased reductions in the course of 1974.

141. The Soviet delegation did not object to the Security
Council adopting the Secretary-General’s recommendation
to extend the stationing of United Nations troops on
Cyprus for a further period of six months in order to ensure
normal conditions for the continuation and possible successful conclusion of the intercommunal talks. In this
context, naturally, the position of theinterested parties on
this matter was taken into account and above all, of course,
the position of the Government of the Republic of Cyprus.

148. My delegation is aware, of course, of the belief by
some that certain assurances by the parties are necessary
before major reductions in TJNFICYP can be considered.
We recognize that these concerns are real to those on the
scene and we cannot ignore them. In my Government’s
estimation, however, explicit assurances by the parties are
not necessary since conditions in Cyprus are conducive now
to a substantial reduction and restructuring of the Force.

142. In casting its vote in favour of the resolution
endorsing
this recommendation, the Soviet delegation
proceeded from the assumption that the extension of the
stationing of the United Nations Force in Cyprus for a
further period ending 15 June 1974 is to be carried out in
full compliance with the provisions of the original resolution of 4 March 1964 and the subsequent decisions of the
Council on the Cyprus question; that is to say, the troops
are to continue with their present functions and the present
voluntary system of financing them is to be maintained.

149. The United States would again like to express its
gratitude to Major-General Chand and the officers and men
of the eight countries contributing forces to UNFICYP. We
also wish to commend the dispatch with which the
experienced body of peace-keepers responded to the
Council’s call for the establishment of a United Nations
Emergency Force in the Middle East.

143. Mr. SCHAUFELE (United States of America): It has
been nearly 10 years since the Security Council began its
efforts to promote peace and reconciliation in Cyprus. For
nearly 10 years this Council has been urging accommodation of the differences which divide that country’s two
communities.
During this period, the Council set up, and
has periodically renewed the mandate of an international
peace-keeping force for Cyprus. And for nearly a decade,
the Council has persistently expressed the hope that
sufficient
progress could be made to permit the early
withdrawal,
or at least a substantial reduction of the United
Nations Force.

1.50. The United States delegation would like to reiterate
its deep appreciation for the valuable services of the
Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, Mr., OsorioTafall, and to commend the Secretary-General for his
report on the problems and prospects of the current
situation in Cyprus.
151. With respect to the situation in Cyprus, the United
States is moderately encouraged about the future. Although
the intercommunal talks have not resulted in breakthroughs
on basic questions, the negotiations continue. Likewise, the
military situation remains calm, We encourage all sides to
take advantage of the opportunities that now exist for
substantive progress. We expect that eventually all elements
of the Cypriot nation will find that they can live peacefully

144,

Now, as we approach the decennial anniversary of the
peace-keeping Force, my delegation believes that it
is time to take stock of what we have accomplished and
where
we are going, in order that we may bring our
Cyprus

15

the necessary guarantees to all communities. We, in the
Indian delegation, have also worked on the principle that
Cyprus will continue as a non-aligned country and that any
hint or suggestion of any kind of partition must be firmly
rejected, both on moral and practical grounds. We are also
conscious that Cyprus as a sovereign State must continue to
exercise all its prerogatives for maintaining its internal and
external peace and security.

with each other in a sovereign, independent and united
Cyprus.
152. My Government continues to be encouraged by the
responsible attitudes held by the neighbouring Powers. We
commend the constructive positions taken by Greece,
Turkey and Cyprus. We are gratified that the new Government of Greece has confirmed its policy of strengthening
good relations with its close neighbours, Turkey and
Cyprus. This is a substantial contribution to the improvement of the situation on the island and to international
peace and security in the Eastern Mediteranean.

159. Lastly, we should like to thank the Secretary-General
and his representatives for the efforts they are making and
to wish the parties the best success. We are particularly
gratified that the representatives of Greece. Turkey and
Cyprus have brought us up to date with regard to the
developments in the intercommunal talks and of the
difficulties which have arisen. In our view, these difficulties
can be overcome as long as all sides firmly abide by the
principles I have mentioned.

153. Regrettably, the Secretary-General has again had to
inform us of the continuing financial deficits in the
operation of the United Nations Force. The SecretaryGeneral estimates that the deficit may soon reach $23.1
million. We believe every effort should be made to reduce,
if possible to eliminate, and certainly not to increase this
deficit. We are disappointed that the special efforts of the
present contributors have not been matched by others,
especially those who support this operation by their votes
and have interests in the area. Nevertheless, we again urge
all Members of the United Nations, and especially members
of this Council as well as those who benefit most directly
from IJNFICYP’s presence, to co-operate in efforts to put
UNFICYP on a sound and current financial basis.

160. We hope that when the Council meets again political
progress in the island will have been sufficient to enable the
withdrawal of most, if not the whole, of the Force to be
made.
161. Mr. PEREZ DE CUELLAR (Peru) (interpretation
from Spanish): We voted in favour of the draft resolution
contained in document S/l 1154. We did so because the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus for the period 1 June to 1 December
1973, which has earned our appreciation and respect
because of its balance and fullness, indicated significant
hopes for progress, albeit slow, in the intercommunal talks,
the military situation and the observance of the cease-fire.
Despite the fact that agreement in principle on the
structure and the function of the governmental institutions
has not as yet been achieved entirely, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Osorio-Tafall, whose
work has earned our praise, feels that there are no
insurmountable obstacles.

154. The United States delegation supports the extension
of the United Nations Force in Cyprus for another six
months. This force, its strength brought into line with
current needs, will continue to enhance the preservation of
law and order in Cyprus and contribute to the security of
the Eastern Mediterranean.
155. Mr. SEN (India): The Council has met every year for
nearly a decade-and recently in the middle of June and
again in the middle of December-to renew the mandate of
the United Nations forces in Cyprus. The statements made
by the various delegations on each occasion understandably
become somewhat repetitive. This fact enables me to be
very brief indeed.

162. Furthermore, we have noted in the statements made
by the representatives of Cyprus, Greece and Turkey, that
there is a shared view, namely, the desire to arrive at
concrete solutions that will ensure peace and security in the
island of Cyprus.

156. First, the Force has done good work and we should
thank it and its Commander.
157. Second, we would all wish the Force to be reduce? as
soon as possible and to be withdrawn completely when
circumstances permit. We were encouraged that the recent
transfer of a substantial part of the Force to the Middle
East did not have any noticeable effect on the internal
situation in Cyprus. For this welcome feature, credit must
of course go to the people of all communities of Cyprus,
and particularly to the Government of Cyprus. We have also
noted, with satisfaction, that the first phase of reduction of
the United Nations forces, however modest, has been
completed.

163. We believe that the achievement of such goals still
calls for the presence of the United Nations Force in order
to maintain peace in the island, but that there ishope that
the Force can be reduced as the fears and suspicions
between the two communities diminish.

1.58. Third, in the political field progress has not been as
rapid as we expected, but nonetheless we are hopeful that
agreement will be reached on the basis of the principles
which have been accepted since 1964. These principles are
that Cyprus must continue as an independent, sovereign,
unitary State with complete territorial integrity and with

165. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
now call on the Secretary-General.

164. We believe that neither the parties concerned nor the
Security Council nor the United Nations as a whole should
lose sight of the fact that the ultimate solution will only be
achieved within the framework of respect for the indepcndence and territorial integrity of Cyprus.
jkom Chinese): I

166. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have listened carefully to the discussion which has just been concluded on
my report on the United Nations operation in Cyprus. 1
16

have noted in particular the remarks made by the members
of the Council and by the representatives invited to
participate in the Council’s debate concerning the plan for
the reduction Of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force.

stated that “the Government is relutant to extend electricity services to Turkish Cypriot villages which its
employees cannot enter freely and where bills may not be
paid or electrical equipment may be interfered with.”
[s/11137, para. 63.1 The Secretary-General understands
the situation. The electricity workers are not allowed to
enter without asking beforehand and getting permission.
Difficulties are put in the way of rendering public service.
The same applies to water. They do not pay. Three million
pounds are due on electricity services which have not been
paid by the Turkish community, and yet they are still
supplied with electricity.

167. In the light of these remarks, it is my intention to
undertake consultations shortly with the representatives of
countries providing contingents for UNFICYP and with the
representatives of Cyptis, Greece and Turkey, with a
view to finalizing arrangements for the implementation,
during the current mandate, of phase II of the reduction
plan.
168. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
call on the representative of Cyprus.

from Chinese): I

174. What is the reason for this separatism that makes
them even destroy the interests of the Turkish Cypriots?
Where is Turkey’s concern for the interests of the Turkish
Cypriot community when their opposition to an integrated
economy makes the standard of living of the Turkish
Cypriots go down? Why should there be lists of punishments for a Turkish Cypriot who associates with a Greek
Cypriot in a friendly manner? What is the reason for their
insistence on a continued military confrontation after it has
become obvious that it is unnecessary? What is the reason
for not allowing freedom of movement in the enclaves?
What is the reason for the enclaves now, and what is the
reason for setting them up?

169. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): There are certain points to
which I have to reply that were made by my colleague and
friend, the representative of Turkey, particularly with
regard to the unitary State. That was part of the agreement
and I have here many statements in which they themselves
have admitted it. For instance, Mr. Eralp, stated that the
Turkish community “has sat down to talk with the Greek
community in order to work out a system whereby they
can live together in a unitary State” [147&h meeting,
~O?Z 431. SO they knew it very well. Mr. Bayiilken, as
successor,
said subsequently to that, “As regards
[Mr. Rossides’] remarks on the unitary State, the leader of
the Turkish community did not object to a unitary State,
The whole question is how the unitary State would be
framed.” (1521st meeting, para 14.X] That is another
matter. It is a matter of interpretation and so on. We said
so. But the basis of a unitary State is undisputed. I shall not
take time to quote many other cases of Turkish admissions
that the basis of the talks was a unitary State.

175. Mr. Galo Plaza says clearly in his report that the
enclaves were artificially set up to be presented as a
territorial separation with the divisive objective of a
federation. But, as Mr. Galo Plaza points out, they have
completely failed because the enclaves are scattered over
the island rather than being in one part. They do not form a
separate entity and they contain less than half of the
population of the Turks in Cyprus and in extent they
represent less than 4 per cent of the area of Cyprus. The
other half lives with the rest of the people, intermingled.
And why should those in the enclaves require armed posts
to protect them, while the rest of the Turks have no fear
and live in peace with the rest of the population? What is
the reason for this primary concern for separateness and
this insistence on it against the interests of the Turkish
Cypriots themselves and against their wishes?

170. In any case, I wish to make it crystal clear that my
Government will not accept or consider any deviation from
the agreed basis of an independent, sovereign and unitary
State. Any deviation would mean that the five years of
work
on talks would be wasted and thrown into the
waste-paper basket because of changed positions from the
Turkish
side. Any such’ deviation would be in reality to
undermine the very foundation upon which the talks are
based. It is our view that the United Nations and the
Security Council should very emphatically discourage these
changes of shifting positions and destroying the very
concept of the talks.

176. A number of reports show that the Turks in Cyprus
want to live in peace and conciliation. Lord Caradon made
the point very clearly in a statement in the Council. Raving
served in Cyprus twice, and having been Governor, he could
testify that they lived in peace and amity and had done so
for a hundred years as far as he knew. What is the reason
for this artificial enmity now? All this is the objective of
partition which underlies every movement.

171. I should also wish it to be understood that no other
constitution
than that of a unitary State could possibly
apply to or be workable in a State like Cyprus, with an
intermingled population throughout the island. The representative of Turkey said, “Is no other form of constitution
possible than a unitary State? “, which really means again
that he wants some kind of federation. I have already stated
Mr. Gala Plaza’s views and it is so obvious that the Tutkish
i&a of a federation is merely camouflage for partition. But
no other kind of unitary State can apply to Cyprus.

177. I do not need to answer the representative of Turkey
on all points because, fortunately, a great number of the
members of the Council have answered him by emphasizing
the need for deconfrontation, by emphasizing the need for
freedom of movement, the need for normalization, the
need for unity. Almost all the representatives on the
Security Council spoke of unity. So that is the answer to
the representative of Turkey in his wish to throw away the
unitary State because it means unity. Who can suggest in
this Council, or anywhere else, that any problem can be
solved by accentuated and forced division, and not by
co-operation and understanding?

172. There are many other points that I should like to
have answered but there is no time.
173. However, he did say that they do not have sufficient
electricty. Here, in the Secretary-General’s last report, it is
17

178. Who, then, is opposing the solution of the problem
and procrastinating but those who oppose conciliation,
understanding and co-operation and who want to force a
division? That is why we have this situation here after 10
years, which will continue because the moment there is any
possibility of reaching an agreement in the talks, there is an
immediate shifting and then escalation to something more
divisive. How can a problem be solved in this sense? And,
of course, everything is brought to bear-fears, fears about
enosis. They know very well it has been customary for the
Turkish representatives over the years to use enosis as a
pretense of fear in order to obstruct the independent and
sovereign Cyprus in its peaceful progress and to bring about
partition.

184. Unfortunately, it is not possible to speak in the same
terms with regard to the question of enosis. I expect at,
answer now, or when the time is opportune; but on this
question, I think that I have never received, and will never
receive an answer.
185. But I will say one final word. We should not indulge
in idle discussions here. There are well-known political,
historical, juridical facts. ‘All these facts are, I hope, being
taken seriously into consideration by all concerned ia
Cyprus while discussing the ultimate fate of the constitu.
tion of the independent and sovereign State of Cyprus. It is
there in Cyprus that the solution, one hopes, will be found,
But the solution may be found not by offering the Turkish
community human rights or minimal basic rights enjoyed
by citizens of every civilized State, but by recognizing the
rights to which they are entitled in the exercise of their
right to self-determination as one of the founding communities of the independent State of Cyprus. I insist that
Cyprus is a bicommunal State and, as I said before, had it
not been a bicommunal State, it would not have been a
State.

179. I apologize to the President for having taken a little
time. I understand the urgency, but these things have to be
said. Before closing I wish to thank all the participants for
their constructive statements in support of the independence, sovereignty and unity of Cyprus and of the solution
of this problem.
180. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
call on the representative of Turkey.

from Ckinese): I

186. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
call on the representative of Cyprus.

from

Chinese): I

187. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): The representative of
Turkey again tending towards partition, spoke about a
“bicommunal State”-and everyone here would think that
these would be balanced communities; they are comprised
of a majority .of 82 per cent and a minority of 18 per cent,
artificially formed into the Republic of Cyprus-merely for
the sake of other purposes, as I have said. Therefore, we
cannot accept the view that they will have equal rights, that
the 82 per cent will be equated with the 18 per cent. We
will accord to them the maximum rights to which they are
entitled within a unitary State.

181. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): First, I wish to have it on
record that I have no great reverence for the views of
Mr. Galo Plaza.
182. The second point that I wish to place on record is
that quotations out of context cannot provide arguments in
favour of one view or another. The bases for the enlarged
intercommunal talks do not contain such an agreement as
to result in the creation of a unitary State alone. I know of
at least one State which was a member of this Council very
recently whose constitution was modified into just the
opposite of what is implied in the word “unitary”.

188. But the reason that we insist on a unitary State is not
because federation is not to be respected but because
circumstances do not allow federation. Therefore, if my
colleague will go along with the idea of co-operation and
unity we shall solve the problem.

183. There have been references to the wish of the
Turkish community-or the Turkish Government-to have
partition as their ultimate aim. I can say very firmly that
there is no such aim in the mind of the Turkish Government or of the Turkish community in the island.

The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

18
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 2.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

73-82001~June

1979-2,200
