46

General Aaeemhiy -

Tenth Se88ion

----------------------------- -----------------to increase the term of office of the members of the Commission from three to five years,

tion with the Governments concerned regarding the
future of the Tribunal,

1. Invites the International Law Commission to communicate its opinion concerning the amendment of article
11 of the Statute of the Commission relating to the filling
of casual vacancies in its membership;

Na ting that the negotiations between Italy and Libya
for the conclusion of the various special agreements provided for in resolution 388 A (V) have not yet been
concluded, but that the parties have indicated that the
said negotiations have reached an advanced stage,

2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of the
eleventh session of the General Assembly the question
of amending article 11 of the Statute of the International
Law Commission.
550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1955.
987 (X). Publication of the documents of the
International Law Commission

The General Assembly,
Recalling the terms of its resolution 176 (II) of 21
November 1947,
Considering paragraph 35 of the report• of the International Law Commission on the work of its seventh
session and the study6 prepared by the Secretary-General
in pursuance of Gerteral Assembly resolution 686 (VII)
of 5 December 1952 concerning ways and means for
making the evidence of customary international law more
readily available,

1. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange as soon
as possible for the printing of the following documents
relating to the first seven sessions of the International
Law Commission:
(a) The studies, special reports, principal draft resolutions and· amendments presented to the Commission,
in their original languages ;
(b) The summary records of the Commission, initially in English ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General also to arrange
for the printing each year, in English, French and Spanish, of the documents mentioned in the preceding paragraph relating to future sessions of the Commission ;
3. Invites the International Law Commission to express its views for the guidance of the Secretary-General
with respect to the selection and editing of the documents
to be printed and, if necessary in its opinion, to resubmit
to the General Assembly the question of the printing
of the documents of the Commission.

Noting that the Governments of Italy and Libya have
manifested, through their representatives at the tenth
session of the General Assembly, their acceptance of such
measures as the Assembly will adopt for the purpose
of terminating the present United Nations Tribunal in
Libya upon condition of the simultaneous establishment
of an Italian-Libyan Mixed Arbitration Commission
vested with the functions, powers and jurisdiction provided for in article X of resolution 388 A ( V),
Resolves:
1. That the United Nations Tribunal in Libya shall
be terminated on 31 December 1955, and on that date
its functions, powers and jurisdiction, under the terms
of reference of article X of resolution 388 A (V) shall
be transferred to, and vested in, the Commission established under paragraph 2 of the present resolution ;
2. That there shall be established an Italian-Libyan
Mixed Arbitration Commission consisting of three mem·
bers, one of whom sha:l be appointed by the Government
of Italy, one by the Government of Libya and the third
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations. The
Governments of Italy and Libya shall notify the Secretary-General of the United Nations and each other of the
names of their respective arbitrators not later than 15
December 1955; the Secretary-General shall appoint not
later than 27 December 1955 the umpire, upon joint
designation by Italy and Libya, the said designation to
take place not later than 15 December 1955 or, in the
event of failure by the parties jointly to submit the
name of the umpire by that date, the umpire shall be
chosen by the Secretary-General;
3. That the Commission shall come into existence
upon the appointment of the umpire and at least one of
the other members of the Commission, that two members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for
the performance of its functions, and that for all deliberations of the Commission the favourable vote of two
members shall be sufficient;
·

550th ple,.ary meeting,
3 December 1955.

4. That the expenses of the Commission shall be
borne exclusively by Italy and Libya in equal shares;

988 (X). Establishment of an Italian-Libyan
Mixed Arbitration f',ommission

S. That the rules of procedure of the Commission,
including the designation of the place or places whePe
its work shall 1,<' conduct£>rl, shall he rlctermincd by the
( omrnissi1i11 itself in acconlanrr with paragraph 3 above.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 388 A (V) of 15 December
1950 on economic and financial provisions relating to
Libya, article X of which set up a United Nations Tribunal in Libya and definited its functions, and resolution
792 (VIII) of 23 October 1953, by which the United
Nations Tribunal in Libya was continued in existence
and the Secretary-General was requested to report to
the General Assembly at its tenth session after consulta• Official Records of tht Gtntral Asstmbly, Tenth Stssion,
Suppftmtnt No. 9 (A/2934).
6 /bid., Tenth Session, Annexes, agenda item SO, document
A/C.6/348.

551st plenary meeting,
6 December 1955.
989 (X). Arbitral procedure

The Gene1·al Assembly,
H miing considered the draft• on arbitral procedure
prepared by the International Law Commission at its
fifth session and the comments' thereon submitted by
Governments,
• Ibid., Eighth Session, S•PPltment No. 9 (A/2456), para. S7.

4,7

Re10lution• adopted on the report• of the Sixth Committee

Recalling General Assembly resolution 797 (VIII) of
7 December 1953, in which it was stated that this draft
includes certain important elements with respect to the
progressive development of international law on arbitral
procedure,
Noting that a number of suggestions for improvements on the draft have been put forward in the comments submitted by Governments and in the observations made in the Sixth Committee at the eighth and
current sessions of the General Assembly,
Believing that a set of rules on arbitral procedure will
inspire States in the drawin~ up of provisions for inclusion in international treaties and special arbitration
agreements,
7 Ibid., Tenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 52, document
A/2899 and Add.land 2.

1. Expresses its appreciation to the International Law
Commission and the Secretary-General for their work
in the field of arbitral procedure;

2. Invites the International Law Commission to consider the comments of Governments and the discussions
in the Sixth Committee in so far as they may contribute
further to the value of the draft on arbitral procedure,
and to report to the General Assembly at its thirteenth
session;
3. Decides to place the question of arbitral procedure
on the provisional agenda of the thirteenth session, including the problem of the desirability of convening an
international conference of plenipotentiaries to conclude a convention on arbitral procedure.
554th plenary meeting_,
14 December 1955.
