VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third (:ommittee

such ratification or accession, to be guided by the
basic provisions of the Convention in their internal
and foreign policies.
60th plenary meeting
7 November 1977

32/14.

Importance of the universal realiza~ion
of the right of peoples to self-determmation and of the speedy granting of in•
dependence to colonial countries and
peoples for the effective guarantee and
ohservance of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2649 (XXV) of 30 November 1970, 2955 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972,
3070 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973, 3246 (XXIX)
of 29 November 1974, 3382 (XXX) of 10 November
1975 and 31/34 of 30 November 1976,
Recalling also its resolutions 2465 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2548 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969,
2708 (XXV) of 14 December 1970, 3103 (XXVIII)
of 12 December 1973 and 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974 on the use and recruitment of mercenaries
against national liberation movements and sovereign
States,
Recalling the Maputo Declaration in Support of the
Peoples of Zimbabwe and Nami~ia and the Progra1?1?e
of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe and Namibia,
adopted by the International Conference in Support
of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia, 12 held at
Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977, and the declaration
adopted by the World Conference for Action against
Apartheid, 13 held at Lagos from 22 to 26 August 1977,
Taking note of the declaration of the First Afro-Arab
Summit Conference, 14 held at Cairo from 7 to 9 March
1977,
Reaffi,rming its faith in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and the importance of
its implementation,
Reaffi,rming the importance of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination, national sovereignty and territorial integrity and of the
speedy granting of independence to colonial countries
and peoples as imperativcs for the enjoyment of human
rights,
Affi,rming that "bantustanization" is incompatible
with genuine independence, unity and national_ sovereignty and would have the cffect of perpetuatmg the
power of the white minority and the racist system of
apartheid in South Africa,
Reaffirming the obligation of all Member States to
comply with the principies of the Charter and the resolutions of the United Nations regarding thc exercise
of the right to self-determination by peoples under colonial and alien domination,
12A/32/109/Rev.l-S/12344/Rev.J, annex V. For the printed
text, see Of]icia/ Records of the Security Council, Thirtysecond Year, Supplement far Ju/y, Aug11st and September
1977.
13 A/CONF.91/9 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.77.XIV.2 and cmrigendum), sect. X.
14 A/32/61, annex l.

133

Welcoming the independence of Djibouti,
Reaffirming the national unity and territorial integrity of the Comoros,
Indignant at the continued violations_ of the hun~an
rights of the peoples still under colomal ~nd f?re1gn
domination and alíen subjugation, the contmuatlon of
the illegal occupation of Namibia and South Afri~a's
attempts to dismember its territory, the perpetuatlon
of the racist minority régimes in Zimbabwe and Sout_h
Africa and the denial to the Palestinian people of their
inalienable national rights,
1. Calls upon ali States to implement fully and
faithfully the resolutions of the United Nations regarding the exercise of the right to self-determination by
peoples under colonial and alien domination;
2. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples for independence, territorial integri~y, natic:mal
unity and liberation from colonial and fore1gn dommation and alien subjugation by ali available means, including armed struggle;
3. Reatfirms the inalienable right of the peoples
of Namibia and Zimbabwe, of the Palestinian people
and of ali peoples under alien and colonial domination
to self-determination, national independence, territorial
integrity, national unity and sovereignty without externa! interference;
4. Demands the immediate evacuation of the
French administration and forces from the Comorian
territory of Mayotte;
5. Condemns the policy of "bantustanization" and
reiterates its support for the oppressed people of South
Africa in their just and legitimate struggle against the
racist minority régime in Pretoria;
6. Reaffi,rms that the practice of using mercenaries
against national liberation movements and sovereign
States constitutes a criminal act and that the mercenaries
themselves are criminals, and calls upon the Governments of ali countries to enact Iegislation declaring the
recruitment, financing and training of mercenaries in
their territory and the transit of mercenaries through
their territory to be punishable offences and prohibiting
their nationals from serving as mercenaries, and to report on such legislation to the Secretary-General;
7. Condemns the policies of those members of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and of other countries whose politica1, economic, military or sporting
relations with the racist régimes in southern Africa and
elsewhere encourage these régimes to persist in their
suppression of the aspirations of peoples for self-determination and independence;
8. Strongly condemns ali Governments which do
not recognize thc right to self-determination and independcnce of ali peoples still under colonial and forcign domination and alien subjugation, notably thc
peop!es of Africa and the Palestinian people;
9. Strongly condemns the ever increasing massacres
of innocent and defenceless people, including women
and children. by the racist minority régimes of southern
Africa i11 thcir despcratc attempt to thwart the legitimate
demands of the people:
1O. Demands the immediate release of all persons
detained or imprisoned as a result of their struggle
for sclf-determination and independence, full respect
for their fundamental personal rights and the observance
of article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human

134

General Assembly-Thírty-second Sessíon

Rights, under which no one shall be subjected to torture
or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment; 15
11. Notes with appreciation the material and other
forms of assist:mce that peoples under colonial and
foreign rule continue to receive from Govemments,
United Nations agencies and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, and calls for a maximization of this assistance;
12. Looks forward to the publication of the following studies by the Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities:
(a) Historical and current development of the right
to self-determination on the basis of the Charter of
the United Nations and other instruments adopted by
United N ations organs, with particular reference to
the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental fre·edoms;
(b) Implementation of United Nations resolutions
relating to the right of peoples under colonial and foreign domination to self-determination;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to give maximum publicity to the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
to give the widest possible publicity to the struggle
being waged by oppressed peoples for the realization
of their self-determination and national independence;
14. Decides to consider this ítem again at its thirtythird session on the basis of the reports that Governments, United Nations agencies and intergovernrnental
and non-governmental organizations have been requested to subrnit concerning the strengthening of assistance to colonial Territories and peoples under foreign
domination and control.
60th p[enary meeting
7 November 1977
32/58.

Methods and ways likely to be most effective in preventing crime and improving the treatment of offenders

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3021 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, in which it instructed the Committee on
Crime Prevention and Control to submit a report on
the methods and ways likely to be most effective in
preventing crime and improving the treatment of offenders, including recommendations on the measures
rnost appropriate in such areas as law enforcement,
judicial procedures and correctional practices,
Concerned about the prevailing trends of criminality
in many countries of the world, which show the spread
of emerging new forms of scrious and organized crime,
l. Takes note of the report entitled "Methods and
ways likely to be most effective in preventing crime
and improving the treatment of offenders", contained
in the report of the Committee on Crime Prevention
and Control on its fourth session, 16 as a guideline for
future United Nations activities directed towards the
prevention and control of crime and delinquency and
the treatment of offenders;
2. Invites Member States to make use of the report,
as appropriate, in formulating national crime prevention policies and strategies;
15 Resolution 217 A (III).
16 E/CN.5/536, annex IV.

3. Calls upon Member States, as well as international governmental organizations and relevant 11011governmental organizations in consultative status with
the Economic and Social Council and the specialized
agencies, to collaborate fully in pursuance of the goals
set out in the report;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to facilitate thc
collaboration rcferred to in paragraph 3 above;
5. Urges ali Member States, as well as international
governmental and non-governmental organizations, to
support the United Nations Trust Fund for Social Defence and the international and regional institutes in
crime prevention and control;
6. Recommends that tire Secretary-General should
draw on the report in formulating proposals for futurc
medium-term plans in crime prevention and criminal
justice.
98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977
32/59.

Report of the Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the seriousness of crime problems,
which have assumed new forros and dimcnsions in manv
countries of the world and are transcending nationál
boundaries,
Concerned about the high social and material cost
which crime exacts and the impediment it presents to
a more wholesome development and a better quality
of life for all,
Alarmed at the excesses of thosc crimc control policies which, in certain countries, extend to torture and
other abuses, negating the basic principies of human
rights and of criminal justice itself,
Recalling in this context the Declaration on the Protection of Ali Persons from Being Subjected to Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, contained in the annex to its resolution
3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Recognizing that the various forms of social control
far the prevcntion of crime should take into account
differences in traditions, economic and political structures, available resources and Ievels of development
existing among Member States,
Recallin,g the responsibility assumed by the U nited
Nations in crime prevention undcr General Assembly
resolution 415 (V) of 1 December 1950, which was
affirmed in Economic and Social Council resolutions
731 F (XXVIII) of 30 July 1959 and 830 D (XXXII)
of 2 August 1961, and in the promotion and strengthening of intcrnational co-operation in this field in
accordance with Assembly resolution 3021 (XXVII)
of 18 December 1972,
Having considered the report of the Fifth United
Nations Congrcss on the Prevention of Crime and the
Trcatment of Offenders, 17 held at Geneva from 1 to 12
September 1975, and the recommendations made by the
Committee on Crime Prevention and Control at it3
fourth session, rn
17 A/CONF.56/10 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.2 and corrigendum).
1 R E/CN.5/536, ch.ap. I, sect. B.
