S/2015/1032

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 December 2015
Original: English

Letter dated 24 December 2015 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit a letter dated 19 December 2015 from the
Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union, Nkosazana Dlamini -Zuma,
by which she forwarded a communiqué on Burundi adopted by the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union at its 565th meeting, held on 17 December 2015
(see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

15-23039 (E)

120116

*1523039*

S/2015/1032

Annex
I am writing to you with respect to the situation prevailing in Burundi. Over
the past few months, our two organizations and other members of the international
community have made sustained efforts to help Burundi to address the serious
challenges facing it. I would like to seize this opportunity to reiterate the African
Union’s deep appreciation of the initiatives taken by the United Nations in this
regard and of your personal commitment to the early resolution of the crisis.
I would like to echo the Peace and Security Council in commending the Security
Council for adopting resolution 2248 (2015), in which it welcomed the Peace and
Security Council communiqué of 17 October 2015 and the proposed next steps
contained therein, looking forward to their full implementation.
It is a matter of deep concern to note that, in spite of all the efforts exerted to
date, no tangible progress has been made towards finding a solution to the crisis in
Burundi. Instead, the security situation has continued to deteriorate, as demonstrated
by the recent attacks on military barracks on Bujumbura and in the Bujumbura
Rural Province and the subsequent reprisals, while the political polarization has
further deepened. This state of affairs has the potential to lead to generalized
violence and to undo the advances registered through the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement, with devastating consequences for both Burundi and the
entire region. The international community, drawing lessons from past experiences,
has the duty to do all it can to prevent such a development.
It is against this backdrop that the Peace and Security Council met in Addis
Ababa on 17 December 2015 to, once again, deliberate on the situation and
determine the best way forward. Most notably, the Council decided to authorize, for
an initial period of six months renewable, the deployment of an African mission
mandated to contribute to the protection of civilians and to create conditions
conducive to the successful holding of the inter-Burundian dialogue under the
auspices of President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda. The mission is also mandated to
assist in the implementation of any agreement that may be reached by the Burundian
stakeholders in the context of the inter-Burundian dialogue.
Following the Peace and Security Council communiqué of 17 December
2015, a I wrote to President Pierre Nkurunziza to formally inform him of the planned
deployment and seek his Government’s full cooperation and support. I underlined
that the African Union had no other agenda than to assist Burundi in its hou r of
need, by preventing a further escalation of violence and facilitating the search for a
consensual political solution to the crisis. I expressed the hope that the Burundian
authorities would consent to the deployment to allow it to proceed smoothly, an d
expressed the African Union’s readiness to swiftly initiate discussions with the
Government of Burundi to agree on the related implementation modalities. I will
keep you informed of the evolution of these efforts.
In parallel, steps are being taken to develop the concept of operations of the
envisaged mission and other related documents. This work is premised on the
assumption that the Government of Burundi will give its consent and take all steps
required to facilitate the deployment process and the implementation of the mandate
set out in the Peace and Security Council communiqué. In this regard, we look
__________________
a

2/3

Reproduced in S/2015/1000, annex.

15-23039

S/2015/1032

forward to the support of the United Nations and other partners. The Peace and
Security Department of the Commission will liaise with the relevant depa rtments of
the United Nations Secretariat to follow up on this request and provide further details .
Clearly, the effective implementation of the decisions taken by the Peace and
Security Council will depend greatly on the support provided by the United Na tions,
in particular the Security Council, within the framework of its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. In this
respect, the Peace and Security Council looks forward to a clear expression of
support by the Security Council, including the authorization of a support package
funded by assessed contributions, to enable the rapid and effective deployment of
the envisaged mission on the basis of the expressed consent of the Government of
Burundi. We intend to submit the concept of operations referred to above to the
Security Council, as soon as it is finalized, together with a budget and other
requirements. Given the volatility of the security situation and the risk of serious
escalation on the ground, the importance of a timely decision by the Security
Council to enable the deployment of the envisaged mission hardly needs to be
emphasized.
While authorizing the deployment of a mission, the African Union remains
convinced that only a genuine and truly inclusive dialogue will make it possible to
address the crisis and find a sustainable solution. We fully support the mediation
efforts of President Museveni on behalf of the East African Community and look
forward to the imminent commencement of the dialogue. We call upon the
international community to extend the necessary political, financial and technical
support.
I would be most grateful if you could circulate the present letter and the Peace
and Security Council communiqué of 17 December 2015 to the members of the
United Nations Security Council for their information and action, as appropriate.
The African Union looks forward to continued collaboration and cooperation
with the United Nations in helping Burundi to address the serious challenges
confronting it, as part of our ongoing partnership in the area of peace and security.
I have no doubt that our combined efforts in support of the initiatives taken by the
region will go a long way in facilitating the resolution of this crisis.
(Signed) Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma
Chairperson

15-23039

3/3
