UNITED NATIONS

EC
THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

29 JULY

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2385)

, . . . . . . , , . . . . . , . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Adoption of the agenda . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . -. . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
(N) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162);
(b) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent Representatives of Egypt
and France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Secu.*...,.*
rity Council (S/15316) ,..,.................,..,*,...*..*....

1

SlPV .2385

-

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965,became fully operative
on that date.

2385th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 29 July 1982, at 4 pm.
President:

Mr. Noel G. SINCLAIR

(Guyana).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.

Provisional
1. Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2385)

of the agenda

2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 15 162);
(6) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives of Egypt and France to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15316)
The meeting

was called to order at 4.40 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda

was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East:
(n) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162);
(b) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives of Egypt and France to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15316)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at previous meetings on this item [2374rh,
2375th, 2377th and 2384th meetings],
I invite the
representatives of Lebanon and Israel to take places
at the Council table; I invite the representative of the
Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) to take a
Place at the Council table; I invite the representatives
of Egypt and Pakistan to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. TuPni (tebanon) md Mr. Blum (Israel) took places at the Council tsrble; Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organiza-

tion) took CI place at the Council ruble; Mr. Abdel
Megrrid (Egypt) and Mr. Mcrhmood (Pakistcm)
took
the places reserved for them nt the side of the Cumcil chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT:
sentative of Lebanon,

The first speaker is the repreon whom I now call.

3. Mr. TUtiN
(Lebanon): Preliminary
consultations for the present meeting have been brief and
decisive. They have enabled the Council to engage
in the first phase of what promises to be a lengthy
but, we hope, a productive debate, one that may pave
the way for a major breakthrough in the Middle East
question.
4. Yet we cannot fail to remember that you, Mr. President, have in the past weeks been conducting with
admirable patience, skill and wisdom other consultations on the more specific question of the hostilities
in Lebanon. More than once you were confronted
with a difficult choice: either lending the Council’s
forum to our natural sentiments of revulsion and frustration or accepting the course of pragmatism whereby the Council would intervene only if and when it
could assume an executive roIe in the search for peace.
May I be allowed to express my delegation’s sentiments of appreciation and admiration for your attitude of authority and your concern for what may
become a historic responsibility
in words and deeds.
5. My delegation has asked to be heard today in
order to express with utmost clarity our support for
the initiative of France and Egypt. We have listened
carefully and with extreme interest to the representation by the representatives of two nations brought
together by their common interest in international
peace, the security of nations and the right of the oppressed to freedom, dignity and self-determination.
6. The Lebanese tragedy speaks for itself, and this
is not a day for verbal violence. The atrocities need
no description. The martyrs will be content with our
constant remembrance and infinite love beyond death.
As for those who suffer, their desire is not that we
lament but that we work for their deliverance. May
I therefore be allowed to make the following remarks
which I hope the Council will accept as a constructive
contribution to its deliberations.
7. First, although the draft resolution [,S/153373 is
presented as a comprehensive
package, it should by

no means lead the Council into delaying the implementation of its resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982).
Failure to agree on all the components of the package
must in no way prevent the Council from acting at
the appropriate time in the light of negotiations being
conducted at present by parties concerned, such as
those conducted at the meeting that has just been
successfully concluded
at Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
[sre S/15329, annex]. Needless to say, operative
paragraphs 2 and 3 of Section A of the draft resolution will, in due course, have to be reviewed and
amended in a manner that wil1 embody or sanction
the accepted results of negotiations undertaken by
the American Presidential envoy, Mr. Philip Habib.

we have often been told, with equal cando,ur, that thz
Lebanese question is but a by-product of the Pales.
tine question, “the core of the Middle East problem’“.
11. Hence, the pressing concern with the cessation
of hostilities must not be perceived as a. licence to
Israel to disperse the demilitarized
PLiO into the
Lebanese community against the national interests Of
both the Palestinians and the Lebanese. Indeed. my
Government wishes to draw the Council’s attention
to a number of official Israeli declarations that have
explicitly
advocated a so-called dissemination
and
dispersion of the Palestinians into the villages, towns
and cities, under false humanitarian pretences.

8. Secondly, a key element of the draft resolution,
as we understand it and support it, is the opening
phrase of operative paragraph 1 of section C, which
reads as follows:

12. Other Israeli declarations spoke with greater
frankness of the fear that the reconstruction of Palestinian camps, particularly in southern Lelbanon, Will
re-create the objective conditions conducive to R.
resurgence of Palestinian nationalism and “terrorism”
that will again endanger Israel’s security. If asked
where the Palestinians should therefore go, we and
the Palestinians have and can only have one answer:
back to Palestine.

“Considers that the settlement of the Lebanese
problem should contribute
to the initiation of a
durable restoration of peace and security in the
region.”
We welcome in this paragraph a most solemn response to an appeal that we have repeatedIy addressed, both to the Council and to the General Assembly, that peace in Lebanon should not and, indeed,
cannot wait for the comprehensive
settlement of the
Middle East crisis. May we hope that recent events
have proved beyond doubt that peace in Lebanon
should be the beginning, not the end, and that a Lebanon restored to strength and sovereignty will itself
become a major factor actively contributing to Middle
East peace.

13. I should like to conclude at this stage by saying
that Israel’s security can be guaranteed only by pCace
and mutual recognition of every nation’s and people’s
right to exist. The draft resolution before us is nothing
less than a charter for such mutual recognition.
14. Being the invaded country, Lebanon can be
neither insensitive to the security of others nor oblivious to the imperatives of its own security. Halving
been a hostage of war for years unending, may we,
while expressing our appreciation to France, Egypt
and our many other friends, pray before the Cvund
that all members understand us if we insist th:it the
question of Lebanon be addressed as such, on its own
merits, solely according to the interests of the Lebanese people, and that its ultimate solution nut be
made contingent upon the settlement of any other
question.

9. Thirdly, in this same perspective, we feel that
the Council must be cautioned against the temptation
by some parties ‘to seek a so-caIled comprehensive
settlement of the Middle East crisis, one which will
allow for territorial, demographic, political, economic
or security compensations
in Lebanon or at the
expense of Lebanon’s national integrity. This concern, we believe, is what prompted the Governments
of France and Egypt to propose operative paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of section A of their draft resolution, which support and solemnly confirm Lebanon’s
policy, clearly and unequivocally
expressed in the
communiquC of the Council of Ministers of 14 July
1982 [S/15300, NRIZPX]. For the sake of emphasis, it
may be useful in this context to repeat the three immediate objectives stated in that document, namely, the
withdrawal of Israel from all of Lebanon, the withdrawal of ail non-Lebanese forces and the deployment
of the Lebanese army and security forces,

1.5. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the rep
resentative of Pakistan. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
16. Mr. MAHMOOD
(Pakistan):
Mr. President.
allow me to thank you and the other members of the
Council for inviting me to address the Council during
its consideration of the Israeli invasion of Lebanon.
We are confident that your wisdom and outstanding
diplomatic
skills will help the Council take the necessary decisions at this critical juncture. I also express
our deep appreciation to Mr. de La Barre de Nanteuil,
of France, who guided the work of the Council
last
month with distinction.

IO. Fourthly,
Lebanon’s
national solidarity
with
the Iegitimate right of the Palestinians to self-determination is complemented
by Lebanon’s interest in the
Palestinians’
ability to exercise their right of return
to their homeland. This we admit very candidly, since

17. The wanton Israeli invasion of Lebanon
has
shocked the world and it poses the gravest danger to
peace and to the hopes for a world 0rde.r based on
2

international law and the Charter of the United Nations. The people and the Government of Pakistan
have expressed in the strongest terms their condemnation of Israeli aggression against Lebanon and have
reaffirmed their total solidarity with the Lebanese and
Palestinian brethren.

Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon. I also appeal to
you to join in a concerted effort to ensure the restitution of the inalienable national and human rights
of the Palestinian people whose unredeemed sufferings constitute
a blot on the conscience of
mankind.”

IS. Reflecting the profound concern and anguish of
the people and Government
of Pakistan over the
serious situation in Lebanon, and with a view to
securing an immediate cessation of hostilities and
unconditional
Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon, the
President of Pakistan, General Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq,
has addressed a letter to the heads of State or Government of the permanent members of the Council.
I would take this opportunity to read out the text of
that letter [S//5288, annex]:

19. The Israeli invasion is a stark manifestation
of
Israel’s relentless expansion, its unabated aggression
against Arab neighbours and its ruthless design to
liquidate the Palestinian hation. Israel has defiantly
ignored the numerous resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly which censure its
aggressive policy and demand that Israel respect
international
law. The latest example of this lawless
behaviour is to be found in Israel’s contemptuous
rejection of Council resolutions 508 (1982), 509 (1982),
512 (1982) and 513 (1982), as well as General Assembly resolution ES-7/5, all of which demand that
Israel cease hostilities and withdraw its forces beyond
the internationally
recognized frontiers of Lebanon.

“The tragic plight of the people of Lebanon in
the wake of Israel’s ruthless military assault on
that country and the brutalities perpetrated on the
beseiged population of Beirut compel me to seek
your personal intervention in terminating an intolerable state of affairs.

20. Driven by an insane obsession against the Palestinian people and their sole and authentic leadership,
the PLO, Israel has unleashed its massive war machine against the defenceless people of Lebanon and
the Palestinian people who have taken shelter in that
country. Thousands of innocent men, women and
children have already been massacred. Hundreds of
thousands of others are suffering the terror and travail
inflicted upon them by Israel’s incessant military
onslaught.

“Thousands of Arab and Palestinian men, women
and children have been massacred. Hundreds of
thousands have been uprooted from their homes
and reduced to a state of existence unacceptable to a
civilized world. West Beirut, totally surrounded
by the Israeli army, is being systematically reduced
to rubble, and its entrapped people face death by
starvation and disease.

21. The siege of Beirut and the destruction of that
city by the Israeli army will be remembered as a most
tragic chapter in the history of the Middle East. The
Israeli invaders have even resorted to such despicable
measures as interrupting
the supply of water, food,
electricity and medical supplies to west Beirut.

“The future of our civilization depends on whether
we are still capable of being stirred by such an
appalling spectacle. I believe that the moral impulse
which keeps the heart of our civilization beating is
alive and will not permit us to remain in a continuing
state of inertia induced by the sheer audacity of the
Israeli assault on a hapless Lebanon. We are all
equally answerable for man’s unsurpassed barbarity to man which the people of Lebanon have the
misfortune of experiencing before our very eyes.
History is an unsparing judge and we must tremble
at its verdict if we remain unconcerned with the
tragedy of Lebanon.

22. The Israeli response to serious diplomatic
efforts currently under way is indiscriminate
bombardment of the city, including hospitals, which in the past
week alone has taken the toll of hundreds of innocent
lives. In its attempt to silence the voice of the Palestinian freedom fighters, Israel has clearly not ruled
out the genocidal option of starving and strangulating
almost 500,000 inhabitants in west Beirut.

“The world community has a clear duty to stop
Israel from pursuing its genocidal war to the bitter
end. The primary responsibility to curb Israel rests
with the permanent members of the Security Council, particularly
the super-Powers, who have the
ability and the resources to do so. If Israel is not
restrained now the consequences for regional and
global peace and security will be incalculable, and
neither the great nor the small will be able to escape
the impact of the forces that may be unleashed.
YOU bear a special responsibility
to uphold the
cause of justice and peace in our tormented world.
1 therefore urge you to use the power and influence
at your command to bring about an immediate

23. Israel is mistaken if it thinks that its coercion
can obliterate the Palestinian people and their leadership. History bears witness that the will and determination of peoples cannot be overpowered by brute
force, The voice of millions
of Palestinians living
under occupation or forced into exile cannot be silenced by genocide. Indeed, such brutality will win
their cause even greater recognition.
Israel is also
mistaken in its view that it can obtain security through
violence and the use of force against the Palestinians
and other Arab peoples. Peace and security are inseparable from the imperative
of justice and law. The
leaders of Israel, who are responsible for its con3

tinuing aggression and oppressive policies, must draw
a lesson from history and learn from the fate which
befell similar and more powerful aggressors in the
past.

nationally recognized frontiers of Lebanon so that the
territorial integrity, political independence and sovereignty of Lebanon can be preserved, We hope that
the Council will be able to act in a manner which will
preserve confidence in the Council’s ability to carry
out its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of
peace and security.

24. Israeli lawlessness has reached intolerable levels
and it carries the most dangerous portents for international peace and security. The world conscience
must react to Israeli terrorism and barbarity against
the Palestinian people. The United Nations, which is
responsible for the creation of Israel, has a solemn
responsibility
to bring the tragedy of the Palestinian
and Lebanese peoples to an end. The failure to do so
will irretrievably
erode the moral authority of the
Organization, on which rest our collective aspirations
for a civilized world order. The consequences of such
a catastrophe will be universal and will equally affect
Israel and its powerful allies.

29. Mr. WHYTE
(United
Kingdom):
My Government has continued to follow the situation in Lebanon with the gravest concern. We have repeatedly
made clear our vigorous condemnation
alf Israel’s
invasion and our support for the resolutions which
have been adopted by the Council.
30. The escalation of hostilities which has taken
place in the last few days has inflicted further terrible
suffering on the Lebanese and Palestinian
popuhtions. We are frankly appalled by the continuing
reports of civilian death and injury which have resulted
from Israel’s heavy bombing and shelling of the densely populated areas of west Beirut. We strongly condemn the callous indifference to human life and limb
which these actions have so starkly reveale{d, and WC
cannot accept that these means are in any way justified.

25. The failure of the Council to act firmly in the face
of Israeli defiance of the Council’s decisions has
resulted in ever-widening
Israeli aggression. In the
present circumstances,
it has become imperative for
the Council to proceed urgently, with all the authority and resources at its disposal, to avert a blood-bath
in Beirut and to secure the implementation
of its
resolutions 508 (1982), 509 (1982), 512 (1982) and 513
(1982). In this regard, the Extraordinary
Ministerial
Meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the NonAligned Countries, held at Nicosia two weeks ago,
called upon the Council to apply as a matter of urgency comprehensive
mandatory
sanctions against
Israel under the provisions of Chapter VII of the
Charter until Israel fully carries out the relevant decisions and resolutions of the United Nations [S/15327,
mvwx, pm. 27 (i) 1.

3’1. My Government set out its position in the statement issued by the heads of State and Government
of the 10 member States of the European CommunitY
at Brussels on 29 June [S/15265, CIIZIZEX].This is that
a cease-fire must be preserved and should be accompanied, on the one hand, by an immediate withdrawal
of Israeli forces from their positions around1 the Lebanese capital as a first step towards their complete
withdrawal, and, on the other hand, by a simultaneous
withdrawal of the Palestinian forces in west Beirut in
accordance with procedures to be agreed between the
parties.

26. We also appreciate the joint initiative of Egypt
and France, which, in its immediate purpose, is aimed
at bringing about the cessation of hostilities throughout Lebanon. We have also noted that, while addressing itself to this pressing issue, that initiative also
takes into account the larger question of the denial of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, which
is at the heart of the Middle East conflict.

32. In order to achieve peace throughout Lebanon,
it is necessary for there to be a complete and prompt
withdrawal of Israeli forces from the whole country,
as well as the departure of all other foreign forces,
except those which may be authorized by a legitimate
and broadly representative Government of Lebanon,
whose authority must be fully re-established over all
its national territory.

27. Pre-conditions for a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East remain the same, namely, the complete
withdrawal of Israel from all occupied Arab and
Palestinian
territories,
including the Holy City of
Jerusalem, and the restoration of the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people, including its
right to the establishment
of a sovereign State in its
homeland. It is also imperative that the PLO, which is
the sole representative
of the Palestinian
people,
participate in any peace process on an equal footing,

33. Such a settlement is urgently requireld if international peace and security are not to be yet more
seriously endangered and if a secure and peaceful
future is to be established for the long-suffering people
of Lebanon, A strengthened peace-keeping presence
is likely to be an essential part of such a set.tlement.
34. The direct connection between the events
in
Lebanon and the Palestinian problem cannot be tocl
strongly emphasized. There can be no stability in that
part of the Middle East until the political aspirations
of the Palestinian pebple are met. There must, therefore, be an overall peace settlement which takes

28. The Council faces a grave challenge in the Israeli
invasion of Lebanon. Immediate and effective action
is required to stop Israel’s genocidal onslaught against
the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples and to secure
withdrawal of the Israeli forces beyond the inter4

account of the Palestinians’ right to determine their
own future. The only territory in which such an act of
Palestinian
self-determination
can realistically
be
carried out is the territory of the West Bank and Gaza.
What political
structures emerge on that territory
would be for the Palestinians themselves to determine.

40. Nearly two months ago Israel invaded Lebanon.
Attacking by land, sea and air, it swept all before it
in the southern half of Lebanon and reached the outskirts of Beirut. It has now besieged west Beirut for
more than 40 days. It has continued at regular intervals to shell that part of the city from land and sea,
and it has bombed intensively from the air. It has, at
times, cut off water supply, electricity and food, and
it has maintained the most intense physical and psychological pressure on the beleaguered area in order
to oblige the PLO to leave.

35. Force is no solution to the Palestinian problem.
It creates only bitterness and further bloodshed. It is
imperative
that this should be accepted by all the
parties. Even after the bloody events of the last few
weeks, the opportunity for a political solution remains.
The way forward lies through a mutual act of recognition. Of course, Israel and its people have the right
to enjoy security and a life of peace. The PLO must
recognize unambiguously
Israel’s right to exist and
to security, while, at the same time, Israel must recognize the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people,
including its right to self-determination.
That is the
path to a peaceful solution, away from war and towards
the negotiating table.

41. This is not rhetoric; it is a simple factual description of what has happened since early June. Thousands have died-Lebanese,
Palestinians and Israeli
and Syrian soldiers. Tens or scores of thousands have
been made homeless. In recent days and despite
successive cease-fires, intensive shelling and bombing
have continued. We deplore and regret all of the
deaths which have been caused.
42. Throughout
this period there have been continuing negotiations through Mr, Habib and others
with a view to bringing an end at least to the devastating fighting in and around Beirut. We hear successively optimistic and pessimistic assessments of these
negotiations.

36. For those reasons, my Government
warmly
supports the draft resolution which the Governments
of France and Egypt introduced this morning [S/153171.
We believe that it sets out constructive and equitable
principles for a comprehensive solution to the present conflict.
We commend them to all the parties
concerned and hope that they will give them their
most serious consideration with the aim of achieving
a consensus in the Council.

43. These negotiations
deserve encouragement
and support, as do all efforts which aim at a peaceful
solution to the present appalling situation and which
look to implementation
of Council resolution 509
(1982) and the full restoration of Lebanese sovereignty
and authority up to its frontiers.

37. We are all aware, too, of the important efforts
which have been under way for some time outside
the Council to preserve a cease-fire and to prevent
an all-out assault on west Beirut. We support them
and must hope that they succeed. The consequences
of an all-out Israeli assault could only be horrendous,
both in the immediate pain and suffering which it
would cause and in the awful legacy of hatred and
bitterness which it would inevitably leave. My Government wishes to leave the Government of Israel in no
doubt of the total unacceptability of such an assault.
Any settlement achieved under the shadow of Israeli
bombardment will not last. It is only through political
means that a just and lasting peace will be achieved.

44. But though there have been frequent temporary cease-fires, always so far the assault has been
renewed and the fighting has continued.
45. As one focuses on the day-to-day reports of the
negotiations and the calls on Israel to show restraint
and patience, it is easy to lose sight of the basic point
that the capital of a United Nations Member State
has been under virtual siege for nearly two montlis
now by the armed forces of a neighbouring State.
46. How far has the Council for its part been able
to act to bring an end to this unacceptable situation?
The answer, unfortunately,
is that the Council’s role
so far has been limited and that the resolutions which
it has adopted are not being implemented.

38. Mr. DORR (Ireland): If I had been speaking
earlier this month, Sir, I would obviously
have
expressed good wishes to you on your assumption of
the office of the presidency. As it is, in the closing
days of the month, I can only thank you for the sustained and dedicated effort which you have made
throughout the month to carry out to the full the difficult duties of President of the Council. I congratulate you and the delegation of Guyana on the way
in which you have done this.

47. The last really substantive resolution adopted by
the Council was resolution 509 (1982), by which the
Council called unanimously
for a cease-fire by all
parties and immediate Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon. That resolution has not been implemented
yet,
nearly two months after the outset of the Israeli invasion.

39. I should also like-even
one month later-to
thank our colleague the representative of France for
the way in which he carried out the very heavy duties
of President of the Council in the month of June.

48. Since then the Council has limited itself to
adopting two further resolutions of a humanitarian
5

character, the latest of these nearly one month ago
511 (1982) mi 513 (1982)l. The Council
has also extended the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for a time and
given the Force certain humanitarian functions. But
UNIFIL continues to be obstructed and is not allowed
to function fully in carrying out even these humanitarian tasks.

resolution which they have submitted [S//S-?/7] is
indeed a serious and valuable effort along the lines
I have outlined. We welcome in particular the f&s?
that it provides for immediate measures relating to the
situation in Beirut and that, at the same time, it situates
these immediate steps in a wider context. I would
express Ireland’s appreciation for this initiative by the
Governments of Egypt and France and for the efforts
by their representatives here at the United Nations.

49. We believe that it is time now for a new and
serious effort by the Council. This should provide
for certain immediate steps to stop the present devastating conflict in and around Beirut. But it should
also try to address the basic problem in its wider
aspects and set these immediate steps in a larger
context.

55. It will be clear from what I have just said thal
we support the general lines of the draft resolution
introduced here this morning.
Some parts of the
text could perhaps be improved or amended in further
discussions, and we are glad to hear that the sponsors
are flexible and open in their approach.

[resolutions

56. The first part of the draft-that
is, sections -4
and B-provides
for specific measures to help resole
the immediate crisis in Beirut. We see this as the
highest priority and we trust that the parties concerned
will consider these measures as a first step to full
implementation
of the existing resolutions
of th’e
Council-in
particular resolution 509 (1 982)~-SO that
the full sovereignty and territorial integrity
of I&anon will be restored.

50. Ireland has always felt that the overall situation
in the region is one which cries out for an effort to get
a real political dialogue under way. What is needed
is to find some way-through
the Council or otherwise-of opening first a dialogue and then a serious
negotiation which would involve all of the parties and
I. address itself to all of the fundamental issues.
51. For our part, we have seen three points as basic
to any such dialogue: first, it would have to be based
on some kind of minimum acceptance by all parties of
the existence of all other parties and of their right to
be involved in the dialogue; secondly, it would have to
be clear that the principles of Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) provide a starting-point, but
that they are no more than a starting-point-that
is to
say, those principles are necessary but they are not
adequate or complete: thirdly, a way would accordingly have to be found to complete them. In our view,
a key missing element would have to be added: the
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
within the framework of a peace settlement.

57. That part of the draft resolution in particular
focuses on a possible United Nations presence in ~zrtd
around Beirut. We fully support the principle of prilctical United Nations involvement in seeking to est&lish and maintain peace. Two such ways in \shich
the United Nations could be involved are envisaged
in the draft.
58. The first is in section B, paragraph 1, which
requests the Secretary-Genera1 immediately
to stati@n
United Nations observers, by agreement
with the
Government of Lebanon, to supervise a cease-fire illBQi
disengagement. We believe this could be a ve:ry helpful
step and we hope that such United Nations observer?;
could be put into place as soon as possible.

52. We know that such a dialogue may be extremely
difficult to get under way. The emotions of all of the
parties run deep. We know-though from outside we
can hardly comprehend fully-the emotional power of
the memory of the sufferings of the Jewish people in
Europe a generation ago which has given the people
of Israel a determination never again to be passive in
the face of persecution or attack. We know, too, the
deep emotions which animate the Palestinian people,
dispersed as they are, deprived of a homeland and
forced to live in scattered communities and often in
refugee camps throughout the Middle East,

59. The second way in which United Nations
involvement is envisaged is in section B, paragraph
2.
The Secretary-General is asked to report on the prospects for the deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping force in the Beirut area. We agree that this iz;
a possible option, But we also see certain problem%
that might arise in present circumstances.
We would
therefore hope that the issue will be discussed
fully
in the Council and that all the implications
of such a
move will be fully considered before a formal decision
on such a force is actually taken.

53. But, difficult as it is, we believe that only such
a dialogue, leading to a negotiation and then to a
comprehensive settlement, can bring peace at last
to the region, a peace which would offer true security to all of its States and justice to all of its peoples,

60. Those are all measures to deal with the imm;ediate situation, The second main part of the drafr.
section C, is an effort to find a way out of the apparently endless cycle of violence by placing these immediate measures in a wider context. The aim of t\ cumprehensive, just and lasting peace settlement
in the:
Middle East must sometimes seem like a distant

54. It is against that background that we have approached the initiative taken by Egypt and France in
the Council this morning. We believe that the draft
6

I
1

1f

siders that it represents a laudable effort within the
framework of the Council’s efforts to find a solution
to the unsettling problem of Lebanon,

mirage. But we continue to believe that only such a
settlement,
taking full account of all aspects of the
problem and involving all the parties, can really bring
peace on a lasting basis.

68. My delegation not only firmly supports the spirit
underlying that draft resolution but it has, on very
diverse occasions, defended the same principles and
demonstrated its willingness to go even further, especially as regards the recognition of the rights of the
Palestinian people.

61. Ireland joined with its partners in the European
Community
in stating views on these general lines in
the Venice declaration of 13 June 1980 [5/14009].
Central to that declaration was the idea of a reconciliation, through negotiation, of the right of all States,
including Israel, to a secure and peaceful existence
and the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination within the context of a peaceful settlement.
I shouid add that Ireland, for its part, has recognized
the role of the PLO in representing the Palestinian
people in negotiations for a comprehensive
peace
settlement,

69. However, in my statement at this time I shall
not confine myself to the draft resolution presented
jointly by the delegations of Egypt and France. We
shall on a future occasion comment further on it, but
I can indicate that we support it since, as I have already
said, it reflects most of the points that my delegation
advocates. The important thing now is this: in accordance with the instructions that I have received from
my Government,
I wish to submit for the Council’s
attention a draft resolution which I would appreciate
being put to the vote as a matter of priority, preferably
today.

62. This part of the present draft resolution, in its
genera1 thrust, accords well with this whole approach
that we have long advocated. It is also in general
accord with the position of the 10 member States of the
European Community
as set out by the European
Council on 29 June last [S/1526.5, annex].

70. This is a humanitarian
draft that is not at all
intended to interfere with the draft resolution presented by the delegations of Egypt and France. I shall
read it out so that members of the Council may understand its significance and scope and the purpose
of the Spanish Government
in asking that I submit
it to the Council. I reiterate that I would appreciate
its being given the highest priority, given its merits
and the fact that it deals with a purely humanitarian
question, It reads as follows:

63. Resolution 242 (1967) was adopted by the Council 15 years ago. It was widely welcomed at the time
and it is of continuing importance. But it is now seen
as not wholly adequate, In recent years-in
1976,
in 1979 and again in 198O-efforts were made within
the Council to adopt other resolutions on the fundamental question. Those efforts did not succeed.
64. It has already been said and will no doubt be
said again that this present effort is too ambitious and
that it is doomed to failure. In our view, however, it
is an effort to bring the immediate and tragic loss of
life in and around Beirut to an end and at the same
time it represents a serious and realistic effort to make
real progress at last on one of the most difficult and
dangerous international problems of modern times.

“Deeply

population

“Rmulling

Mr.

de PINIES
(Spain) (inte,;oretalion
from
Mr. President, we have had very few opportunities this month publicly to acknowledge the work
being done by you this month and by your predecessor, the representative of France, last month.
My best wishes go to both of you. You have both
demonstrated
great ability and competence in conducting the deliberations of the Council, especially
in cautious and delicate work that is at times done in
private but that is just as important as the work we do
in public. My congratulations go to both of you.

512 (1982) and 513

“2. Requests the Secretary-General
to transmit
the text of the present resolution to the Government
of Israel and to keep the Security Council informed
of its implementation.”
7

,‘.

its resolutions

‘* 1. Demands
that the Government
of Israel
lift immediately
the blockade of the city of Beirut
in order to permit the dispatch of supplies to meet
the urgent needs of the civilian population and allow
the distribution of aid provided by United Nations
agencies and non-governmental
organizations,
particularly
the International
Committee
of the
Red Cross;

67. In connection with the d&t r&mhiticm presented
by France and Egypt [S/153/7], my delegation con.‘.

of the civilian

(1982),

Spuuish):

.

at the situation

“R@rring
to the humanitarian
principles of the
Geneva Conventions of 1949’ and to the obligations
arising from the regulations annexed to the Hague
Convention of 1907,2

65. We therefore support in principle the initiative
which Egypt and France have taken and we support
the general lines of the draft resolution which they
have offered to the Council. It is our hope that the
Council will give this text the most serious consideration in the coming days.
66.

concrrned
of Beirut,

That is the text of the draft resolution that I submit
for the urgent consideration of the Council.

ularly, the Geneva Conventions,
Council resolution 5 13 (1982).

as well as Security

71, My Government and country are seriously concerned at the tragic situation of the city of Beirut. At
this time we do not wish to refer to any other matters
pertaining to the Middle East, not even to the general problem of Lebanon. We request that priority be
given to this draft resolution, the purpose of which is
to put an end to the siege of the city of Beirut, where
the civilian population has been suffering from hunger, thirst, war and death.

“On behalf of the men, women, clhildren and
the aged, we ask all those who are in a position
to help that they urgently exert their utmost influence to lift the blockade and allow food supplies
and basic necessities to enter west 13eirut. The
civilian population of west Beirut feels entitled not
only to its basic human rights but also to a concerted universal effort to alleviate the suffering of
the innocent.

72, It is time that the Council acted and acted as a
matter of urgency. Furthermore,
in relation to the
draft resolution
submitted
by Egypt and France
-which they told us this morning was not so urgent
as to require priority voting-we
hope that those two
countries will understand the urgent need that motivates my Government’s
submission of this draft resolution.

“West Beirut, besieged and surviving without
water and electricity, cries for help and is grateful
to all those who will prove by their support that the
world will not tolerate a systematic starvation and
destruction of its people.”
That letter speaks for itself.
76. I hope that, as soon as we get in final form the
draft resolution read out by the representative
of
Spain, we shall proceed to vote on it, I wish to thank
the Government of Spain for taking the initiative
in
presenting this humane and most urgent draft resolution.

73. The PRESIDENT:
In the course of his statement, the representative of Spain orally presented a
draft resolution for which he is requesting the Council’s priority attention. The Secretariat will proceed
immediately
with the reproduction of the text in all
the official languages of the Council and it will be
distributed as soon as possible thereafter.

77. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): I too should like to begin by stating my Government’s and my own personal congratulat,ions to you.
Sir, for your occupancy of the presidency fr>r this
month and most especially our esteem for the serious
and skilful manner in which you have conducted the
Council’s affairs so far this month. I think the Council
is indeed fortunate to have so serious and skilful a
President during a time when we are considering such
serious problems.

74. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I wish to associate
myself wholly with the humane gesture and the most
urgent request of my colleague the representative of
Spain. This is really the most urgent matter facing the
Council.
75. I wish to mention here a letter addressed to
the President of the Council by the representative
of Lebanon in which he transmitted the text of an
appeal made by the Minister of National Economy,
Mr. Khaled Jumblat, and the Minister of Industry and
Petroleum,
Mr. Mohammad
Youssef Beydoun, on
behalf of the Government
of Lebanon [S//5324,
1ln1zex]. The appeal reads as follows:

78. The United States is never indifferent
to the
suffering, insecurity or deprivations of human beings
caught in war, occupation or natural disasters. Cep
tainly, we have been deeply concerned with the hardships visited on the people of Lebanon during the
current conflict. The Lebanese people, we: know, have
suffered violence too long at the hands of unwilnted
intruders, unwelcome invaders and occupiers,

“The blockade of west Beirut, imposed by the
Israeli forces a fortnight ago, is continuing despite
all intensive diplomatic
efforts and efforts by the
International
Committee
of the Red Cross, the
representatives of the United Nations and United
Nations agencies.

79. The concern of my Government for the people
of Lebanon has been and is being actively expressed
in the large contributions for emergency humanitarian
aid made by my Government and in the appointment
of a Special Administrator for Aid to ensure the impb
mentation of extensive humanitarian aid programmes
in the region, President Reagan has asked the Congress to provide a total of some $65 million in humam
itarian emergency aid for the people of Lebanon.
The
President’s
special envoy, Mr. Philip
Habib,
has
worked indefatigably in his efforts to restore peace lo
Lebanon and a degree of territorial integrity and sovereignty which that Government has not enjoyed for
too many years.

“Food and fuel suppliks have not been allowed
to enter west Beirut, with the exception of negligible quantities of bare necessities, The siege has
dramatically
affected the life of the civilian population and created conditions of hardship for innocent men, women and children, let alone conditions
in hospitals, orphanages and schools.
“Such inhuman acts by Israel constitute a flagrant
violation of all international
law and, more partic8

I

80. There is, I believe, no room for doubt among
reasonable men and women about the commitment
of
the United States Government to the peace, independence and sovereignty of Lebanon-indeed,
our
commitment
to peace, national independence and
sovereignty of all nations. Yet we see serious problems with the draft resolution submitted by my friend
and colleague the representative of the Government
of Spain, for the following reasons: first, because of
inadequate time either to gather or to confirm the facts
about the situation in Beirut and the problems of
access; secondly, because of an inadequate opportunity to consult with our Government; and, thirdly,
because this draft resolution, we believe, is lacking
in a certain serious balance which would give it greater
weight,

decessor in that post, the representative of France.
I am cognizant of the depth of your commitment
to
solving this crisis and alleviating
its tragic consequences for the people of Lebanon and the Palestinian
people.
86, We are meeting today in a situation that is perhaps without precedent in modern history. It is as if a
repeat performance is being held of events that occurred in the mid-1930s, when the international
body
of that day was reduced to a debating body, when
its effectiveness and credibility, as well as its resolutions, were ignored and neglected, and when, as a
result of a Hitler and a Nazi Germany unchecked by
international
consensus and the requirements
of
international
legitimacy, war was unleashed. We are
in a way approaching the same situation. We have an
Israel undaunted and using its arsenal of weapons to
unleash and conduct a war of annihilation,
a war, to
quote Mr. Sharon, of “destruction,
destruction, deas if by the repetition of that apocalyptic
struction”,
term Israel is attempting to deter the people of Lebanon from insisting on their independence and sovereignty, or the people of Palestine from persisting in
their legitimate struggle to achieve an independent
State in their homeland.

81. It is surely, in the first instance, the PLO which
imposes itself on the civilian population of Beirut.
But the draft resolution submitted by my colleague
from Spain does not ask that that armed force abandon its occupation of Beirut or desist in its military
activities. It calls only on Israel. Yet everyone understands that Israel seeks to affect supplies to the PLO
forces, not to the civilian population of Beirut.
82. The United States welcomes the concern of the
Council and of the humanitarian agencies of the United
Nations for the suffering in Lebanon, as we welcome
the concern of this body for an end to human suffering
everywhere.
We feel, however, that a one-sided
appeal in a two-sided conflict suggests purposes that
are political as well as humanitarian, and we cannot
support them-certainly
not on the basis of inadequate notice and inadequate information.
We therefore call upon the Council to take the time necessary
for a more careful and balanced consideration of this
most serious, wrenching problem. I ask for suspension of this meeting to permit consideration and consultation with our Government.

87. The world community is expected to sit on the
sideIines and to allow the efforts of Mr. Habib-wellmotivated efforts, 1 must admit-to
take their course
in an attempt to defuse and to eradicate the causes of
the tragedy now taking place in Lebanon and, more
drastically, in Beirut. The Security Council and the
United Nations, and the international
community as
a whole, have demonstrated their willingness, which
is perhaps unfortunate, to allow the United States to
pursue its efforts to defuse the crisis because of that
country’s special relationship with Israel. The United
States has asked us all to allow it to occupy a middle
ground between right and wrong, between victim and
victimizer, in order that it can placate the violator of
Lebanese sovereignty,
the destroyer of Lebanese
towns, soften its blows and mitigate its strangulation,
all in order that Israel not “lose its patience”.

83. Mr. de La BARRE de NANTEUIL
(France)
(inlerp,*etcrtion fkom French): With the agreement of
the representative of Egypt, I should like to state that
we are in entire agreement that priority should be given
to the draft resolution submitted by the representative
of Spain and that it should be voted on as quickly as
possible.

88. The United States, a super-Power, has asked
the world community
not to press too hard to make
Council resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982) effective and credible too soon. It has asked us Arabs to
be patient and to allow the nobly motivated efforts of
Mr. Habib to bear fruit other than the harvest of death
and destruction that we are witnessing daily, especially now in the city of Beirut. We have been asked
by the United States to desist even in the humanitarian matter of verifying whether there has been an
interruption
of the power supply or in the supply of
food, medicine and amenities by the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), because if we
adopt any humanitariau
draft resolution, such as the
one submitted by the representative
of Spain, we
might risk showing bias against Israel and that in turn
might endanger Habib’s mission. For, in the final

84, The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Clovis
Maksoud, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States, to whom the Council extended an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure at
its 2374th meeting. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
85. Mr. MAKSOUD:
I wish to express to you,
Mr. President, and through you to the members of the
Council, the thanks of my organization for the kind
invitation you have extended to me to participate in
this debate and to make a statement. I need not reaffirm our congratulations to you as President of the
Council this month, nor need I felicitate your pre9

analysis, Israel has made it clear, even here in New
York during Mr. Begin’s visit, that it will give in to no
pressure and that its immunity
from pressure and
leverage, whether moral or diplomatic,
must be respected and feared.
89. Hundreds and thousands of people have been
killed or maimed. Last night, after 9 o’clock, Beirut
time, when the cease-fire negotiated by Mr. Habib
was announced by the Prime Minister of Lebanon,
Mr. Habib telephoned the Prime Minister and told him
that Mr. Sharon had requested an hour-and-a-half
postponement because, apparently, Mr. Sharon could
not relay the orders to the army of Israel. Between
9 p.m. and 10.30 p.m., Beirut time, all hell broke
loose again-from
the air, from the sea and from the
mountains and hills in the proximity of Beirut.
90. In the mean time, the children’s section of AIMakassed Hospital was destroyed and at least 30 more
people were killed, in addition to the injured and the
wounded, who, according to Dr. Amal Shammaa, are
usually dead by the time they arrive at the hospital.
91. And yet we are asked to be patient-otherwise,
Mr. Begin might lose his patience again.
92. For how long can the world community remain,
not silent-because
it has not been silent-but
ineffective because of our delegation of authority to
Mr. Habib, whose well-motivated
attempts are deeply
appreciated?
93. I know that the draft resolution, which was submitted as a matter of urgency, is aimed at lifting the
siege of Beirut in order to allow a regular flow of
power, food supplies and water. Nearly half a million
people are being strangulated on the assumption that
there are PaIestinians among them. If the number is
correct, there are 6,000 of them. Does that warrant
the indiscriminate
killing and the bombardment
of
apartment houses which house the Swiss and the
Canadian Ambassadors? These are not really “PLO
strongholds”.
94. Apparently what is intended is that the world community become adjusted to the continuous bombing
of Beirut because it will then become a side-show in
world concerns. In order for it not to become a sideshow in world concerns, a humanitarian
draft resolution has been submitted on a priority basis. I regret the
assessment of the United States representative
that
there was inadequate time and opportunity
to verify
the evidence [pnt+ct. 80 chose]. Inadequate
time?
Perhaps-because
every emergency
resolution
is
supposed to be dealt with urgently. But do we guarantee, can Mr. Habib guarantee, can the United States
guprantee that if adequate time is given to verify the
evidence, during that time hundreds more civilians
will not be killed in Beirut?
95. On behalf of the Leagt~e of Arab States and as 8
Lebanese, I would say: let us not deal with this as a

matter of priority if during the “adequate time” there
is a cease-fire which is credible and the flow of water
and food is guaranteed. We would unquestionably
accept the guarantee of the United States Government.
96, So it is not a resolution that we are seeking SO
much as avoidance of the continuation of th.e massacre.
which is assuming genocidal dimensions+
97. I request you, Mrs. Kirkpatrick:
please, although
you might have reservations about what you call the
objectivity of this draft resolution, request adequate
time to verify the evidence. I will grant that perhaps
you need to have a more objective assessment of the
evidence. But I would appeal to you, if the Council
grants more time, that in the mean time the cost of this
time not be further bleeding in the city of Beirut because of Israeli bombardments
and the killing of civilians in Beirut.
98, Needless to say, hovering over our d.ebate today j
is the unfolding tragedy that touches ma.ny of us in j
our conscience, in our families and in our very exist- /
ence. But more important perhaps for the purposes ol :
this debate is the submission by France and Egypt of
a draft resolution [S/153/7] that seeks to ialleviate the
dangers that have emerged from the tragedies in
Beirut and Lebanon and to set the outlines of a comprehensive, just and durable settlement. In order for a
settlement to be durable, it must be just, ;and in order
for it to be just, it must be comprehensive.
99. In pursuing this, the League of Arab States and
the Arab States seek to contribute to this effort. We
want our input to be commensurate with the requirements of seeking an immediate peace. Because of that,
and in order to make a contribution
not only to the
defusing of the crisis, but also to the remedying
of
the tragedy and the lessening of the consequences of
this tragedy, the League of Arab States--in
the wake
of its meeting to study and analyse the findings of
the ministerial Arab League delegation
that visited
several capitals of the world community-has
made
the following announcement
tonight, which I shall
paraphrase because I shall be translating from Arabic.
100. We urge you, and through you the world cons
munity, to bring about compliance with an immediatt
and sustained cease-fire in Lebanon. We note furthermore that the Government of Lebanon and the PLO
have agreed on the modalities for redelployment
of
PLO military forces, to be carried out in stages, in
conjunction and agreement with the Lebanese Cove
ernment. We urge the lifting of the siege of Beirut and
its suburbs by the immediate
withdrawal of Israeli
forces. The Lebanese Government
should take all
effective measures to ensure the security and safety
of all the inhabitants of the city of Beirut and its suburbs, and they should be joined in that task by international forces. The Arab countries will undertake
all pqlitical, economic and other measures and make
‘till arrangements to assist Lebanon fully to implement
Council resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (f!982),

of what was agreed at
time”
there 101, An official tranShtiOn
that
meeting
will
be
made
available
to the United
)Wofwater
Mtionably

)vernmenl,

;e, although
w callthe
st adequate
hat perhaps
meritof the
the Council
cost ofthis
FBeirutbe.
illing of cj.
ebatetoday
ny of usin
very exist.
purposesof
Id Egyptof

dleviatethe
ragediesiln
Sofecom
I orderfor~a
md in orde
r
I.
I Statesant
; effort.WI
the require
use ofthat
only to the
medying01
zquences
01
in the wake
findingsof
that visited
-has made
lich I shall
*om Arabic.
world corn
1 immediate
late furthep
Id the PLO
jloymentof
n stages,
in
aneseGOF

f Beirut and
1l of Israeli(
lld takeall
and safely
and its sub.
Sk by inter
I underlake
s and make
) implefMl
,821.

eters-in other words, the territory from which Israel
must withdraw. That resolution has been violated by
the annexation of Jerusalem and the Golan Heights
and by the proliferation of many settlements in the
occupied territories of Palestine. Therefore, those
who are seeking to make resolution 242 (1967) credible
must make it implementable, at least in terms of its
territorial basis, by describing precise parameters.

Nations later today. its significance, and the signif&
cance of the meeting itself, lies in its unanimity.
A more immediate significance is that it entailed an
agreement between the Lebanese Government and
the PLO; another aSpeCt of its significance is that
redeployment of Palestinian
military forces is an
option
which has been accepted by the PLO. The
cumulative effect of all this would undoubtedly be to
help deliver an Arab commitment
to whatever attempt may be made by the international community.

105. Even former Senator Ribicoff of Connecticut,
when he represented the United States at a General
Assembly session, said-admittedly
during a pro
former affirmation of resolution 242 (1967)-that there
is a basic defect in that resolution, especially regarding
its description of the Palestinian problem exclusively
in terms of refugees, and without even naming them,
and its tendency to deal with the central issue more in
terms of philanthropic solutions than in terms of
political consequences and political solutions.

102. Thus, we should like the Council, in its deliberations in the search for a comprehensive and durable
solution, to realize the immediate effect of the agreement that was made tonight in Jeddah. It signals to the
world community readiness, flexibility and genuine
patience and provides it with the means to bring about
international legitimacy, as well as making the Arab
world available to help in that task. This must come
about in circumstances that would entail no humiliation for anyone in Lebanon. It must be done in such a
way that the withdrawal of Israeli forces from their
siege of Beirut would be the first step, so that any
decision or commitment
made by any of the parties
should be durable and deliverable. For, as the representative of the United Kingdom has stated, no commitment, decision or policy on anybody’s part can be
durable and deliverable if it is made under duress or as
a result of the coercion of the strangulating siege that
has been imposed.

106. Thus, even the United States assesses resolution 242 (1967) to be inadequate, at least in that operative part; and the international community, as noted
by the representative of Ireland, has tried several
times to re-examine and recast it, not in order to ignore
it or to deny its validity, but because of a yecognition of its inadequacy and of the fact that it cannot
provide a total formula for the resolution of the Palestinian question, and in order to correct those defects.
107. Everybody in the world-the
non-aligned,
Islam, the European Community, Latin Americahas realized that, although in most of its operative
parts, resolution 242 (1967) constitutes the definition
of international consensus, it remains inadequate in
terms of the refugees. To say that resolution 242
(1967) is inadequate does not mean that it is totally
irrelevant; it means only that it is inadequate. Therefore, in that light and from that point of view, the
Council has repeatedly attempted to bring about a
new resolution that seeks to factor in the relevant and
operative parts of that resolution but to correct its
deficiency pertaining to Palestinian rights.

103. When this has taken place, the holocaust with
which we are threatened in the city of Beirut will have
been averted. Then the ability of the Lebanese and
Palestinians to articulate
their commitments
will
develop and be revealed in an atmosphere that preserves the integrity and legitimacy of the Lebanese
Government’s commitments and of the commitment of
the PLO to any undertaking it makes. This will bring
about the unfolding of the plans necessary to ensure the
total and absolute sovereignty of Lebanon and the
restoration of its legitimate
authority over all its
territories, and to ensure that the Palestinian people,
and the PLO in particular, will not become trapped
in any tunnel they enter at the behest of the international community, but will see light at the end of that
tunnel. That light is the exercise of the right of selfdetermination in their homeland, including the right to
establish an independent State.

108. So instead of being bombarded every day
with the fact of that Council resolution, it is high
time that we de-mythologized it-not
rejected it but
de-mythologized it. Our attempt, as well as the latest
agreements by the League of Arab States in Jeddah
tonight, has been to welcome all efforts in that direction in order to secure immediate relief for the people
of Beirut from the siege, strangulation, hunger and
killing which they are experiencing, and t0 see to it
that the Lebanese Government achieves its full sovereignty, integrity and unity and that the modalities
are worked out, in harmony and not in conflict, for the
total withdrawal of Israel from Lebanon and for the
simultaneous search for a way to enable the Palestinian people not to remain permanently disenfranchised-as Israel seeks to render them-by
either
decimating or subjugating them, as it is doing in the
‘West Bank, Gaza and Jerusalem.

104. In the last few weeks, and more particularly in
the last few days, we have witnessed an attempt to
mythologize Council resolution 242 (1967), as if that
resolution were sacrosanct and as if through repetition it would come about that that resolution is the Only
basis for security and that the PLO must recognize it.
1 shall attempt to de-mythologize
it presently, but
first I would note that everybody has joined in an international consensus that the basis of the mkmince Of
this resolution is its description of territorial param11

/

two hours. It was my understanding that it was a suspension to go into informal consultations,,
but that
the period would also be used for consultations with
Governments.

109. Israel’s attempt at subjugating the Palestinians
in the occupied territories by decimating the Palestinians in Lebanon is one of the cruelest acts in modern
history, nearly equal to the cruelty that Nazi Germany
committed against the people of the Jewish faith.
110. The PRESIDENT:
meeting for 10 minutes.

120. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): Because of the
urgency of the problem, I firmly oppose tlhe suspension of this meeting. I associate myself with the representative of Panama in opposing such a suspension
and request that the draft resolution submitted by the
representative of Spain [S//5325] be put to the vote
immediately.

I shall now suspend the

1I I. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council now
have before them the draft resolution contained in
document S/15325, the text of which was orally introduced by the representative of Spain. The document is
now available in the official languages.

121, The PRESIDENT:
We therefore have a proposal by the representative of the United ‘States that
the meeting be suspended for two hours, and that
proposal is opposed by the representatives of Panama
and Jordan.

112. In connection with this text, the representative
of the United States formally requested a suspension
of the meeting in order to allow for consultations. If
there is no objection, it is now my intention to suspend
the meeting for consultations.

122. I now put to the vote the proposal of’ the reprcsentative of the United States.

113. Mr. OZORES TYPALDOS
(Panama) (interpretrttion jbrn Spanish): My delegation is opposed to a
suspension of the meeting and a delay in voting on the
draft resolution.

In fmwr:
Ireland, Japan, Togo, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Zaire
Agcrinst: China, Guyana, Jordan, Panamta,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

114. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of the
United States has proposed that the meeting be suspended. The representative of Panama has opposed
that proposal and would like the draft resolution to be
put to the vote immediately.
I shall therefore now put
to the vote the proposal by the representative of the
United States that the meeting be suspended.

Ahstaining:

115. Mr, DORR (Ireland):
On a point of order,
Mr. President, I believe that in your earlier statement
you said that the meeting would be suspended to allow
for consultations. Is that the intention of the suspension? I do not wish to breach the rule that this motion
should be decided without debate: I merely ask the
question on a point of order.

of the Ur

France, Spain, Uganda

123. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance
with the
request of the representative of Spain, supported by
the representative of Panama, the Council will now
vote on the draft resolution contained in document
S/15325.

116. The PRESIDENT:
That is indeed what I stated.
1 therefore now put to the vote the proposal by the
representative of the United States that the meeting be
suspended for consultations.
117. First, 1 call on the representative
States on a point of order.

Poland,

pcrrticipate

ed

in the voting.

124. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on representatives who have asked to be allowed to make
statements after the voting on the draft resolution just
adopted,

i18. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): I should simply like to make it clear that the
request of the United States is that the meeting be
adjourned for two hours to allow for consultations
with Governments.

125. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United State:s of America): I should like to say that the United States found
it impossible to participate in the vote. It strongly
objects to the procedure employed here today and
suggests that it will be impossible for the Council to
function if members are not to be provided. an opportunity for consultation with their Governennents.

119. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to make it
clear that it was not my understanding at the time the
proposal was made that it was for a suspension for
I2

’

126. Mr. de PINI!%
(Spain) (interpretcrtion jkm
Sprrnish): I should like to express my gratitude to the
members of the Council, who have almost unanimously supported our draft resolution. As we understand it, humanitarian draft resolutions should receive
priority.
I should like to remind the Council in this
regard that there were consultations on resolution 5 13
(1982), adopted by the Council on 4 July, and that
we came back immediately to the Council chamber and
voted on the text in the version with blue-coloured
type.

we are in favour of all steps that at this very moment,
in the mean time, may alleviate the plight of the victims
of Israeli aggression. This is a simple humanitarian
move, a little gesture in fact, It was in this context
that we reacted to the draft resolution introduced by
my distinguished neighbour here, the representative of
Spain, and that is why we voted in favour of it. Indeed,
when people are suffering and dying we cannot argue
that some political balancing should take place and
thus cause such a humanitarian proposal to be washed
out.

127. Mr. T&N1
(Lebanon): In very simple terms,
I should like to express the gratitude of my countrymen to the Council for adopting the draft resolution,
and I should particularly like to thank my friend the
representative
of Spain for having spontaneously
proposed it.

134. In conclusion,
I should like to express my
delegation’s satisfaction with the vote on that draft
resolution, which we consider accorded with all the
appropriate rules of procedure.

128. Mr. NOWAK (Poland): Mr. President, allow me
to associate the Polish delegation with those other
delegations
that have expressed admiration
of the
serious and highly skilful manner in which you, the
representative of friendly Guyana; have conducted the
work of the Council during the month of July. Our
thanks go also to the previous President, the representative of France, who gave proof of eminent diplomatic skills in the Council during the month of June.
129.

I shall try to be brief.

130. The representative
of Lebanon has today
noted with subtlety that the Lebanese tragedy speaks
for itself. Indeed, the tragedy of the inhabitants of
Beirut speaks for itself; the tragedy of the Palestinian
people speaks for itself. We have been strongly impressed by the letter from the Lebanese representative [S/1.5324] today and by the images of Beirut we
see almost every day on our television screens.
131. My delegation had a chance on 18 June to
explain my Government’s position [23791/l rneefirzgl,
and I shall not dwell on it again since everything my
delegation
said then remains in force. Let me only
reiterate that my Government demands that an end
be put to the Israeli invasion of Lebanon, that the
authority of the Council be used to bring about the
withdrawal of the Israeli forces, that the territoria!
integrity of Lebanon be safeguarded and that the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people be exercised,
including their right to statehood.
132. Peace and an honourable solution cannot be
achieved by protecting the aggressor, but should
result from peace negotiations with the participation of
all the parties concerned and taking into account theh
vital rights and interests.
133, Those are the primary objectives that my delegation takes into account when evaluating the proposals presented here in this context. Without prejudice to the realization of those primary objectives,

135. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interprvtcrtion jkm Russian): Mr. President, I should like most cordially to congratulate you
on the very effective and successful way in which you
are performing the duties of President of the Council.
136. We should also like to express our gratitude to
the representative of France for his very noteworthy
work as President last month.
137. In connection with the draft resolution just
adopted by the Council, we should like to make the
following statement.
138. Israel is using the most barbaric and the most
inhumane means against the Lebanese and Palestinian
populations
in occupied southern Lebanon and in
Beirut.
139. First, this is anti-humanitarian
action on the
part of Israel in order to blockade Beirut, to break off
the supply routes for food and electricity.
Various
humanitarian
organizations are being prevented from
carrying out their work, including the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, to organize assistance for the Palestinian
refugees. This is not only an essentially anti-humane
action by Israel; it is a gross violation of Council
resolutions 512 (1982) and 513 (1982). Therefore, the
Council was perfectly correct in confirming
those
resolutions and requiring that Israel put an immediate
stop to its blockade of Beirut. We, like 13 other members of the Council, supported the draft resolution.
140. In our consideration of the draft resolution that
was presented to us we heard from one of the members of the Council a very strange statement to the
effect that this is not the appropriate time for the adoption of a humanitarian
draft resolution of this kind.
One wonders if the United States considers the actions
of Israel appropriate.
Is it appropriate
for troops
from Israel to occupy southern Lebanon and the
capital of Lebanon? Does the United States consider
that appropriate?

141. The yardstick used by the United States must
be monstrous and strange if it can fail to support an
elementary humanitarian
draft resolution.

to that sorely tried land. Israel wants peace in and with
Lebanon. Israel has no quarrel with Lebanon, only
with those who have subjugated it.

‘j

142. In addition, in Lebanon, Israel is utilizing the
most barbaric ways and means of waging war: cluster
and phosphorous bombs and, as numerous press
reports have shown, poisonous substances. And
where does Israel obtain these means of waging war?
Who has made it possible for them to be used by
Israel? Once again, in the foreground we see the United
States, which, for example, supplied IsraeI with cluster bombs. If they had not had those supplies, they
would not have been able to use them. We wonder
why the United States has made these supplies available to Israel. Is it in the name of humanitarianism?
In this connection,
one quite legitimately
wonders
where the American
concept of humanitarianism
is being formulated:
in the United States, or in Tel
Aviv. I am not asking the representative of the United
States to answer this rather difficult question.

149. Let me therefore reiterate again today tha!
Israel has no territorial ambitions whatsoever in Lebanon. We do not seek to acquire even one Isquare inch
of Lebanese territory, We do not want to stay in Lebanon, or in any part thereof. But we are entitled to
demand that proper arrangements be made so that
Lebanon should not again serve as a stag,ing ground
for terrorist attacks against Israel’s civilian population. We are entitled to demand that concrete arrangements be made that would permanently
preclude
hostile action against Israel and its civiilians from
Lebanese soil.

1

1

I

150. Lebanon must cease to be a centre of international terrorism, and arrangements must be made
to ensure that it does not become such a centre again
in the future. Any attempt or initiative aimed at enabling the continuation
of the terrorist presence on
Lebanese soil must therefore be resisted both as being
short-sighted and as running counter to the true interests of international peace and security in Lebanon
itself and in the Middle East as a whole.

143. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Israel, on whom I now call.
144. Mr, BLUM (Israel): At the outset, Sir, permit
me to pay my respects to you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of July.

!
1

of
151. We fully concur with the representative
Lebanon, who told the Council this afternoon that
“a Lebanon restored to strength and sovereignty will
itself become a major factor actively contributing
to Middle East peace” @nru. 8 N!XHXJ].

145. Those among us here whose objective is to
contribute to the restoration
of Lebanon’s sover-’
eignty, which has been virtually eroded over the past
decade to the point of having become non-existent,
those among us who seek the restoration of peace and
stability to that war-torn land, which is essential for
the stability of the entire region, have very serious
doubts about the usefulness of this meeting and indeed
about the intentions of its sponsors,

:
:

152. Consequently, the terrorist PLO, this leading
component of international
terrorism, cannot, should
not and will not be a partner to any negotiations.
let
alone to any international
arrangement
concerning
the Arab-Israel conflict or any of its aspects.
153. When we speak of the restoration of Lebanese
sovereignty, we have in mind the restoration of genuine sovereignty over Lebanon to its own people, and
not a mere ritualistic lip-service to such sovereignty.
used as a fac;ade behind which alien interests seek t0
perpetuate their stranglehold over Lebanon and its
people. The experience of recent years has clearly
demonstrated
that the sovereignty of Lelbanon has
become a sham and has ceased to exist in anything
but name, having been abused by those who have
converted Lebanon into a base for aggression and
international
terrorism. This must not be repeated.
It is therefore essential that all non-Lebanese elements
without exception remove themselves from Lebanese
soil and that the Lebanese people be enabled to take
their destiny into their own hands. Israel, f,3r its part,
will oppose the repetition of the mistakes of recent
years and any initiative that would perpetuate any nonLebanese presence on Lebanese soil. Lebanon, rightly
and properly, belongs to its own people, and to them
alone.

146. I will therefore confine myself to a brief recapitulation of our well-known position of principle on
this issue.
147. The position of the Government of Israel regarding the question of Lebanon has been made clear
many times both in this forum and in the General Assembly. Most recently, on 26 June, I stated it at the
seventh emergency special session of the General
Assembly in the following words:
“Israel fully supports the restoration of the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of
Lebanon. Israel stands for the restoration of the
territorial unity of Lebanon within its internationally-recognized
boundaries, under the authority of’
its lawful Government
and free from any foreign
intervention.“X
148. No one in the Middle East is as eager as Israel
to see Lebanese sovereignty restored, its internal
strife resolved, the Syrian occupiers removed, the
PLO subdued and freedom and tranquillity
returned

154. We reject any attempt to interfere in. any form
whatsoever with Council resolution 242 (1’9671, That
I4
I

j

resolution is a carefully balanced document. As was
pointed out in the Council by one of its main authors,
Lord Caradon, the then representative of the United
Kingdom, on the day the resolution was adopted,

Union, Poland and so forth become humanitarians,
one must certainly pause to think and to ponder the
real motives of these and similar humanitarians.
161. With regard to the intemperate statement made
by the representative of the United Kingdom, I wish
to tell him that we roundly and unreservedly reject
his empty and utterly irresponsible
accusations
against my country. At the same time, we are profoundly grateful for and appreciative of his statement
that Israel and its people have the right to enjoy security and a life of peace. I wish to assure him that Israel
fully supports the right of the United Kingdom and
its people to enjoy security and a life of peace.

“the draft resolution is a balanced whole. To add
to it or to detract from it would destroy the balance
and also destroy the wide measure of agreement we
have achieved together” [1382rzd meeting, paw. FJ],
155. Resolution 242 (1967) serves as the only agreed
basis for a peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israel conflict. The Camp David framework accords for peace
in the Middle East and the Egypt-Israel peace treaty
based on them are also firmly grounded in that resolution, as well as in its companion resolution, resolution 338 (1973).

162. Frankly, it is somewhat surprising that any
representative of the United Kingdom should these
days display such a high degree of callous indifference
to problems confronting
a country that faces the
scourge of terrorism. Admittedly,
my country does
not enjoy the luxury of conducting its wars at a distance of 8,000 miles from its borders. Neither does it
enjoy the luxury of conducting wars in such densely
populated locations as San Carlos Bay, Goose Green
or Teal Inlet.

156. As will be recalled, the texts of both these Council resolutions were appended as annexes to the Camp
David accords. Thus, any attempt to tamper with resolution 242 (1967) in any form whatsoever can only
undermine
the delicate framework on which the
entire Middle East peace process is based.
157. The Camp David peace process has already
yielded spectacular results in the form of the peace
treaty between Israel and Egypt. Moreover,
that
framework carries within it the potential for an overall solution of the conflict in all its aspects. And,
despite protestations to the contrary, that framework
is now firmly embedded in the political reality of the
region and has produced one of the few islands of
stability in the midst of a large and deeply troubled
sea of turmoil and convulsion.

163. The representative
of Jordan has treated us
once again to a display of his customary integrity and
honesty. I shall refrain from commenting on the many
deliberate distortions
and falsifications
that punctuated his statement and confine myself to one or
two points.
164. Mr. Nuseibeh bemoaned the fate of the PLO
terrorists in Beirut. He seems to have forgotten-not
for the first time-that
in September 1970 it was his
Government and his King that treated the PLO guests
in Jordan to affectibnate expressions of hospitality
and that those PLO guests in Jordan who were still
alive at the end of that hospitality treatment were
then gently permitted to flee Jordan for their lives
-many of them, incidentally,
to Israel-after
having
defended Amman in the manner they are now defending west Beirut. It was then that most of those PLO
guests imposed themselves on Lebanon and gradually
destroyed its sovereignty.

158. Before concluding, I should like to refer briefly
to some of the statements made here earlier today.
159. With regard to the brief statement made by the
representative of Lebanon this morning, I should like
to set the record straight. The Israel Defence Forces
have strict instructions to facilitate the passage of
ICRC convoys to west Beirut. In this connection,
I should like to state that my country fully supports
any genuine humanitarian concern designed to alleviate
human suffering. But my country rejects and will
resist any attempt to abuse humanitarian concerns
for the purpose of attaining political objectives totally
unrelated
and extraneous
to any humanitarian
concerns.

165. It therefore ill behoves the representative of
Jordan to deny Lebanon and its people the right which
Jordan claimed for itself in 1970-namely,
the right to
defend itself against PLO terrorism and subversion,
Mr. Nuseibeh seems to have forgotten this-but
Mr. Nuseibeh is an honourable man.

160, Needless to say, it would have been easier to
believe in the genuinely humanitarian
concern of
many speakers here had they not ignored studiously
and with callous indifference the agony of the Lebanese people over the years, involving the death of
100,000 Lebanese, the wounding of a quarter of a
million Lebanese and the displacement of more than
I million Lebanese-not
to speak of their indifference
to such massive human tragedies as Kampuchea and
Afghanistan. When the representatives of the Soviet

166. The representative
of Jordan also referred
to the plight of the civilian population in west Beirut,
who-as was recently pointed out by Tha Ne\i’ York
Times, in an editorial on 22 July-have
become the
victims of “the biggest hijacking in history”.
For
reasons that have manifestly to do with Mr. Nuseibeh’s
welI-known intellectual
integrity,
the Council was
not told who is responsible for depriving civilians in
15

Lebanon, including Palestinians, of food these davs.
Nor was ;he Cou&il told by him’of the shelling by ihe
terrorist PLO of an ICRC ship in Juniyah carrying
food for civilians in Lebanon, although that event
occurred only one or two days ago.

Nations itself, in the resolution
ago here.
169.
-but

167. Interestingly
enough, Mr. Nuseibeh did volunteer a revealing piece of information-namely,
that the PLO terrorists in Beirut-whom,
for some
reason, he termed indigenous
fighters-do
have
ample food and water. In other words, the PLO terrorists in Beirut are depriving the civilian population,
hijacked by them, not only of their freedom but also
of food and water. Since Mr. Nuseibeh has been less
than candid with the Council, let me provide the
Council
with some pertinent
information
which
I believe must have been available to Mr. Nuseibeh,
as it was published only yesterday in the form of a
United Nations press release of 28 July 1982, which
reads as follows:

adopted a few minutes

All this was not mentioned by Mr.
Mr. Nuseibeh is an honourable man.

Nuseibeh

170. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I wish to make a few
brief remarks in reply to the allegations of the representative of Israel.
171. First, I would give him some sincere advice,
that is, that he keep silent instead of straining to defend the indefensible: the holocaust that is now, as
we are meeting here, being perpetrated against the
Lebanese people as well as against the Palestinian
people, the refugees whom Israel threw out of their
homeland at the point of the bayonet in 1947 and
1948 and whose villages were destroyed and their
inhabitants massacred, as all of us know. It is not surprising that Israel has done what it has done today,
since it is simply a continuance of its long-standing
policy of bloodthirsty massacres regardless of consequences.

“Vicnntl, 27 July (UNRWA)-Emergency
relief
operations by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA)
for some 30,000 displaced Palestine
refugees in west Beirut, and the movement of supplies from Beirut for distribution
to homeless families in south Lebanon, have been stopped since
19 July by the Palestine Liberation
Organization
(PLO).

172. The representative
of Israel might perhaps
draw a lesson in moral behaviour from what an Israeli
senior commander of a mechanized brigade said only
a couple of days ago in requesting to be relieved of his
post. When asked by Prime Minister Begin why he had
done so, he said-and
this senior officer hlad fought
the Palestinian refugees and Lebanese ci.vilians
in
Tyre, Sidon and elsewhere, up to the environs
of
Beirut: “Well, wherever I looked around I saw only
children, and my conscience can no longer carry the
burden of continuing to massacre them.” Perhaps the
Council could pass a moral judgement on the chemistry
of the two men.

“An armed five-man unit of PLO at the gate of
UNRWA’s
warehouse in Verdun Street, west
Beirut, posted ostensibly to prevent UNRWA’s
supplies from being plundered, has orders to prevent any UNRWA supplies from entering or leaving
the warehouse without written authority
from
PLO.

173. It is indeed an affront to the intelligence
of the
Council, not to speak of the world community,
For the
representative
of Israel to be talking about peace
while his authorities are causing a holocaust unprecedented in recent history. The devastated cities and
the uncounted victims of the carnage perhaps answer
his claims more eloquently than any words could.

“Contacts with PLO undertaken since 19 July
have met with no practical effect, and a convoy of
two trucks loaded with rice and sugar for the Palestine refugees in Sidon was not permitted to leave the
warehouse this morning (27 July).
“Distribution
teams in west Beirut have been
without flour, rice, sugar, corned beef and skimmed
milk powder to issue to displaced Palestine refugees
for over a week, and in Sidon, UNRWA
teams
have been deprived of the 48 tons of food supplies
which were scheduled to have been delivered last
week and today.”

174. The representative of Israel referregd to September 1970. I happened to be then the Ambassador
to Cairo, but I can tell him exactly what happened
because I have been in the Government
since 1968.
The entire Government
of Jordan gave fillI-fledged
support to the Palestinian people, in every way POSsible, because it felt it to be its duty to assist them
to mount resistance against the occupier:s of their
homeland, This support continued at all levels until
towards the end of 1969. As a result of the burgeoning
enthusiasm for enlisting in the resistance movement,
there entered some unruly elements which may have
engaged in some disorderly behaviour, and the Government’s action was no more than an effort to restore
law and order.

168. Here we have a clear description of what has
been happening in the field of food distribution
in
Beirut and elsewhere in Lebanon. The PLO terrorists, being the seasoned criminals they are, are depriving not only the Lebanese civilian population,
but even the Palestinians on whose behalf they claim
to act, of the food earmarked for them by international relief agencies. One wonders what reference can
be found to these events, documented by the United
16

175. Secondly, this happened after three years of
the kind of shelling and bombardment to which Jordanian villages and Palestinian refugee camps were
subjected all through 1967 and up to 1970, in which
thousands of people lost their lives and in which the
Israelis destroyed the east Ghor canal which irrigates
the Jordan Valley, culminating in their savage attack
against Karamah and the Jordan Valley in east Jordan.
Everybody knows that there assembled, like a troupe
producing a film, a horde of journalists to report on
Israel’s glorious victory. They waited at the Kalia
Hotel until 2 p.m., when they were advised to go
back to occupied Jerusalem because the Jordanian
army knew how to deal with them.

question of Palestine or the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, on which there are hundreds of
standing resolutions.
182. Israel was created as a result ofa United Nations
act [Gencrcrl Assembly wsolution
181 (II)] partitioning Palestine and assigining a far larger area to the
Palestinian
State than that comprised by the West
Bank, Gaza or what is now called Arab Jerusalem.
And yet the Israelis never gave a chance to the Palestinians either to vote in a plebiscite or to say what they
thought of it. They launched an all-out attack against
the totally disarmed Palestinian
civilians three or
four days after the adoption of that partition scheme
and occupied four fifths of Palestine-even
before the
end of the Mandate and before a single Arab solider
had entered the country to save the remnants of the
Palestinian
people in whatever places remained in
Palestinian hands.

176, The Government of Jordan still supports, and
will continue to support, the PLO as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people in every
way possible and with every means at its disposa1.
177, When the representative of Israel talks about
the “hijacking”
of Beirut, one wonders who has
hijacked whom. Beirut is there, in the centre of Lebanon; it is the capital of Lebanon. Hundreds of thousands of Palestinian refugees, uprooted from their
homes in Palestine, have been living in Lebanon for
34 years awaiting repatriation and redemption, but to
no avail. And yet the Israelis have the audacity to
claim that they are trying to restore peace to Lebanon
by committing
an act of full-fledged genocide against
those hundreds of thousands of Palestinian refugees,
and just as many Lebanese.

183. Now we have an initiative which tries to solve
not only the immediate problem of Beirut and Lebanon as a whole-and
it is extremely urgent to do
so-but also the question of Palestine and the right of
the Palestinian people, and by corollary the entire
Middle East crisis.
184. Does Council resolution 242 (1967) even mention the Palestinian people? As I said, resolution 242
(1967) was designed to liquidate the consequences of
the 1967 war, but what we are dealing with now is
the search for a fair, just and comprehensive solution
to the question of Palestine and the Middle East. It is
therefore very, very timely that France and Egypt
have submitted a draft resolution to introduce the
dimension missing from resolution 242 ( 1967), namely,
the question of Palestine, so that at long last the Middle East can enjoy a semblance of stability, prosperity
and peace.

178. What has hijacked Beirut has been the invading
army. Despite the international
community’s
consensus resolutions calling upon Israel to withdraw to
Lebanon’s
internationally
recognized boundaries,
Israel has refused to do so and is now laying siege to
the city of Beirut.

185. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
of the Palestine Liberation Organization.

179. Where would the representative of Israel want
those Palestinians to go? Does he want to bomb them
into the Mediterranean?
Their only abode, in which
they have been living for 7,000 years, is right in Palestine, the country which they were forced to leave at
the point of the bayonet. I can submit compilations
regarding what has happened to those hapless Palestinians. Now they are being ruthlessly pursued, even
in their status of refugees. That is the humanity that
Israel claims to have.
180. I do not want to speak for too long, but I should
like to make a substantive point which is very relevant
to the basic theme of our discussion, namely, the
commendable
French-Egyptian initiative [S//53/7].

186. Mr. TERZI
(Palestine
Liberation
Organization): I must admit that I have been watching you,
Sir, very closely through the month of July in these
very, very crucial moments, and I admire your skill,
your patience, your perseverance and your behaviour
as President of the Council, as well as all the sincere
efforts and endeavours you have made to put an end
to the bloodshed, siege and brutality of the invading
forces-acts
that have been protested and even rejected by conscientious
members of those Israeli
forces, by other Israelis and by peace-loving peoples
all over the world, All I can say, Sir, is thank you.

181. The representative of Israel states that Council
resolutions are adopted in their totality and that any
tampering with them would spoil the entire set-up.
I should like to inform him that Council resolutions
242 (I 967) and 338 (1973) were adopted to resolve the
consequences of the 1967 conflict, not to solve the

187. At times one wonders whether we learn from
history. The battle of London is still alive in our
minds, as are the siege of Leningrad and the uprising
in the Warsaw ghetto. All that is now being directed
against Beirut will justify the Nazi crimes against
the free world in the 1940s.
17

0

188. There is a misconception
about what is happening in Beirut. It is not only the PLO but the Lebanese people as well that are standing up in defence of
their country, their capital, their families-almost
500,000 civilians: the Lebanese, too, are joining in
to defend their city and their people. We happen to
be there so we have joined in the defence of that city
in order to secure and ensure the survival of the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples in that besieged town.

in besieged Beirut by Chairman Arafat. I need not
repeat what he said. We all saw it on television and
read about it. Uri Avneri may be brought to trial on
some trumped-up charge by those who r’eject and
undermine peace efforts.
192. On I October 1977, the United States Secretary of State, Mr. Cyrus Vance, exchang;ed views
regarding the situation in the Middle East with the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, and in a joint communiqui
the
two countries expressed their belief that:

189. On 2 July, three distinguished personalities,
all of the Jewish faith-I
am referring to Nahum Goldmann and Philip Klutznick, both former Presidents of
the World Jewish Congress, and Mr. Pierre Mend&
France, a former Prime Minister of France-issued
a joint statement, from which I shall quote the following:

“hithin
the framework of a comprehensive
settlement of the Middle East problem, all specific questions of the settlement should be resolved, including such key issues as withdrawal of Israeli
armed forces from territories occupied in. the 1967
conflict; the resolution of the Palestinian question.
including ensuring the legitimate rights of the Patestinian people; termination
of the state of war and
establishment of normal peaceful relations on the
basis of mutual recognition
of the principles
of
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence.”

“The real issue is not whether the Palestinians
are entitled to their rights, but how to bring this
about while ensuring Israel’s security and regional
stability. Ambiguous concepts such as ‘autonomy’
are no longer sufficient, for they too often are used
to confuse rather than to clarify. Needed now is the
determination
to reach a political accommodation
between Israel and Palestinian nationalism.

The two Governments
“The war in Lebanon must stop. Israel must lift
its siege of Beirut in order to facilitate negotiations
with the PLO, leading to a political settlement.
Mutual recognition
must be vigorously pursued.
And there should be negotiations with the aim of
achieving
coexistence
between the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples based on self-determination.”
190. Chairman
lowing words:

Arafat replied

also expressed their betief that:

“in addition to such measures for ensuring the
security of the borders between Israel and the
neighbouring
Arab States as the establishment
of
demilitarized
zones and the agreed stationing
in
them of United Nations troops or observers, international guarantees of such borders as well as of the
observance of the terms of settlement ca.n also be
established.”

on 4 July in the fol-

193. At that time, the PLO did not hesit.ate for ;1
moment to state that it welcomed such a move, for we
saw in it light at the end of the tunnel and hoped that
peace would eventually reign over the alrea. Qur
hopes were further strengthened when the Govemment of the United States declared on 30 PJovembcr
1978 before the General Assembly: “We acknowledge that that resolution [242 (1967)] does not deal
with the political dimension of the Palestinian? issue’” .’
We hoped that the United States would talke up the
matter seriously and participate actively in the search
and endeavours to resolve the Palestinian problem
in
all its aspects, particularly the fate of the Palestinian
people, as well as the political dimension.

“Coming
at this precise moment from three
Jewish personalities
of great worth, world-wide
reputation and definite influence at all levels, both
on the international
scene and within their own
community,
that statement takes on a significant
importance. I wish they might use their influence
to put an end to the war of extermination
to which
the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples are subjected,
and I invite them in these crucial and difficult days
to visit the Palestinian camps in Lebanon so they
can check for themselves the massacres and crimes
committed by the Israeli forces.”
191. To us, and to the world, that should have been
no surprise. The Palestine National Council,
our
parliament and the legislative branch of the PLO constitutional
structure, which is of course our highest
authority,
has on several occasions affirmed the
importance of relations and co-ordination with democratic and progressive Jewish forces and organiiations, both within and outside the occupied homeland.
Such relations have been continuing
since then.
Only a few days ago, Uri Avneri, a former member
of the Knesset and an activist for peace, was received

194. On 19 April 1981, the Palestine Natiolnal Council decided to welcome a further approach to solVing
the question of Palestine and the Middle lEast conflict. That approach presented a historic opportunity.
It included the following words:
“If there is to be real peace in the Middle East, the
Israeli occupation of all Arab territories
captured
in 1967 must be ended. The inalienable rights of the
Arab people of Palestine must be secured,
UP to
18

*

and including the establishment of their own State.
It is essential to ensure the security and sovereignty
of all the States of the region, including those of
Israel.”

these troops are withdrawn unconditionally
and
immediately.
The issue before the Council is the holocaust of the 1980s: the issue is the hundreds of thousands of displaced persons; the issue is the scores of
thousands of detainees, wanton arrests and detentions, the disappearance of hundreds of Palestinian
and Lebanese men, women and children, including
doctors and medical teams.

Those were the basic principles of that approach, and
the Palestine National Council decided to welcome
it. On the same date, among other decisions, the
National
Council also unanimously adopted a decision condemning internal terrorism and international
terrorism.
I mention this only in order that those
who do not want to know of this may perhaps benefit
from what we say here.

199. The immediate
issue in besieged Beirut is
water for the thirsty, medical supplies for the civilian
victims of the indiscriminate
and barbarous bombing
and shelling by Israel. The issue is the sovereignty
and territorial integrity and unity of Lebanon within its
internationally
recognized boundaries. The issue is the
fate of more than 4 million Palestinians.

195. The Security Council and the General Assembly have adopted many resolutions which are in
one way or another related to the question of Palestine and all of which are aimed at resolving the conflict and at bringing peace to the Middle East. Of
course, many resolutions have also been adopted by
the United Nations that deal exclusively with the
question of Palestine. A great number of resolutions
have been adopted by the Council. One would think
that all those resolutions would be given equal respect and be equally accepted and carried out in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations.

200. Earlier this evening the representative of the
League of Arab States paraphrased for us some of
the decisions adopted in Jeddah. I am now in a position to read out those decisions, and with the Council’s permission I shall now do so:
“The Committee
of Six of the Council of the
League of Arab States met in Jeddah on 28 and
29 July 1982 under the chairmanship of Prince Saud
Al-Faisal, the Foreign Minister of Saudi Arabia.
“The Committee discussed the current situation
in Lebanon in all of its aspects, and agreed unanimously on the following points:

196. The other day, Chairman Yasser Arafat signed
a document
before a delegation of United States
congressmen who were visiting besieged Beirut. In it,
he affirmed the commitment of the PLO to accept all
United Nations resolutions relevant to the question
of Palestine. There have been some attempts to single
out one or two resolutions and to deal with such resolutions in isolation. That selective approach will not
serve any good purpose. I am certain that the ensemble of those resolutions will be acceptable. So
much has been said about resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) that it would seem that those are the only
resolutions the Council has adopted on the situation
in the Middle East and the question of Palestine. The
time has come to view and consider all those resolutions as inseparably linked.

” 1. To exert continued
abide by the cease-fire.

and sustained efforts to

“2. The Palestine
Liberation
Organization
(PLO) announces its decision to move its armed
forces from Beirut. The safeguards and guarantees
for this move as well as the safety of the refugee
camps will be determined in an agreement between
the Lebanese Government and the PLO in Beirut.
“3. To work towards lifting the blockade of the
city of Beirut and its suburbs by securing the withdrawal of Israeli forces.”

197. The representative of Ireland in his statement
has told us about the Council’s efforts since 1976 to
bring about peace in the Middle East and about how
those efforts have been frustrated. I shall forbear
repeating his words. But one question might be asked,
and for good reason. To what extent has resolution 242 (1967) been adhered to or violated? Has the
principle of “the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of
territory by war”, as set forth in that resolution, been
respected and adhered to? How would one classify
the presence of more than 120,000 Israeli troops on
Lebanese territory?

If I may interject here, I am so grateful to the Council for having adopted, almost unanimously, the draft
resolution earlier this evening. Here I can see how the
minds of peace-loving people work together. I continue reading out the decisions adopted at Jeddah:
“4. The Lebanese Government
is to take all
effective measures to ensure the security and safety
of the inhabitants ofthe city of Beirut and its suburbs,
including the Palestinian refugee camps.
“5. The participation of the international forces
in the task of establishing security and safety of
Beirut and its suburbs.

198. The immediate issue before the Council is the
presence of the forces of the Israeli invasion, and the
responsibility
of the Council, in accordance with resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982), is to see to it that

“6. The Arab States are to undertake the necessary political action to assist Lebanon in order to
19

attain the full implementation
of Security Council
resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982)” [s/15329,
flIzr2P.Y.]

209. Some reference has been made ta1 UNRWA
stores in Beirut. It must be realized that Beirut is
under siege, that not even water or electricity or food
is brought in, that Beirut has thousands of refugees,
thousands of victims, human beings-and
here we
will not differentiate as to whether they are Palestinian or Lebanese. We do know that in the warehouses there was and is some food that will help the
people in their plight. What was read out from the press
release was transmitted to Beirut, and I shall now read
the reply of Chairman Arafat to the statement by
UNRWA:

201. We have before us a draft resolution introduced
by Egypt and France [S/153/7]. On this I should like
to state the following.

202. The PLO, and in particular Yasser Arafat himself, have welcomed the initiative and called for giving
it encouragement
and full support. We fully appreciate the motive: to find a solution, a global solution,
a just and comprehensive
solution for the conflict in
the Middle East through the just solution of the question of Palestine in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations. We note with satisfaction that the sponsors of the draft resolution have
shown their willingness to consider amendments. As
a matter of fact, the PLO has already presented some
amendments, and we sincerely hope that the sponsors
will accord them due consideration.

“We are surprised by the statement issued by
UNRWA headquarters in Vienna. It does not reflect
the truth. The armed men we posted were put there
to guard the warehouses from looting by civilians,
especially since the city is completely besieged. The
inhabitants refuse to have food and supplies taken
out of the city. We, the Palestine Liberation Organization, have offered, and we still do, to UNRWA
headquarters to buy whatever is needed from any
source outside Beirut, and we are ready to pay the
price. We were surprised by this strange statement
that was issued by UNRWA.
Please inform
Mr. Urquhart and UNRWA headquarters in Vienna
about the situation and of our readiness to pay for
whatever they would buy from outside Beirut in
any quantity UNRWA wishes, for the r’elief of our
people in the south. We hope that this can be implemented immediately.”

203. We also heard with satisfaction the statement
of the representative of Egypt when he presented the
draft resolution. We note that his statement contained
a reaffirmation of the right of all States to live in peace
within recognized international
boundaries. We note
it, and we hope that it will eventually appear in the
final draft.
204. We noted also the statement that the draft resolution deals with the role of the United Nations to
supervise the cease-fire and disengagement
in and
around Beirut by stationing United Nations military
observers therein.

2 IO. I wonder what city under siege would permit the
contents of its warehouses to leave the city, especially
in this case where there is no guarantee that the Pales.
tinian refugees-who,
I stress, are supposed to re.
ceive these rations from UNRWA-will
eventually
get them. At the end of this morning’s m.eeting. the
representative of Lebanon told the Council that, as of
noon today, even ICRC was being prevented
from
bringing medicines into the capital [2384$/z meefing,

205. But then we come to something very close to us
and to the core of the issue. We note that the representative of Egypt added that the Palestinian people
has the right to self-determination
with all its implications and the right to statehood in the West Bank
and Gaza, territories that were occupied in 1967 and
from which the United Nations has decided that IsraeI
should withdraw. We further note the statement that
the Palestinian people shall be represented in the negociations and, consequently,
that the PLO shall participate therein,

ptr I’N. &I] .

2 11. Finally, I must recall that even while the world
is involved with what is happening around Beirut and
in Lebanon, even while the Israelis are committing
all these crimes, they are at the same time 8commiCting
crimes against the Palestinian people under occupation. The description of one such crime--a desecration-is
to be found in annex II of document S/l53 18.
In brief, on 28 July, the sanctuary of Haram al-Sjharif
was to have been raided by some 150 Israelis. They
raided two private houses, forced the dwellers out of
their homes and then attempted to invade Ifamm
al-Sharif by climbing down a wall.

206. Those are, I would say, constructive elements
and we trust that eventually they will find their way
into the draft resolution now before us.
207. Today the Secretary-General
has issued a
statement to which we believe it is important to refer.
He recalls in particular paragraph 1 of Council resolution 512 (1982). The statement appears in press release SG/SM/3315.
I am sure that he would not have
issued such a statement if he were not fully aware of
the situation in Beirut.

212. I would also stress again the ill-treatment
of
prisoners and detainees, and the fact that not even
ICRC has been able to trace the hundreds of people
who have disappeared. We hope that in time ICRC
and other international agencies will be able to locate
them.

208. I am grateful, again, to the Council for having
adopted, almost unanimously,
the draft resolution
despite the non-participation
of one of its members.
20

213. The PRESIDENT:
I call next on the representative of the United Kingdom, who has asked to speak
in exercise of his right of reply.

cated in my statement earlier-it
is not by the particularly brutal methods which are being used by the
Israel Defence Forces and the Government of Israel
at this moment in Lebanon that the Palestinian problem is about to be solved.

214. Mr. WHYTE
(United Kingdom):
The representative of Israel, in the course of a few rather disobliging comments on the statement that I made earlier
in this debate, made a surprising reference to some
recent events in San Carlos, Teal Inlet and Goose
Green. He added that the Government of Israel did
not enjoy the luxury of fighting its wars 8,000 miles
away from home [PoI’N. 162 aho~~].

217. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Israel
has asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply, and
I call on him how.
218. Mr. BLUM (Israel): It is not my intention, and
it was not my intention, to go into the merits of the
recent conflict in the Falkland Islands (Malvinas).
There was one point I wished to make, and to that
point the representative of the United Kingdom has
not addressed himself. The United Kingdom claimed
the exercise of its right of self-defence 8,000 miles from
the borders of Britain. I do not wish to go into the
merits of that claim, but surely a country which is
being attacked from beyond its borders and whose
civilian population is being terrorized and harassed
from across the border is entitled to invoke its legitimate right of self-defence, just as the United Kingdom
asserted that right with regard to events that happened
some 8,000 miles away from London.

215. I suggest that if the representative of Israel
wishes to draw any kind of analogy between those
events and what is now happening in Beirut, he should
get it into rather sharper focus. Let me remind members of the Council what was going on at the time in
those Falkland Islands. British troops in that neighbourhood were engaged in repossessing British territory, territory which had been the victim of armed
invasion by Argentina. They were acting in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations in exercise of the right of self-defence, following the total
failure of Argentina to respond to a mandatory resolution of the Council which called for the immediate
withdrawal of all Argentine troops from the Falkland
Islands [resolution
502 c/982)]. Moreover, the British
troops and the British Government were doing all this
in order to safeguard the right of self-determination
of
the inhabitants of the Falkland Islands.

NOTES

216. What is now happening in Beirut is that a massive invasion of another sovereign nation is being conducted by the Israel Defence Forces in order to seek
to deal with a problem which arises precisely because
the Palestinians, over many years, have been denied
that right of self-determination.
If the Palestinians had
been accorded that same right, Beirut would not now
be in ruins. In the view of my Government-as
I indi-

1 United Nations, TWCI/~ Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970 to 9’73.
2 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, ‘Fllc, Ha&~c
Conventions

cud

DeclorM’ons

of

1899

cd

1907

(New

York.

Oxford University Press, 191.5).
1 O&in/

RLTOI&

of

the

Gener’crl

Assmhly,

.8?cJ~~cJnt/f~U?cv’gctlc’y

Sp~icrl Sessior~, Pkrrqr m~erings, 24th meeting.
4 Ibid., Thirty-third
session,
Plenary
mrtdings,
para. 88.

21

65th meeting,

HOW

TO OBTAlN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UMTED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
liom bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,
New York or Geneva.

SE PROCURER

LES

Lcs publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
auprb
des ventes.
New York ou Gentve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

sent en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicacioncs
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
e&n
en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Nacioncs

00400

UNIES

et les agences
B : Nations

dtpositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Secci6n
de Ventas.

88-60989-June

1989~-7.0%
