General Alsembly-Tblrty-fourth Session

116

considered by the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth
session.
104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979

34/126.

Assistance to Seychelles

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3421 (XXX) of 8 December
197,5 concerning the implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, in which it urged the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system to extend assistance to the newly independent and
emerging States,
Recalling its resolutions 31/156 of 21 December
1976, in which it urged all Governments, in particular
those of the developed countries, to lend their support,
in the context of their assistance programmes, for the
implementation of the specific action envisaged in favour
of developing island countries, and 32/185 of 19 December 1977, in which it urged all organizations in the
United Nations system to implement, within their respective spheres of competence, app~opriate specific action
in favour of developing island countries,
Recalling also its resolution 32/101 of 13 December
1977, in which it requested the Secretary-General to mobilize financial, technical and economic assistance from
the international community on behalf of Seychelles,
Recalling further its resolution 33/129 of 19 December 1978, in which, inter alia, it endorsed the economic
assistance programme for Seychelles,
Taking note of the recommendation of the Committee
for Development Planning at its fourteenth session, in
response to the application of Seychelles for inclusion
in the list of the least developed countries, that Seychelles
should be assisted during the remainder of the current
decade and that the special difficulties and upheavals
experienced by Seychelles required special measures, 90
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
of 28 June 1978,91 to which was annexed the report of
the mission which he sent to Seychelles in response to
General Assembly resolution 32/101,
Concerned at the continued structural imbalances in
the economy of the country, the overwhelming dependence on the tourist industry and the country's heavy
reliance on imports,
Taking into account the disadvantageous demographic
and geographical features of Seychelles-the small population, the wide dispersion of a large number of islands
and the physical remoteness of the country-which pose
special development problems,
Noting that, without good transport and communication links, any development will be difficult,
Taking note of the projects which the mission, in consultation with the Government, identified as urgent or
as calling for accelerated implementation, 92
Having examined also the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 15 August 1979,98 to which was annexed
the report of the review mission which he sent to Seychelles in accordance with General Assembly resolution
33/129,
90 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978,
Supplement No. 6 {E/1978/46 and Corr.1), para. 99.
• 1 A/33/139.
111 /bid., annex, sect. IV.
98 A/34/373.

1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the measures he has taken to organize an international economic assistance programme for Seychelles;
2. Endorses fully the assessment and recommendations contained in the annexes to the above-mentioned
reports of the Secretary-General and draws the attention
of the international community to the requirements for
assistance for projects and programmes identified in
those reports;
3. Draws the attention of the international community to the special development problems confronting
Seychelles as a developing island country with a small
population;
4. Calls upon Member States, in the light of the
recommendation of the Committee for Development
Planning and in accordance with the previous resolutions of the General Assembly, to accord Seychelles, as
a matter of priority, special assistance and benefits and
to give special consideration to the early inclusion of
Seychelles in the new list of the least developed countries to be drawn up in the context of the third United
Nations development decade, based on up-to-date data;
5. Reiterates its 'appeal to Member States, regional
and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental bodies to provide financial, material and technical assistance to Seychelles to enable it to establish the
social and economic infrastructure that is essential for
the well-being of its people;
6. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the World Bank and the International Fund
for Agricultural Development to bring to the attention
of their governing bodies, for their consideration, the
special needs of Seychelles and to report the decisions
of those bodies to the Secretary-General by 15 August
1980;
7. Draws the attention of the international corn. munity once again to the special account which was established at United Nations Headquarters by the Secretary-General, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 32/101, for the purpose of facilitating the
channelling of contributions to Seychelles;
8. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to maintain and
increase their current and future programmes of assistance to Seychelles, to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective international
programme of assistance and to report periodically to
him on the steps they have taken and the resources they
have made available to assist that country;
9. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Seychelles;
(b) To pursue with the Government of Seychelles
the question of organizing a meeting of donors and, in
this respect, to co-ordinate efforts with the United Nations Development Programme, the Economic Commission for Africa and the World Bank;
(c) To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to continue the organization of
the international programme of assistance to Seychelles
and the mobilization of assistance;
(cl) To keep the situation in Seychelles under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, regional and other intergovernmental organiza-

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

tions, the specialized agencies and international fin_ancial
institutions concerned and to apprise the Economic and
Social Council, at its second regular session of 1980,
of the current status of the special economic assistance
programme for Seychelles;
(e) To arrange for a review of the economic situation of Seychelles and the progress made in organizing
and implementing the special economic assistance programme for that country in time for the .matt~r to be
considered by the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth
session.

104th plenarv meeting
14 Deccmher 1979

34/127.

Assistance to the Comoros

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31 / 42 of 1 December 1976,
in which it urgently appealed to the international community to assist the Comoros in an effective and continuous manner so as to enable it to face successfully
the critical situation resulting from the economic difficulties experienced by that newly independent country,
Recalling also its resolutions 31 / 156 of 21 December
1976, in which it urged all Governments. in particular
those of the developed countries, to lend their support,
in the context of their assistance programmes, for the
implementation of the specific action envisaged in favour of developing island countries, and 32/ 185 of 19
December 1977, in which it urged all organizations in
the United Nations system to implement, within their
respective spheres of competence, appropriate specific
action in favour of developing island countries,
Recalling further its resolution 32/92 of 13 December 1977, in which it endorsed the assessment and recommendations of the United Nations Mission to the
Comoros, contained in the annex to the report of the
Secretary-General of 3 November 1977," 1 and its resolution 33/123 of 19 December 1978, in which it appealed
to Member States and regional and interregional organizations to provide effective and continuous financial,
material and technical assistance to the Comoros to help
it overcome its financial and economic difficulties and to
permit the implementation of the projects and programmes identified in the report of the Mission,
Taking note of the special problems confronting the
Comoros as a developing island country and as one of
the least developed among the developing countries,
Noting the priority which the Government of the
Comoros has assigned to the problems of restructuring
the administration, reorganizing State enterprises and
introducing effective budgeting and accounting procedures and controls,
Noting further the grave budget and balance-ofpayments problems facing the Comoros,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
of 7 July 1978, 00 to which was annexed a progress report on the programme of special economic assistance
to the Comoros recommended by the Mission,
Having examined also the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 12 July 1979,96 to which was annexed the
report of the review mission which he sent to the
Comoros in accordance with General Assembly resolution 33/123,
0 4 A/32/208 and Add.1 and 2.
95 A/33/ 170.
96

A/34/361 and Corr.1.

117

Noting Economic and Social Council resolution
1978/ 49 of 2 August 1978, in which the Council appealed to the international comm~nity to respond ge~1erouslv and to continue to assist the Comoros 111
carryi;1g out its short-term and long-term development
programme,
I. E.rpresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the steps he has taken to mob ii ize assistance for
the Comoros;
2. Notes with smisfaction the response b) various
Member States and organizations to its appeal and that
of the Secretary-General for assistance tn finance. in
whole or in part. a number of projects identified in the
annex to the report of the Secretary-General of 3
November 1977;"'
3. Notes H'ith co11cem. however. that the assistance
thus far provided falls short of the country's urgent requirements and that a substantial amount of assistance
is still urgently required to carry out the projects identified in the annex to the report of the Secretary-Genernl
of 3 November 1977;
4. Reiterates its appeal to Member States. regional
and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental bodies to provide effective and continuous financial. material and technical assistance to the Comoros to
help it overcome its financial and economic difliculties.
in particular, its budgetary and balance-of-payments
deficits;
5. Urges Member States to give special consideration to the inclusion of the Comoros in their bilateral
programmes of development assistance and, in cases
where assistance programmes for the Comoros are already in force, to expand them, wherever possible;
6. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the World Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to bring to
the attention of their governing bodies, for their consideration, the special needs of the Comoros and to report the decisions of those bodies to the SecretaryGeneral by 15 August 1980;
7. Draws the attention of the international community once again to the special account which was established at United Nations Headquarters by the Secretary-General, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 32/92, for the purpose of facilitating the
channelling of contributions to the Comoros;
8. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to maintain and
increase their current and future programmes of assistance to the Comoros, to co-operate closely with the
Secretary-General in organizing an effective international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him on the steps they have taken and the
resources they have made available to assist that
country;
9. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical and material assistance to the Comoros;
(b) To pursue with the Government of the Comoros
the question of organizing a meeting of donors and, in
this respect, to co-ordinate efforts with the United Nations Development Programme, the Economic Commission for Africa and the World Bank;
