TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR
nd

MEETING: 25 SEPTEMBER 1971
NEW

YORK

Page
, . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , , . . . . * . . . . . , . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
fa,) Uetter dated 13 September 1971 from the Permanent Representative of
Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/ 103 13);
fb) Reports of the Secretary-General (S/8052, ‘S/8146, S/9149 and Add.1,
S/9537 and S/10124 and Add.1 and 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1582

r

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council, The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTY-SECOND

Held in New York on Saturday, 25 September
President: Mr. Toru NAKAGAWA (Japan).

1971, at 5 p.m.

invited to take places at the Council table when it is their
turn to speak.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra {Lebanon), Mr. S. Traore (Mali), Mr. M. M. Zentar (Morocco),
Mr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) and Mr. R. Driss (Tunisia)
took the places reserved for them in the Council chamber.

3. Mr. MALIK

(Union

of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated j?om Russian): This is not the first time that the

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 582)
I.

MEETING

Security Council, on the initiative of the Arab States, is
considering the question of the arbitrary measures taken by
the Israeli occupation authorities in the Arab city of
Jerusalem. In the more than four years that have elapsed
since the beginning of Israel’s aggression in the Middle East
and the capture of the Arab city of Jerualem by Israeli
troops, the Security Council and the General Assembly
have considered this question several times and have
adopted decisions strongly condemning Israel for its attempts to annex or appropriate that city. In these decisions,
the United Nations has unreservedly called upon Israel to
desist from any actions designed to alter the status and the
Arab character of that city.

Adoption of the agenda.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 13 September 1971 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/10313);
Reports of the Secretary-General (S/8052, S/8146,
S/9149 and Add.1, S/9537 and S/l0124 and Add.1
and 2).
Adoption of the agenda

4. This clear and well-defined position adopted by the
Security Council and the General Assembly on the question
of Jerusalem is fully in accord with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, the rules of international
law and the modern sense of justice of the peoples. This
position of the United Nations is based on the solid
foundation of the generally recognized principle of international law that the acquisition of territory by the use of
force or by war is inadmissible. This principle is the basis of
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November
1967 concerning a peaceful political settlement in the
Middle East, which was adopted by the Council in
connexion with Israel’s aggression against the Arab countries.

The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East:
(0) Letter dated 13 September 1971 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10313);
(b) Reports of the Secretary-General (S/8052, S/8146,
S/9149 and Add.1, S/9537 and S/10124 and Add.1

and 2)
I. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the Council’s
previous decision (1579th meeting] I shall, with the
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Jordan,
Egypt and Israel to take places tit the Security Council table
in order to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote.

5. This principle was subsequently confirmed by the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth anniversary session in
its resolution on the situation in the Middle East [resolution 2628 (XXV}], in the Declaration on the Strengthening
of International Security [resolution 2734 (XXV)] and in a
number of other documents adopted by the Assembly at
that session.

At ihe invitation of the President, Mr. B, Tot&an (Jordan), Mr. M. H. El-Zayyat (Egypt) and, later, Mr. Y.
Tekoah (Israel) took places at the Security Council table.

6. The defiant and negative attitude of Israel towards the
decisions of the United Nations on the question of
Jerusalem and the situation in the Middle East clearly
reveals the expansionist and predatory character of the
aggressivepolicy of the ruling circles in Tel Aviv towards
the whole Arab world.

2. The PRESIDENT: I shall next invite the representatives
of Lebanon, Mali, Morocco, Saudi Arabia and Tunisia to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber in order to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, on the understanding that they will be
1

expressing p&found indignation and strong condemnation,
have repeatedly drawn attention to the facts, to the
arbitrary measures taken by the Israeli occupiers in Jerusalem and- to their blatant and cruel violation of human
rights and to their insults to the human dignity of the Arab
population. From the documents now available to the
Security Council and from the facts adduced by the Arab
representatives, it is apparent that the Israeli occupation
authorities are systematically destroying and razing to the
ground Arab dwellings in the city of Jerusalem. On those
deliberately and illegally ravaged lands, they are building
housing for their Jewish settlers. In the central part of the
city, these vandals of the second half of the twentieth
century are outraging the national and religious feelings of
the Arabs and their human dignity by barbarously destroy
ing and annihilating the most precious and unique monuments of Arab culture. The aim is clear. This is racism, To
spit and trample upon the culture of another people, to
raze to the ground the most precious monuments of that
culture, to impose one’s own way of life on that people by
force, these are Hitlerite tactics. These internationally
criminal acts by Israel are a gross violation of The Hague
Convention of 1954 for the Protection of Cultural Property
in the Event of Armed Conflictr

7. The question of Jerusalem is only part of the general
question of the dangerous international crisis in the Middle
East which has arisen as a result of Israel’s aggression
against the Arab countries. However, even when considered
from this standpoint alone, it becomes graphically clear
that Israel is continuing to pursue a policy of seizing and
appropriating Arab territories, ousting Arabs from their
lands and, in the last resort, blocking and impeding the
achievement of the peaceful political settlement in the
Middle East envisaged by the Security Council in its famous
resolution 242 (1967).
8. The facts and the evidence presented to the Council by
the representatives of Jordan, Egypt, Syria and other Arab
States and the official information contained in the
numerous reports by the Secretary-General on the situation
in Jerusalem testify irrefutably to the fact that Israel, in
disregard and in defiance of the decisions of the United
Nations and in blatant violation of the generally recognized
rules of internationa1 law, is pursuing a policy of pillage and
arbitrary rule, of violence and mockery with regard to the
Arab population in the Arab part of Jerusalem which they
have occupied and in the other Arab territories which they
have seized. The Israeli occupation authorities are striving
to drive the Arabs out of Jerusalem in order to change the
national composition of that city and the other occupied
Arab lands, to Israelize Jerusalem and the Arab lands and to
alter their status by force.

13. Another criminal form the arbitrary and illegal measures of the occupiers in Jerusalem take is plunder through
the forced alienation and appropriation of the land and
property of the Arabs. Despite the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly, which have
declared all such measures illegal and invalid and which
have resolutely called upon Israel to rescind all measures
and refrain from any action designed to alter the status of
Arab Jerusalem, Israel is stubbornly and on an ever
increasing scale continuing forcible seizure and illegal
appropriation, in other words its piratical plundering of
that Arab city.

9. The facts show that the Israeli leaders have officially
adopted a policy aimed at annexing Arab Jerusalem to the
Israeli part of that city and to this end they are taking any
measures they can to bind this illegally seized Arab city to
Israel’s economy and way of life. They do not show the
least sign of wishing to settle the question of the withdrawal of Israeli troops from that foreign city and from all
the Arab territories occupied by Israel. On the contrary,
Israel is working to put down roots and consolidate its
position in Arab Jerusalem, to surround it with a ring of
Jewish housing constructed on Arab land, and to swallow
up that city to serve the ends of Zionist expansion.

14. Matters have reached a stage where the Israeli OCCUpiers have begun to seize even the premises and property of
the United Nations in Jerusalem. We all know of the
exchange of correspondence between the Secretary-General
and the Israeli Government of which an account is given in
the reports of the Secretary-General. This documentary
evidence shows that the Secretary-General has tried in vain
to have the United Nations property in Jerusalem which
was seized by the Israeli occupiers returned to the
Organization.

10. The representative of Jordan has informed the Security Council of the nefarious plans of the Israeli Zionists to
extend the boundaries of the city of Jerusalem artificially.
He has rightly pointed out that Israel wishes to take over
Jerusalem, not on the grounds of any cultural or historical
considerations, but mainly for military and strategic considerations and in the interests of the economic exploitation of that city for the sake of enriching Israel’s capitalist
monopolies.

15. In order to implement its predatory plans, Israef is
systematically carrying out measures designed to alter the
ethnic and demographic composition of the occupied part
of Jerusalem. By means of intimidation and terror and the
forcible immigration and mass deportation of the Arabs,
the occupiers are endeavouring to clear space for Jewish
settlers in Arab Jerusalem and in other parts of occupied
Arab Palestine. Such illegal actions by the occupiers in the
territories they have seized are a gross violation of the
Geneva Conventions of 1949. Such acts by occupying
forces were also strongly and unreservedly condemned in
the Charter of the International Military Tribunal. The
representative of Israel has tried in vain here to represent

11. The Security Council cannot ignore the official data
presented by the representative of Jordan which show that
the plans for the seizure and Israelization of Arab Jerusalem
were formulated and prepared by those in Israel who covet,
foreign lands long before Israel began its aggressive war
against the Arab States in 1967. This was a kind of Israeli
“Barbarossa” plan to seize Jerusalem. The implementation
of these plans to recarve and enslave the territory of other
countries was, as has now been established by documents,
one of the criminal military and political aims of Israel’s
aggression in June 1967.
12. The Arab countries and other Asian and African
States, as well as a number of international organizations,

1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 249 (19561, No. 3511.

2

/

~
i

the arbitrary measures and use of force by the Israeli
occupiers in Jerusalem as a kind of blessing. It is absolutely
cIear to the Security Council that they are not in any way a
blessing but the most abominable and shameful evil.

to evacuate the illegally occupied Arab lands and unless it
does so, as everyone now knows, a peaceful settlement in
the Middle East is impossible. Israel is impeding the
iniplementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967)
and sabotaging the Jarring Mission and its initiative of
8 February2 bn the key questions relating to a settlement
in the Middle East-the withdrawal of troops and conditions for peace.

16. Israel’s annexationist acts are now on such a wide scale
that even in the United States press, which is sympathetic
to Israel, reports have appeared from time to time
unmasking the IsraeIi aggressors. Not long ago, the Washirlgton Post noted that the plans of the Israeli authorities to
settle 52,000 Jewish settlers in Arab Jerusalem were illegal
under international law.

23. At the same time, Israel is in fact consolidating its
position in the occupied Arab lands and the Israeli leaders
are openly making statements of an expansionist nature, We
have only to read the recent statement by Dayan.

17. United States journalists have also been forced to
recognize that the illegal displacement of the population of
Arab Jerusalem by Israel is only “the tip of the iceberg”
represented by Israel’s far-ranging plans to appropriate
foreign lands in the occupied territories of the Arab States.

24. In fact, in Tel Aviv they are seeking not to achieve a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East, but to consolidate
their conquests, counting on the fact that with the passage
of time Israel will be able to maintain its hold for a long
time over the Arab lands it has seized.

18. The same annexationist policy is being pursued by
Israel everywhere in the Arab territories which it occupies.

25. There is no doubt that at the current session the
General Assembly will draw the necessary conclusions from
this and, following the example of the twenty-fifth session
of the Assembly, will make an effective contribution
towards restraining the Israeli aggressors and achieving a
peaceful settlement in the Middle East.

19. The ultimate aim behind this policy of terror, violence
and conquest is to force the Palestinian Arabs to resign

themselves to the occupiers, to submit to their domination
and to grow accustomed to the idea that Israel holds sway
over the Arab lands.

26; In these circumstances, and in conformity with the
United Nations Charter, it is the duty of the Security
Council to condemn Israel strongly for the annexationist
policy it is pursuing in Jerusalem, to call for the immediate
cessation of its arbitrary measures and expansionist policy
and to compel the ruling circles in Tel Aviv to carry out the
resolutions of the Security Council, to withdraw their
troops from all the occupied Arab lands including Arab
Jerusalem, and to bring about a peaceful political settlement in the Middle East on the basis of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967).

20. All these expansionist acts together with Israel’s
insolent refusal to withdraw its troops from the occupied
Arab territories, to achieve a settlement and to normalize
the situation in the Middle East on the basis of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) cannot fail to arouse the
most profound indignation and condemnation. This policy
of Israel was strongly condemned by the General Assembly
at its twenty-fifth anniversary session. Quite recently the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity, in a special resolution on
the situation in the Middle East adopted at its eighth
session, expressed its serious concern over the continued
Israeli occupation of the territories of three Arab States and
emphasized the principle, enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations and reiterated by the Security Council and
the General Assembly, that the territory of a State should
not be the object of occupation or acquisition by another
State asa result of the threat or use of force The resolution
adopted by that Assembly contains a firm demand for the
immediate withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from all the
occupied Arab territories to the lines of 5 June 1967 and
for the implementation
of Security Council resolution
242 (1967). That is the voice and the demand of the whole
of Africa, calling for the withdrawal of the Israeli occupiers
from the Arab territories they have seized.

27. As we have been reminded here in the Security
Council by the representatives of Egypt, Jordan and the
Syrian Arab Republic, the Security Council, in its previous
resolutions, after having condemned Israel for its attempts
to annex Arab Jerusalem, decided that if Israel maintained
its negative attitude towards those resolutions, the Council
would consider what further measures to adopt to restrain
the, aggressor.
28. ‘In view of Israel’s stubborn refusal to submit to the
decisions of the United Nations and to respect the
principles and purposes of the Charter of this Organization
as well as the elementary rules of international law, the
Security Council, as the representative of Egypt has rightly
pointed out, is faced with the need to consider what further
measuresit should take.

21. The situation which has been created in Jerusalem as a
result of Israel’s aggression and policy of international
banditry is aggravating the already serious and dangerous
situation in the Middle East. Israel’s actions in Jerusalem
are aimed at frustrating the achievement of the political
settlement in the Middle East called for by the Security
Council in its resolution 242 (1967).

29. The Security Council bears the responsibility for the
implementation of the resolutions on Jerusalem which it
has adopted. Any new decision which the Council adopts
should take into account not only its principal role and
2 See officini Records of the Security Council, Twenty-sixth
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1971,

22. The conflict in the Middle East is still unsettled and
critical. Tension has not abated. Israel is showing no desire

document S/10403,annex I.
3

contmues to believe that secret and quiet diplomacy, on the
legal basis of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) is the
most adequate instrument to fulfil the aspirations for a
lasting peace for tens of millions of inhabitants in this area.

responsibility within the United Nations system for the
maintenance of international peace and security, but also
its specific responsibility with regard to the question of
Jerusalem. In the circumstances, it is particularly obvious
and important that a new decision by the Council should
not weaken this responsibility or the decisions previously
adopted by the Council. A new decision by the Council
must confront Israel with the determination of the Security
Council to have its resolutions implemented and to compel
Israel to subrrdt to the decisions of the Council.

37. But we cannot remain indifferent to the frustrations
and sufferings with which they are confronted. Since June
1967 my Government at every opportunity has expressed
its solicitude for the oppressed or harassed civilian populations victims of the war and the occupation. We have also
many times expressed our constant concern to see respect
for humanitarian conventions, especially the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 12 August 1949, which, in section HI,
contains an actual code of behaviour for the occupying
Power towards persons and properties in the territories
which have fallen under its authority.

30. In this connexion, we support the request of the Arab
countries that a special mission be sent to Jerusalem. This
must be a mission of the Security Council.
31. The Soviet delegation considers that the request of the
Arab representatives that the Security Council should take
measures under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter
to eliminate the consequences of Israel’s aggression in the
Middle East is fully justified.

38. Among the parties to the conflict Israel has been since
1968 the only Power occupying “enemy” territories and is
therefore in a position to apply the provisions of that
Convention. We cannot but mention our regret to seethat,
despite the reiterated requests of the International Committee of the Red Cross,to which article 10 grants the right
of initiative, Israel persists in refusing to apply integrally
this Convention, which it signed and ratified in April 1951.
It is true, however, that the Israeli Government allows the
International Committee of the Red Cross to continue its
humanitarian activities on a pragmatic basis. Further,
co-operation between the Israeli authorities and that
Committee in the field of the treatment of civilian
internees, the regrouping of families, the delivery of
food-stuffs and assistance continues in the interest of the
persons concerned.

32. The Soviet Union, for its part, is ready to participate
in the implementation of such measures if a decision to that
effect is adopted by the Security Council.
33. It is the duty of the Security Council to compel the
presumptuous Israeli aggressorsto respect the principles of
the United Nations Charter and the decisions of the United
Nations aimed at strengthening international security and
universal peace,
34. Mr. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium) (interpretation from
French): Once again the Council is seized of the question of
Jerusalem. Indeed, on 13 September the Permanent Representative of Jordan asked for the urgent convening of the
Security Council [S/10313/ in order “to consider Israel’s
illegal measures . . , in defiance of Security Council resolutions 252 (1968), 267 (1969) and 271 (1969).”

39. However, my Government noted with regret that the
same did not apply to articles of the Convention relating to
the right of residence and the integrity of civilian properties
in occupied territory. The annual or monthly reports of the
International Committee of the Red Crossregularly speak
of “several destructions of houses and the expulsion of
persons, in contravention of the Fourth Convention”.
Generally speaking, the Committee, in a most impartial
manner, took note of many cases of expropriation in the
Arab city of Jerusalem as well as on the outskirts of that
city, of various transfers of inhabitants and of the destruction of villages or whole quarters, such as those of
Qalquilya and Tulkarem.

3.5. Answering the appeal which you made, Mr. President,
at the beginning of our meetings, my delegation will take
care in its statement to deal only with the legal and political
aspects and consequences of the implementation of the
large new building programme, the measures of expropriation or confiscation and the population transfers effected
by the Government of Israel or the municipal authorities of
Jerualem. Indeed, my Government shares the view of those
who believe that it would be premature at this time in our
Council to touch upon the question of the Middle East
from the viewpoint of its global settlement as from that of
a particular aspect of it. There is no doubt that the major
mistake would be to isolate one of the factors of this
complex problem and grant it any primacy.

40. These violations by the Israeli authorities of articles
33, 49 and 53 of the fourth Geneva Convention have also
been recognized by the Security Council in the three
resolutions devoted to the problem of Jerusalem.
41. The representative of Israel justified the action of his
Government or of the municipal authorities by imperative
considerations of security, hygiene, urban migration, or
demographic expansion. Further, he spoke of indemnities
which allegedly were granted to the former owners in
certain cases,

36. Indeed, at a time when, despite often contradictory
conceptions of national interests, the chances to reach a
negotiated solution-or even a preliminary interim arrangement-remain a reality, thanks not only to the skill and
perseverance of wise diplomats and statesmen but also and
even first of all to the will for peace affirmed by the
enlightened leaders of the countries concerned, political
wisdom dictates that we not compromise an already
difficult negotiation through debates which are likely to
arouse sterile passions. Therefore, the Belgian Government

42. No matter what humanitarian

or administrative considerations are invoked by Israel to justify its policy, it is
none the less true that the measures taken were unilateral
measures contrary to the spirit and the letter of interna4

tional conventions. They incontrovertibly create, during a
military occupation, an irreversible situation, and my
Government will never cease to oppose that and to deny
that such measures have any validity. In the same order of
ideas, Be&m rejects any attempt of unilateral acquisit’tin
of territory by force. In conformity with its histori _
tradition, Belgium remains faithful to the principles ;nshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, more
especially in Article 2, paragraph 4, which enjoins Member
States to refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State, or in any other manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations.
43. These principles were solemnly reaffirmed a year ago
on the occasion of the celebration of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of our Organization. In paragraph 5 of the
Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security
[General Assembly resolution 2734 (XXV)/ -a document
in the drafting of which my delegation took a very active
part-the
Assembly reaffirmed this obligation among
others. In the same text-in paragraph I7-the Assembly:
(‘Urges Member States to reaffirm their will to respect
fully their obligations under international law in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter . . .“.
These principles were further expanded in thk Declaration
on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations [General Assembly
resolution 2625 (XXV), annexJ. It is in the respect for
treaties and international agreements that the main basis
must be found for the building up of harmonious relations
among States.
44. We express the wish that at the end of our work on
this subject the Council will succeed unanimously in
agreeing on a draft resolution which would invite the
Government of Israel to abrogate all legislative and administrative measures and renounce all actions aimed at
transforming the status and the character of the city of
Jerusalem, and to put an end to the transfers of populations.
45. Finally, we ask the Secretary-General to draft a factual
report on the implementation of the subsequent resolutions
of the Council containing specific details about the way in
which legislative and administrative measures taken by
Israel are in violation of previous resolutions of the Security
Council and the convention on the law of war.

examine the question of Jerusalem. The Jordanian cornplaint which is the subject of our meeting today is the
logical consequence of the last resolution which we adopted
tinanimously on 3 July 1969 [267 (1969)], and which
itself was preceded by the resolution of 21 May 1968
[252 (1968)]
and by recommendations of the General
Assembly. The provisions of those resolutions, so clearly
expressed by our Organization, however, have unfortunately remained a dead letter, and today, in the light of
that non-compliance with the almost unanimous will of the
United Nations, we are once again constrained to take up
the question.
48. We all know how heavy the very name Jerusalem is
with his-tory and passions, of attachments and intransigence, all equally legitimate in their very contradictions. We
are also aware of the difficulty’ of isolating the specific
request of Jordan from the over-all problem of peace in the
Middle East. However, we believe that in the present
situation, and without pre-judging the general debate which
may in due course prove necessary here or elsewhere, it is
our duty to comply with your appeal, Mr.President, and
limit ourselves solely to examining the complaint before us.
Objectively we shall endeavour very briefly to recaI1 the
facts and legal regulations which we must respect even more
scrupulously.
49. Following the six-day war, as soon as the Israeliarmy
had occupied the Jordanian sector of Jerusalem on 27 June
1967, the Israeli Parliament adopted a law stipulating that
the laws, jurisdiction and administration of the State of
Israel wouId apply to every region that would be designated
by ordinance. The next day, 28 June, the Government
handed down an ordinance according to which the Jordanian sector of the city and the neighbouring areaapproximately IO0 square kilometres-would
constitute a
region to which Israeli legislation would be applicable.
50. For his part, the Israeli Minister of the Interior on that
same day issued another ordinance which merged the Arab
municipality of Jerusalem and the neighbouring territories
with the Israeli municipality.
51. The following year, on 14 August 1968, the Knesset
adopted a new law on regulations concerning legal and
administrative questions, the effects of which on Jerusalem
led the Jordanian Government to submit a new complaint
to our Council.
52. Even before those legislative provisions had been
adopted, the Israeli Government, as early as 11 June 1967,
had had 13.5 houses demolished and had evicted 660
inhabitants from the Mograbeh Quarter in order to create
an open area of access to the Wall of the Temple.

46. My Government has good relations with Israel. It
therefore believes that it is its duty to appeal to the Israel
authorities to fulfil as rigorously as possible the obligations
it freely contracted by adhering to the Charter of the
United Nations and by signing the fourth Gefieva Convention. When it becomes more far-sighted with time, history
will be grateful to those who, despite all difficulties, will
have laid the foundations for a lasting peace.

53. Subsequently, the Israeli Government proceeded with
numerous expropriations of land belonging to Arab owners,
notably on 30 August 1970, when nearly 1,200 hectares of
land were expropriated, according to the Israeli Official
Journal, No. 1656, of 30 August 1970.

47. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretation
from French): As has already been stated today, this is not
the first time the Security Council has been called upon to

54. Lastly, and more recently, the Israeli Minister of
Housing undertook the accelerated construction around
Jerusalem of a ring of apartment houses including 35,000

international law, as well as of the Charter. Thus, as we
were just reminded, the Geneva Convention of 12 August
1949, relative to the protection of civilian persons in time
of war, stipulates, izz its Section III concerning occupied
territories, that the occupying Power cannot infringe the
legitimate rights of the people.

dw&ng units intended for future immigrants. That took
place despite the objections-purely aesthetic, moreover-of
an international group of architects who had been designated by the Mayor of Jerusalem, Thus it was that land
belonging to the United Nations was converted, in January
1971, into construction sites, despite the protests of the
Secretary-General, who on 18 February had submitted a
report on this matter [S/10124], followed by two complementary reports, dated 20 April [S/.IO124/Add.I]
and 20
August 197 1 /S/l 024/Add.2].

61. Indeed, the Israeli authorities have several times
assured us that they would take the necessary measures to
protect the Holy Places and ensure free accessthereto. That
does not, however, justify the integration of a territory
occupied by war, or precipitate measures of annexation.
What seems serious to us in this policy of faits accomplis is
not only that it violates United Nations resolutions as well
as izzternational law, but that it increasesthe resentments of
the parties concerned, aggravates the tension in the Middle
East, and jeopardizes the chances for a peaceful settlement
which, in the interests of Israel as well as of the Arab
States, the international community has indefatigably
endeavoured to achieve.

55. Those facts show that the Israeli Government is
pursuing a policy designed to integrate the Arab city totally
‘and permanently within an administratively unified Jerusalem. No one can contest the fact that such measures
zrzight soon lead to an irreversible situation.
56. Aware of such a danger, the General Assembly, as
soon as the June 1967 conflict had ceased, adopted, on
4 July and 14 July 1967, resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and
2254 (ES-V), the first of which called upon Israel:

62. Jerusalem-Yerushalyim in ancient Hebrew-means, it
is said, “City of peace”. It is also the city of prayer, the city
of threefold prayer: the city of the Holy Sepulchre, of
Zoubbet el Sakra, of the Wailing Wall.

‘6 . to rescind all measures already taken and to desist
forthwith from taking any action which would alter the
status of Jerusalem”.
Those resolutions were adopted by a very large majority of
the Assembly, without any opposition.

63. This unique character, this universal character, must
be preserved. No unilateral action can or should alter it.
Surely Israel, better than anyone else, should understand
this Moslem, Christian and Judaic vocation of the city,
Then this holy city, which has lived through so many ruins
and upheavals and for which for centuries so much blood
has been shed, will fulfil its destiny of spiritual work by
sealing the reconciliation of divided human brothers,

57. In its turn, the Security Council, referring to those
two resolutions, adopted on 21 May 1968 resolution
252 (1968) which states that:
“all legislative and administrative measures and actions
taken by Israel, including expropriation of land and
properties thereon, which tend to change the legal status
of Jerusalem are invalid and cannot change that status”.

64. The draft resolution, carefully drafted in moderate
terms, which, despite its flaws, we shall support, is
primarily an appeal. We trust that it will not fall on deaf
ears.

It requested, in addition, that IsraeI rescind all measures
already taken and that it “desist forthwith from taking any
further action which tends to change the status of
Jerusalem”.

65. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interprefntion
from Spanish): A few days ago, in a memorable statement

which will doubtless figure in the annals of the United
Nations among those statements of our Secretary-General,
U Thant, that are most important and informative, he said:

58. Subsequently, on 3 July 1969, the Council adopted
resolution 267 (1969), which “Cezzsuresin the strongest
terms all measures taken to change the status of the City of
Jerusalem”, and confirms that those measures “are invalid
and cannot change that status”. After having requested it
immediately to rescind those measures, the Council requested Israel I’. . . to inform the Security Council without
any further delay of its inzentions with regard to the
implementation of the provisions of the present resolution”. In case of a negative response, or in the absence of a
reply from Israel, our Council wasto meet without d.clay to
plan whatever other measures might be taken.

“the United Nations will not become the effective
instrument its founders intended it to be until its
Members abide by its rules and give real attention to its
decisions and resolutions. This is especially true in the
most complex and difficult situations, such as the Middle
East problem, where the failure to reach a solution is not
so much the failure of the United Nations to take
decisions as the failure of its Members to abide by those
decisions.”

59. We are obliged to observe that none of those resolutions, none of those injunctions, has been acted upon. Israel
is simply continuing to implement legislative measures, with
no regard for the will of the izzternational community.

66. Those prophetic words reflect exactly the reality of
the situation and have the additional value that they warn
us very seriously regarding the future.

60. There seems to be no doubt that this policy of
annexation is in formal contradiction to United Nations
resolutions and constitutes a violation of the rules of

67. It is true: the history of the United Nations on the
question of Jerusalem is the history of a long series of
resolutions that have not been complied with, beginning
with that one which set forth the partitioning of Palestine
6

itself, the creation of the State of Israel and the constitution of the Holy City and its neighbouring area as a corpus
separatum under the administration of the international
Organization .

73. We know that Jerusafem constitutes one facet of the
over-all conflict in the Middle East and we know that we
cannot achieve a final solution on the question until we
come to a totalsettlement of the basic problems besetting
the region. We understand also the great value and interest
that Israel attaches to the city of Jerusalem which is so
important to the Jewish people and the Jewish religion.

68. From the outbreak of hostilities in 1948, which led to
the occupation by Jordan of the major portion of the Old
City and of the new city by Israel, to the events that gave
rise to the present meeting, the majority of the resolutions
of the General Assembly and of the Security Council have
not been complied with.

74. There can be no doubt whatsoever that at least to the
same extent that same value and interest are the heritage of
Christians and Moslems. For this reason we are convinced
that sooner or later, clearly and internationally, the status
of Jerusalem will have to be defined, taking into account
adequately and integrally that convergence of historic and
religious interests and rights to which the Pope referred.

69. I do not beheve it is necessary here to list the ample
background that has been accumulated in the course of
years and which is far too well known to all. However, I
will point out that in all cases there has been a constant
characteristic, namely that the specific, if not unique,
situation of Jerusalem has always been recognized as well as
the need to preserve it from any effort to undermine or
change it.

75. Until that takes place we must not innovate in
Jerusalem. And this not only to preserve the status and the
character of the City, but, what is even more important
perhaps, in order that political and religious passions shall
not continue to be exacerbated and make even more
difficult the achievement of a negotiated solution.

70. There can also be no doubt that today there is a
perfectly justified concern in vast areas of the world over
what is taking place in Jerusalem. No one can argue,
objectively, that that concern is always due to antagonism
towards Israel or a predisposition against the State of Israel.
Jerusalem has as much importance for Christians, Moslems
and Jews as to justify fully the attention of the United
Nations and of the highest authorities of those beliefs with
regard to what might take place there in the present and in
the future. It cannot validly be contended that interest in
this problem is exclusively the monopoly of the countries
neighbouring the region or that preservation of its status is
the responsibility of only its present occupier,

76. It was with that end in view that resolutions
2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V) were adopted by the General
Assembly at its fifth emergency special session and that
resolutions 252 (1968), 267 (1969) and 271 (1969) were
adopted by the Security Council. Pursuantto all these,he
who is at present in de facto possessionof Jerusalemby
military occupation is under the imperative obligation not
to transform nor changethe City in sucha way asto alter
that status and confront the United Nations with faits
accomplis.
77. In the case of the grievous question of the Middle
East, the position of the Argentine Republic has been and
continues to be impartial and constructive. My country
enjoys friendly relations with all the countries that are
parties to the presentconflict, We are therefore guidedby
only one objective: to contribute by our unstinted efforts
to the establishmentof just and lasting peacein the region,
based on the law, on the purposesand principles of the
Charter and on the acceptanceand mutual fulfilment of the
obligationsincumbent upon the parties pursuant to resolution 242 (1967) of the Security Council. Wetrust that this
way of approachingthis question will not be termed a lack
of equity on our part.

71. On 14 March 1971 His Holiness Pope Paul VI stated:
“Speaking specifically of the situation in the Middle
East, which might require much greater elaboration, we
feel that we must protect a very serious duty and right,
not merely on our own behalf but on behalf of all
Christianity. We refer to the recognition of the specific
requirements of the Holy Places in Palestine, of the
continued residence of Christians in that unhappy land
and of the status of Jerusalem, where none can deny the
special convergence of a multitude of historic and
religious rites.”
A short time later, on 24 June this year, the Holy Father
stated :

78. With the authority that this position gives us, having
shown it constantly and invariably in all the debatesthat
have taken place on the Middle East, we repeat our
conviction that Israel, without hesitation, must adjust its
conduct to the requirementsof the aforementionedresolutions and that the Security Council should once againand
with full clarity reaffirm its previous statementsregarding
Jerusalem.

“Then there is the question of Jerusalem. We believe, I
repeat, that it is in the interest of all and therefore is a
duty that that city, enjoying as it does a unique and
mystic destiny, be protected by a special statute, guaranteed by a legal international instrument, so that in this
way it can become, instead of an object of implacable
controversies and endless disputes, a place of concord,
peace and faith. With this end in view and in a spirit of
respect and friendship, we are carrying out a task of
persuasion,”

79. Mr. KIJ$AGA (Poland): The Polish delegation has
studied attentively the documentssubmitted to the Council
on the subject now under consideration, that is, the
question of the illegal measurescarried out by Israel in
Jerusalem.My delegation has also studied the statements
madein the Council in the debateup to now, in particular,
the statements of delegations of friendly Arab States

72. The statements I have just quoted, which I presume no
one will imply are born of political designs, express a
concern that many of us share.
7

dor Tomeh of the Syrian Arab Republic are putting the
United Nations itself in the position of the complaining
party.

directly interested in the problem in so many respects, be
they military, political, juridical or religious.
80. We have also taken note of your appeal, Mr. President,
to limit observations to the subject under consideration. My
delegation intends to heed that appeal. In doing so,
however, we want to underline that the developments
concerning Jerusalem are, in our opinion, and I am sure in
the opinion of many other delegations, but a part of the
Israeli over-all aggressive policy of military occupation Of
territories seized as a result of aggression, of attempts aimed
at consolidating such illegal occupation through a policy
based on the concept of force by producing faits accomplis.
Being a subject of this policy, Jerusalem is at the same time
one of the typical examples of it,

85. It can therefore be said that in the chain of aggressive
acts committed by Israel against Arab countries, the
attempts at formally annexing Jerusalem, at-as it was
pointed out in the debate-Israelizing the city, create a
particularly sensitive situation.
86. This being the framework and the political and legal
stand of the United Nations and of the world community
our duty today is to assessthe acts of Israel against this
background and to adopt the measures necessaryto redress
the situation obtaining in Jerusalem, as a minimum im*
mediate step in the context of a general solution of the
situation in the Middle East based on resolution 242 (1967)
of the Security Council.

81. I agree with many of my colleagues that our debate on
this problem must be put in its proper context, its proper
juridical and political framework. Basic to it is and must be
the concept of the non-admissibility of acquisition of
territory by military conquest, by use of force in contravention of .the Charter of the United Nations. This is a
fundamental concept of international law enshrined in the
Charter. Its validity in the present circumstances has been
strongly reaffirmed in one of the main documents adopted
by the commemorative session of the General Assembly last
year: the Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security [resdution 2734 (XXV)]. That it is of immediate
relevance to the case of the Middle East is self-evident.
Hence the first premise in our approach to the problem
under discussion.

87. The facts of the situation in Jerusalem are well known,
They have been presented once again in the lucid statements of Arab delegations in our Council. They are the
subject of numerous reports of organs of the United
Nations and of the specialized agencies. Repeating them
would not add anything to the debate. One camlot,
however, fail to see the consistency in the illegality of
Israeli acts in Jerusalem, as well as in other occupied Arab
territories.
88. From the outset the Israeli authorities made it clear
that the process of annexation of Jerusalem was to be
irrevocable and not negotiable. The statement of policy has
been consistently applied in practice in two directions:
first, through the creation of faits accomplis in the City of
Jerusalem; and second, through the simultaneous rejection
and ignoring of all United Nations decisions and protests by
international opinion.

82. A second consideration in our viewing of the problem
stems from the numerous resolutions of .the Security
Council as well as of the General Assembly concerning
Jerusalem-resolutions, which, in our opinion, are only a
logical application of the principle of non-admissibility of
military conquest of foreign territory to the case in point.
Hence the condemnation of all measures taken by Israel
with a view to imposing its sovereignty in occupied
Jerusalem, to changing the status of the city of Jerusalem.
Hence the categorical statement that all legislative and
administrative measures and actions by Israel which purport
to alter the status of Jerusalem are invalid and cannot
change that status, and the equally categorical demand that
they be rescinded forthwith. Hence the decision to keep the
situation under a review and not to allow any further steps
to be taken by Israel in pursuance of its expansionist goals.

89. The Israeli actions in Jerusalem, as shown in the
documents before the Council, reveal a persistence and a
thoroughness in the implementation of that statement of
policy from a position of force, from a position of military
occupation. The main line of that policy is directed at a
radical change of the structure of the population of
Jerusalem by means of expulsion of the Arab population,
destruction of Arab houses and property and confiscation
of land. That is, of course, the concept of the use of force
in its purest form,
90. A second line consists of intimidation of the Arab
population based on economic pressure as a means to
obtain the same objective.

83. In any consideration of the problem of Jerusalem the
spiritual aspect inherent in that situation cannot be
overlooked. For Jerusalem is of special significance to the
religious communities of the world. It has a particular
position as a historic centre of cultural and spiritual values.
The strength of the feelings expressed in the debate to date
is a testimony to this. So is the deep concern manifested by
the international community, by the highest representatives
of religious circles as well as by cultural organizations,
UNESCO being in the for&front.

91. The third line of Israeli action seems to consist in
measures aimed at the eventual eradication of all forms of
Arab cultural and religious presence. In this Israeli IebeilP
ram practice there would be room for new J&h
immigrants and for master plans of development of quarters
for a constant stream of Jewish newcomers.
92. Those and many other measures of the Israeli authori.
ties find their ultimate expression in juridical and admin.
istrative acts and regulations whose sum total amounts to
nothing else than a policy of practical annexation of
Jerusalem.

84. Neither can we overlook the fact, so forcefully
exposed in our debate already, of the illegal acts by Israeli
authorities against the premises of the United Nations in
Jerusalem. These extreme acts, as wasrecalled by Ambassa8

93. As I said at the beginning, it is not my intention to
dwell on those aspects of the problem, especially since they
have been so thoroughly covered by other delegations.
However, the meaning of those acts, their illegality and,
consequently, the necessity of putting an end to them
are-and here I agree completely with the representative of
the Arab Republic of Egypt-what matter essentially. For
what we face is one aspect of the overall policy of Israel, a
policy of using force, as well as military means and political
support which it receives from its allies, in order to
continue and consolidate its territorial conquests with a
view to making them, if possible and as far as possible,
permanent, through the tactics of faits accomplis; while at
the same time hampering and undermining all attempts at a
peaceful settlement of the problem of the Middle East in
accordance with Security Council resolution 242 (1967).

which have long awaited a special status that will
guarantee free accessto them. Jerusalem should not be a
cause of division but a centre of high spiritual value that
can promote reconciliation?‘3
At that time Italy supported fully-and continues to
support-General Assembly resolution 2254 (ES-V). That
position has ever since been consistently maintained by
Italy and reflects also the traditional attachment of the
Italian people to the Holy City.
98. In the past the United Nations has adopted resolutions
which provide principles and guidelines for the protection
of the international interests that surround Jerusalem. This
Council, in particular, has adopted various decisions to this
effect and, furthermore, has laid down in one of its
resolutions the principles in accordance with which a
general settlement has to be attained to bring lasting peace
to the Middle East.

94. In studying this fundamental problem I have been
impressed by the elaboration made by Ambassador ElZayyat of the “further actions” which the Security Council
must take in the face of Israel’s avowed contempt for and
utter disregard of its resolution. The Polish delegation, too,
declares itself in favour not only of a reaffirmation of the
decisions contained in Security Council resolutions
252 (1968) and 267 (1969), but also of the adoption of all
measures necessary to ensure the implementation of those
resolutions and of the principles which, at the beginning of
my intervention, I called the political and juridical framework of the problem now under consideration.

99. The Italian Government is firmly convinced that such
a resolution is constructive and well balanced and contains
all the essential elements for a just and lasting peace. In
fact, having emphasized the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war, it affirms the withdrawal of Israeli
armed forces from territories occupied in the recent
conflict, the termination of all claims or states of belligerency and respect for and acknowledgement of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of all
States in the area and their right to live in peace within
secure and recognized boundaries. ItaIy is more than ever
convinced that all efforts should be directed towards the
full implementation
of Security Council resolution
242 (1967) through the instrumentalities provided by it.

95. Mr. VINCI (Italy): The complaint brought before the
Security Council by the Jordanian Government is on a
subject which, for well-known historical reasons and because of more recent events, gives rise to strong emotions
much beyond its geographical area every time it is taken up.
The debate which has taken place in the course of three
meetings in this chamber and has resounded loudly outside
testifies to this simple truth.

100. Accordingly, we think that the future of Jerusalem
should be determined, in accordance with the pertinent
resolutions of the United Nations, through the special
machinery provided for by the Security Council, and it
should. not, therefore, be predetermined through unilateral
acts such as those which have been voiced in this chamber
and cited with so many details that it would be redundant
for me to go over them.

96. That is why I do not think my delegation could add
anything to the knowledge of the Council by dwelling on
the historical background and a number of measures carried
out in the occupied section of Jerusalem which can have
some bearing on the future status of the City. Everything
that could be said has been said in those meetings and
repeated today. I would rather turn to what can be done by
the Council at this stage. For our part, we are confident
that once again the Security Council will reaffirm, in clear
terms and by unanimous vote, that the status of Jerusalem
should be preserved. This will show, above all, how wide
and deep is the international concern for any action taken
in Jerusalem without regard to the special position which
the City enjoys in the world community.

101, In order to spare the time of the Council I shall
confine myself to noting, as all previous speakers have
done, and as undoubtedly those who follow will do, that
these actions and measures, carried out in the section of
Jerusalem occupied by Israel in the course of the June war,
are inconsistent with the provisions of international law
governing rights and obligations of an occupying Power, In
particular, in our opinion, the 1949 Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War
is fully applicable to the occupied sections of the city of
Jerusalem.

97. On several occasions in this Organization Italy has
stressed the unique international standing of a City sacred
to three of the world’s largest and oldest religions. In the
aftermath of the June war, Mr. Moro, the then Prime
Minister of Italy, speaking on the Middle East from the
rostrum of the General Assembly, on 21 June 1967, said:

102. The Italian Government considers that these actions
and measures are not only contrary to international law,
but also politically harmful. My Government has on several
occasions expressed its concern in this respect to the
Government of Israel since they create new causes of

“There are, moreover, questions which affect the more
general interests of the international community. . . . A
similar problem exists with regard to 1’the Holy Places,

3 Official
Records
of the General Assembly,
Fifth
Emergency
Special Session, PZmary Meetirrgs,
1530th meeting, para. 134.

9

107. The most flagrant violation in Jerusalem of the
international laws governing the administration of occupied
territory have been the expropriations of Arab-owned
lands, the expulsion of C\rabs from their homes, and the
destruction of their property. This has been done in spite of
the fact that Israel is a signatory of the Geneva Convention
of 1949 which prohibits such action. The illegality of these
actions is increased by the motive behind their enforce.
ment. Article 49 of The Hague regulations prohibits the
occupying Power from transferring part of its own civilian
population into the occupied territory. It is clear that
Israeli nationals are being brought in to displace Arab
residents of East Jerusalem.

tension in the Middle East. My delegation cannot fail to
reiterate this concern, as well as its disapproval of unilateral
measures which, being at odds with international law, are
distressing for any nation like mine, which upholds the
strict respect of the law.
103. Mr, FARAH (Somalia): My delegation has listened
with great attention to the debate that has taken place SO
far on the question of Israel’s occupation of East Jerusalem,
and on the developments that have followed that illegal act.
The point that has emerged clearly is that Israel has not yet
answered the charges that have been brought against it. In
considering matters such as Jordan’s submission on the
question of Israel’s illegal occupation of East Jerusalem, the
Security Council, of necessity, takes on some of the
characteristics of a court of law. It has to consider the
charges that have been made and the evidence to support
those charges, and if the Council is to carry out its proper
function and not abrogate its authority, it must take
whatever action is necessary to preserve international law
and international order.

108. Israel’s transgressions against the Geneva Convention
of 1949 are particularly ironic since the provisions of that
Convention were adopted in large part as a result of the
treatment of Jews under the Nazi regime immediately
before and during World War II. The conditions of Israel’s
occupation of Arab lands in general, and of Jerusalem in
particular, provide the first opportunity for measuring the
performance of an occupying Power against the standards
set by that Convention. Obviously, Israel’s performance is
one that is completely unacceptable to the world community.

104. The Council has a firm basis for its proceedings and
judgements. This basis is applied by the principles of
international law, implicit and explicit in the Charter, by
the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, which uphold the principles of the Charter, and it
is also supplied by the statutes and precedents that arise
from those covenants on the conduct of international
affairs to which the majority of the world community
subscribes.

109. Much of the evidence of the truth of these charges
lies in officially announced policies and promulgations of
the Israeli Government. The annexation of the old city is
no secret. It was approved by the Knesset , There have been
frequent pronouncements by Israeli leaders that the unification of Jerusalem is irrevocable and that as far as they are
concerned, the question of a return to the stahrs quo afldeis
non-negotiable. In fact, this was the tenor of the official
Israeli response to the Secretary-General’s request that
Israel comply with the Security Council resolution of 1968
[2S2 (196811.

10.5. The Council has heard irrefutable evidence to support the charge that Israel has carried out actions which
defy the principles of the Charter, defy the General
Assembly and the Security Council, and contravene some
of the major covenants on the conduct of international
affairs. These charges are not new. They began to be made
in 1967 and have continued ever since and they are
supported by a body of evidence that has steadily increased
since that time. All of the charges that can be made against
Israel on the question of the status of Jerusalem stem from
that country’s denial of a principle of international law
reaffirmed by the Charter, the principle which states the
inadmissibility of the aquisition of territory by conquest,
Israel’s denial of that principle is clearly illustrated by its
purported annexation of East Jerusalem in 1967 and by its
extension of the purported annexation to areas beyond the
City.

110. The numerous violations of the normal provisions of
occupation have been carried out through laws and proclamations whose existence can be easily verified and whose
results have been widely reported in the international press.
In response to Israel’s illegal actions in Jerusalem, the
General Assembly and the Security Council have adopted a
series of resolutions, the first being General Assembly
resolution 2253 (ES-V) of 4 July 1967, and the last
Security Council resolution being resolution 267 (1969),
These resolutions were all adopted by overwhelming majorities. They have often been quoted and I do not need to
describe them all here. The consensus of international
opinion on the status (of Jerusalem is best summed up by
the last-mentioned resolution, resolution 267 (1969),
which, among other things, reaffirmed that the acquisition
of territory by military conquest is inadmissible; it deplored
the failure of Israel to show any regard for past resolutions
on the subject of Jerusalem, confirmed that all legislative
and administrative measures and actions taken by Israel,
which purporting to alter the status of Jerusalem, including
expropriation of land and properties thereon, are invalid
and cannot change that status; and urgently called on Israel
to rescind forthwith all measures taken by it which may
tend to change the status of the City of Jerusalem, and in
future to refrain from all actions likely to have such an
effect.

106. These annexations are also contraventions of The
Hague regulations which limit the rights of an occupying
Power to that of administration alone. Another of The
Hague regulations states that the administration of the
occupying Power should follow as closely as possible that
which existed before the occupation of the territory. The
repeal of a great many of the laws in force in East
Jerusalem when it was under Jordanian rule, and the
replacement by Israeli laws and measures was therefore
another violation of this international covenant. Changes in
the currency of the territory, in taxation, in the conduct of
education, and in the laws governing the disposal of
property, were some of the obvious illegalities carried out
by Israel as an occupying Power.
10

111, The judgement and will of the United Nations has
never been more clearly expressed or unanimously sup.
ported. Israel’s responses to these charges have always
followed the same pattern. Its representatives avoid the
central issue, which is that of illegal annexation and illegal
occupation, and dwell on the emotional reasons for Israel’s
desire to unify Jerusalem. Well, as the representative of
Saudi Arabia has pointed out, other religious groups also
have emotional reasons for their concern over the future of
the Holy City. Moslems and Christians can also claim a
stake in Jerusalem on the grounds of ancient history, of
religion and of sentiment. That was recognized by the
adoption of Security Council resolution 271 (1969), which
arose out of the burning of the Holy Al Aqsa Mosque. That
resolution, among other things, recognized “that any act of
destruction or profanation of the Holy Places, religious
buildings and sites in Jerusalem or any encouragement of,
or connivance at, any such act may seriously endanger
international peace and security”. It called upon Israel
“scrupulously to observe the provisions of the Geneva Conventions and internatibnal law governing military occupation . . .“,
112. Now, while it would be unfortunate if such claims
were to have no sway in international affairs they certainly
cannot be the sole basis for international arrangements. The
claims of religion and sentiment must operate within the
framework of the legal and political rigbts’of peoples and
States-in other words, within the framework of the system
of international law which the United Nations upholds.
113. Israel’s refusal to operate within that framework and
its disregard of United Nations resolutions have grown
increasingly arrogant since 1967. While the Israelis claim
they have accepted the principles of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) and agreed-initially, at any rate-to
co-operate with the Jarring Mission established under the
terms of that resolution, they were at the same time
undermining the possibility of a peaceful settlement by
their actions in Jerusalem.

strong that any retum of conquered territory around
Jerusalem in the context of a negotiated peace settIement
would be a practical impossibility.
127. Apparently there was a group within the Jerusalem
City Council and some generalized public opinion in Israel
that was concerned that the master plan of the Israeli
Ministry of Housing not only would destroy the unique
character of the city but would seriously threaten the cause
of ‘peace. On 15 February 1971 the Israeli Minister of
Housing put an end to the controversy by announcing
bluntly the political goa of the housing plan-namely to
settle new immigrants as quickly as possible in order to
keep Jerusalem Jewish. The Mayor and City Council of
Jerusalem immediately abandoned their opposition to the
plan, which they had formerly raised on aesthetic grounds.
Mayor Kollek announced that foreign interference in the
form of protests by UThant and the United States State
Department-which
incidentally termed the plan “unacceptable”-would
actually speed up the process of building
blocks of flats in annexed East Jerusalem.
118. If any further evidence were needed to illustrate
Israel’s intransigence on the question of Jerusalem and its
defiance of the United Nations it would be its cavalier
treatment of the Secretary-General when he requested
information on the housing plan for Jerusalem in general
and on the bulldozing operations within the grounds of the
headquarters of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization. The Secretary-General’s requests for information either have been ignored or have received unsatisfae
tory replies that skirted the central issue.
119. Differing versions have appeared in the international
press of the provisions and revised provisions of the master
plan of the Israeli Ministry of Housing for the construction
of new housing for Israelis on confiscated Arab land in East
Jerusalem. The Israeli representative claims that no such
plan exists. Will he also deny that between 20,000 and
35,000 units are planned for the three areas of Nebi
Samwil, Government House and’ Sharaf, capable of housing
well over 100,000 new settlers?

114. It will be recalled that in document S/10070 of
4 January 1971 the representatives of Egypt and Jordan
gave the Secretary-General examples of Israel’s policy of
absorbing Arab territory in violation of United Nations
resolutions and appealed to the international community to
take steps to put an end to the violations.

120. In February 197 1 the Manchester Guardian reported
that bulldozing was in progress at the Government House
site, and on 1 April The New York Times reported the
eviction of Arab families and the demolition of houses in
the Arab village of Nebi Samwil so that construction could
be started. Are those reports complete fabrications on the
part of newspapers with an international reputation? The
fact that this expropriation of land and this planning and
execution of building projects is being carried out unilaterally and without consultation with or support from the
Arab community has been noted not only by the international press but also by the Supreme Moslem Council of
Jerusalem, the panel of international architects convened
by the Jerusalem City Council, foreign observers and
church groups in Jerusalem.

115. On 23 February 1971 they again protested Israel’s
building plans for areas around Jerusalem seized from
Jordan in 1967, pointing out that the projects could serve
military purposes and perpetuate the Israeli occupation.
116. The facts of Israeli illegal actions in East Jerusalem
are not open to question. They have been widely reported
by the international press and proudly admitted by the
Israeli authorities themselves. Reporting on this question on
12 January 1971, The New York Times, which can hardly
be described as a pro-Arab source, referred to a controversy
within Israel itself over the attempt “to put a purely Israeli
stamp on a region that has long been claimed by Jews,
Arabs and Christians”. ne New York Times went on to say
that the critical judgement in Israel had been that the
Government was aiming to make the Israeli presence so

121. The political and legal issues in all this are clear. In
occupied Jerusalem, as in Hebron, the Golan Heights, Sinai
and other areas of occupied Arab territory the Israelis are
following their classic policy of expropriation followed by
colonization, of “creating facts” in complete disregard of
humanitarian principles or principles of international law.
11

122. There is another matter involved in the developments
taking place in East Jerusalem. Israel’s actions are symptomatic of a disturbing approach to the entire question of the
future of the Holy City, that focus and centre of the faith
of millions of people in the world. That approach is clearly
to make Israeli national interest the sole determining factor
of the administration of the city. The aesthetic debate over
the architectural details of the master housing plan for
Jerusalem was one symptom of an nt.titude th,at can only be
described as insensitive and chauvinistic. The Ksraeli Ministry of Housing made it quite clear a.t a Press conference in
February 1971 that the question of preserving the historic
landscape of Jerusalem is secondary to that of Jewish
immigration to the city. In view of that attitude jt is
difficult to understand the surprise and chagrin of the
Israeli Government last March over a leading article in the
Ossewatore Roman0 complaining that Jerusalem was being
Judaized.

126. In these circumstances my delegation wishes to
introduce draft resolution S/10337 which takes cognizance
of the main issues of the question and attempts to chart a
course of action for this Council which if followed would
take the United Nations one step forward in meeting its
responsibilities.
127. The preambular paragraphs of the draft resolution
are factual. They recall the various resolutions of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council which relate
to the question and which express not only the universal
concern of the international community on Israeli measures
for changing the status of the Israeli-occupied section of
Jerusalem, but also the demand to Israel to rescind the
measures it has taken to give expression to its illegal
actions. The predmbular paragraphs reaffirm a cardinal
principle of this Organization, that the acquisition of
territory by military conquest is inadmissible. Not only is it
proper that the Security Council should reaffirm such an
important principle, but it should also urgently consider
steps that should be taken to obtain respect for that
principle if international anarchy is not to be encouraged.

123. Speaking for himself and for the Government, the
Israeli Minister of Housing also said, in the context of
criticism of the plans for housing Jerusalem immigrants, ‘“I
can see no reason why Jerusalem must claim preferential
status”. It is a chilling thought that the preservation of the
unique character of that sacred city should continue to be
at the mercy of those who cannot see why J&Salem, more
than any other area, must not become a tasteless, overcrowded, urban monstrosity.

128. ?he operative paragraphs are self-explanatory. Paragraph 1 reaffirms Security Council resolutions 252 (1968)
and 267 (1969). Significantly, the latter resolution, which
went further than any of the other resolutions on this
question in expressing the consensus of international
opinion on the illegality of Israel’s occupation of East
Jerusalem and of its policy towards East Jerusalem was
adopted unanimously.

124. Various points of view have been expressed over the
years about the eventual status of Jerusalem. There is
support, particularly from some religious denominations,
for the proposal that Jerusalem should have a special
international status, a view that has been debated in the
United Nations from time to time since 1949. The legal
position now, however, is that there must be a return to the
status quo before the war of 1967 so that the final
disposition of the question of Jerusalem can be arrived at
within the context of an over-all Middle East settlement.
That disposition certainly cannot be made unilaterally. In
attempting to enforce a unilateral settlement on the
question of Jerusalem the Israeli Government has openly
and deliberately embarked upon a policy which closes the
door to peace in the Middle East. It contravenes international, law, frustrates a unanimous resolution of the
Security Council and frustrates the clearly expressed will of
the international community.

129. Paragraph 2 deplores the failure of Israel to respect
the resolutions of the General Assembly and of the Security
Council concerning Israeli measures and actions purporting
to affect the status of the City of Jerusalem.
130. Since it is important to impress upon Israel the
illegality of ,its actions, paragraph 3 has been inserted to
make clear to all that the Security Council confirms that ali
legislative and administrative actions taken by Israei to
change the status of the City of Jerusalem, including
expropriation of land and properties, transfer of populations and legislation aimed at the incorporation of the
occupied section, are totally invalid and cannot change that
status. From the evidence that has been accumulated since
the adoption of the last Security Council resolution on this
matter, it is an incontrovertible fact that Israel has not
complied with any of the calls made upon it to desist from
measures designed to change the status and character of
East Jerusalem. Acknowledging this regrettable fact, opentive paragraph 4 of the draft resolution will call once again
on Israel to take no-and I repeat “no’‘-further
steps which
may purport to change the status of the City.

125: Israel’s policy towards Jerusalem is also a betrayal of
an historic trust. In these circumstances it seems to my
delegation that the Security Council must not only call on
Israel to comply with its resolutions on Jerusalem, but it
must also indicate in no uncertain terms the steps it will
take to enforce its authority should Israel once more reject
the rule of law and turn its back on peace in the Middle
East. Calling on Israel to comply with United Nations
resolutions is a necessary formality, but a formality none
the less. It has been done many times before with no
success and we have had clear notice from the statements of
the representative of Israel that his Government intends to
continue on its defiant course. The question whether Israel
is to be allowed to continue to flout.the authority of the
Security Council with impunity is one that can no longer be
ignored.

131. Finally, paragraph 5 :

‘Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the President of the Security Council and using SUCK
instrumentalities as he may choose, including a representative or a mission, to report to the Security Council as
appropriate and in any event within sixty days on the
implementation of this resolution”.
12

This provision is necessary for there is an impression abroad
that while the Security Council frequently calls upon States
to abide by their obligations under the Charter and in
conformity with its decisions, the Council is not disposed
towardsfollowing up its decisions by concrete action in the
caseof a negative response. It is the hope of my delegation
that should the Secretary-General after the lapse of 60 days
report negatively on the implementation of this draft
resolution, it will be for this Council to consider appropriate measures to secure compliance with its decision.
132. In another situation involving the illegal occupation
of a territory by a Member State, namely, South Africa, the
International Court of Justice, in a striking majority
opinion, has stated, that Member States of this Organization
are under the obligation to refrain from lending any
support or any form of assistance to that country while it
continues in illegal occupation of Namibia. Since there are
no
differences within this Council on the illegality of
Israel’s presence in East Jerusalem and the measures it has
taken to change the status and character of that city, there
would be justification to apply similar sanctions against
Israel if it refuses to conduct itself on the Jerusalem
question in accordance with its obligations under the
Charter, the norms established by international law and the
decisions of this Council,
133. The draft resolution which my delegation has submitted has been drawn up after careful consultation with
some delegations. Some delegations may consider that it
does not go far enough. But acknowledging the varying
extent to which each delegation is prepared to go at this
stage, the draft provisions represent the maximum which
my delegation believes can be achieved in order for the
Council to maintain unanimity of action and unanimity of
purpose on this very important and delicate question.

137. As in past debates on the same item, the arguments
are geared to population counts, to political unity, to
economics, to some sophisticated and some not so sophisticated formulas for establishing State sovereignty on the
one hand, while acknowledging the need to create conditions of transcending spiritual universalism for all the great
religions, on the other hand. The words of the Old
Testament cynic intrude upon this new debate. Surely,
“There is nothing new under the sun”. What can be said
that is new? And if something new is said what new hope is
there that it will lift the fate of Jerusalem out of the
historic niggling over the letter of the law and produce a
situation in which this body will be able to establish the
equity which alone can make Jerusalem a city of peace?
138. We may find, as we should, that the newer IsraeliZionist aggressions deserve still another rebuke, another
rebuke against the aggressor and the exploiter. But history
eloquently testifies that a rebuke, like past rebukes, will not
save the city, because little of the spirit which makes the
city holy will transcend the quibbles over language designed
to narrow the interpretation of the letter of the law,
unfortunately leaving loop-holes to the advantage of the
aggressor.
139. We know, I think, where to turn for a formula for
the salvation of this unique city. Perhaps to the Old
Testament, to th.e New Testament, to the Holy Koran-to
the sacraments of our common spiritual heritage, all of
which are so inextricably linked. to Jerusalem.
140. It takes no theologian to know what a Jeremiah, a
Jesus, a Mohammed would say if any one of them-or all
three of them-were a member of this deliberative body.
They wouId thunder in oral indignation to find the money
&angers
in the temple of Jerusalem. Their voices are voices
along
with those of other great lawmakers of mankind to
which this man-made instrument struggling for peace
should listen. For it is their voices echoing down the ages in
the hearts of hundreds of millions of the peoples of the
world which give Jerusalem its sanctity. And I remind my
colleagues that the United Nations is chartered to serve
“the peoples” of the world.

134. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): The world
watchesas Jerusalem is raped. Zionist plans to establish an
Israeli fait accompli in the Holy City are looked on with
horror by Moslem, Christian and Jew-indeed, by all honest
and law-abiding citizens of the world regardless of their
religion.
135. But it seems that very little can be done to stop Israel
turning Jerusalem into a Zionist showpiece and carnival. As
we deliberate here today, Israel, in utter disregard of law, is
carrying on its work in the Holy City of Jerusalem. Yet, of
all cities of the world, Jerusalem has a special meaning and
should be approached in a special way.

141. I am as prepared as anyone to engage in the
inevitable polemics, the semantics and the legal hairsplitting, However, what I am saying is that a tortured,
bewildered and war-weary world expects better of us in all
things and feels, instinctively at least, if not justifiably
consciously, that when we confront the problem of
Jerusalem we must do better, They expect us to drive the
money changers from the temple. But we cannot do this
until we first drive the pettiness, the hypocrisy alld the
worship of power from those who are power hungry. We
can emancipate Jerusalem if we will it, and make it what
the dreams and the aspirations of “the peoples” wish it to
be. We can do this by listening to the spiritual giants and
law-makers of the world who gave character to our separate
ideologies and who, in doing so, gave Jerusalem a special
meaning to the entire world, We can redeem Jerusalem
through justice and righteousness, by rendering to God that
which belongs to God and by staying the hands of the
conquerors, the Caesars,whoever they are. That is what our
Charter requires US to do and there is no place more fitting

136. All the speakers who have preceded me have described what Israel is doing in contravention of Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions and of internatiOna
law. But despite the usual orchestration of Israeli
Zionist propaganda the Holy City is ‘sullen and indeed sad,
very sad, as on the day of the crucifixion. There is more
than a little evidence that its Arab Christian population,
becauseof subtle pressures,is diminishing, and that its Arab
Moslem population trembles, knowing that it cannot ever
be first-class citizens as aggressionis consolidated by a State
in which the criteria for full nationality are based upon
another religious identification. It is small wonder, therefore, that the item of Jerusalem is again inscribed on our
agenda.
13

to begin than with the city holy to Christians, Moslems and

148.. It is a well-established fact now that Israel gave no
response at all. Its answer was negative; its violations
continued unabated. On the other hand; the Secretary
General, in accordance with paragraph 8 of that resolution,
has submitted since its adoption only six reports to the
Security Council. A careful study of those six reports of the
Secretary-General is enough to establish cause not only for
the condemnation of Israel but also for the application of
Chapter VII against Israel.

Jf.?WS.

142. What has been taking place and is skill taking place in
Jerusalem now is but a small part of what has been taking
place and is taking place in all the occupied Arab territories.
I should be remiss in my duty if as an Arab spokesman I did
not once more place the problem in all its grave dimensions
before this principal organ of the United Nations.
143. Only a few days ago, on 23 September, the Jewish
Telegraplzic Agency reported that Israel’s population had
topped 3 million. It stated the following:

149. In my last statement to the Council [1581st meeringl I quoted from the Advisory Opinion of the Interna.
tional Court of Justice on Namibia,4 to which the
representative of Somalia has already alluded. I dealt with
the consequences of,illegality. But there is a further step in
the Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice,
which, I believe, in its entirety constitutes a landmark not
only in the troubled history of the former Mandated
Territory of South West Africa but also in the evolution of
international law, and more specifically in the subject of
Jerusalem we are discussing.

“The Central Bureau of Statistics announced yesterday
that Israel’s population now stands at 3,062,000, of
which 2,610,OOO are listed as Jews and 452,000 as
non-Jews. The latest figure represents a population
increase of 67,000 Jews and 17,000 non-Jews since last
year. According to the Bureau, 60 per cent of the Jewish
population growth represented natural increase and 40
per cent immigration. The growth of the non-Jewish
population was almost entirely by natural increase.”

1.50. The Security Council has so far adopted three
resolutions; they are in addition to the two resolutions of
the General Assembly. The Advisory Opinion, after having
elaborated on the consequences of illegality, stated the
following with regard to the duty to enforce Security
Council resolutions. Paragraph 113 of the Advisory Opinion
states:

144. What about the city of Jerusalem? We listened
during the debate at the last meeting to the figures given by
the Israeli representative about the number of Jews, Arabs,
Christians and Moslems in the Holy City. I have here the
statistics from the survey of Palestine prepared by the
Secretary of Information for Palestine of the AngloAmerican Committee of Inquiry-a British-American body.
They speak about the census of 1922 and 193 1, when there
were 56,346 Arabs and 34,43 1 Jews. At the same time they
give the figures for the total settled population in Jerusalem
for the end of 1944. when there were 140,532 Arabs and
100,200 Jews. Those are the figures of the Palestine
Anglo-American Committee, and they are embodied in the
Palestine Yearbook for 1947-1948.

“It has been contended that Article 25 of the Charter
applies only to enforcement measures adopted under
Chapter VII of the Charter. It is not possible to find in
the Charter any support for this view. Article 25 is not
confined to decisions in regard to enforcement action but
applies to ‘the decisions of the Security Council’ adopted
in accordance with the Charter. Moreover, that Article is
placed, not in Chapter VII, but immediately after Article
24 in that part of the Charter which deals with the
functions and powers of the Security Council. ‘If Article
25 had refereace solely to decisions of the SecuriQ
Council concerning enforcement action under Articles 41
and 42 of the Charter, that is to say, if it were only such
decisions which had binding effect, then Article 25 would
be superfluous, since this effect is secured by Articles 48
and 49 of the Charter.”

145. According to the statistics given by Mr. Tekoah the
number of Jews in 1970 was 215,000 while that of the
Arabs, Christians and Moslems was 70,000. That shows the
dimensions of the conquest to which we are witness and of
which the Arabs alone are the victims.
146. We have listened to the representative of Somalia
submitting a draft resolution. But my deiegation believes
that the Security Council should have started at the place
where the issue was left after the adoption of resolution
267 (1969) on 3 July 1969. Members who have already
addressed the Council have quoted paragraphs 6 and 7 of
that resolution.

1.5I. The speakers who have preceded me in this meeting
have all expressed their opposition to Israel’s violations of
international law and to its utter disregard for the stipulations and provisions of the three Security Council resolu.
tions. But how is that opposition to be translated into
actuality? How are we to enforce upon Israel that
opposition which we have been hearing in the Council
here?

147. They read as follows:
“Requests Israel to inform the Security Council without any further delay of its intentions with regard to the
implementation of the provisions of the present resolution;

152. Although the United States has not participated in
this debate, I should like to quote from the deliberations
that took place in the Council on 1 July 1969, at the
1483rd meeting. The then Permanent Representative of the

“‘Determines that, in the event of a negative response or
no response from Israel, the Security Council shall
reconvene without delay to consider what further action
should be taken in this matter.”

4 Legal Consequences for States of the Contiilued I-resence d
South Africa in Namibia (South West Afn’ca) notwithstarlding
Security Council resolution 2 76 (197Oj, Advisory Opinion,
KJ.
Reports 1971, p. 16.

14

United States, Ambassador Charles Yost, said the following:

159. While I am on operative paragraph S, there is a
grammatical error in that paragraph which should be
corrected. Paragraph 5 at present reads as follows:

“The United States considers that the part of Jerusalem
that came under the control of Israel in the June 1967
war, like other areas occupied by Israel, is occupied
territory and hence subject to the provisions of international law governing the rights and obligations of an
occupying Power. Among the provisions of international
law which bind Israel, as they would bind any occupier,
are the provisions that the occupier has no right to niake
changes in laws or in administration other than those
which are temporarily necessitated by his security interests, and that an occupier may not confiscate or destroy
private property .” [1483rd meeting, para. 9 7.1

“Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the President of the Security Council and using such
instrumentalities as he may choose, . , .“.
The word “he”’ should be “they”, because the Security
Council is making the request of both the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council. Therefore, the
logical thing would be to consider them together, and say
“as they may choose,” and so on.
160. My third amendment is to add an operative paragraph 6, which would read as follows :
“Decides that the Security Council shall reconvene
without delay to consider the report referred to in
operative paragraph 5 and what further action should be
taken under the Charter.”

153. In the light of all this, any new draft resolution
should have embodied what has already been established in
international law as the measures to be applied against
Israel. In that connexion one should bear in mind Israel’s
obligation under the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of international law to put an end to its illegal
administration in Jerusalem and to all legislative and
administrative measures and actions taken by it in contravention of the aforementioned principles and resolutions. It
should also be determined that Israel’s unilateral annexation of Jerusalem brings international responsibility arising
from the continuing violation of an international obligation.

161. The rationale behind those amendments is the
following. With regard to the first amendment-namely, to
add the words “to rescind all previous measures and actions
and”-those words are to be found not only in Security
Council resolution 267 (1969) but actually in all resolutions on Jerusalem adopted by the Security Council and the
General Assembly. With regard to the replacement, in
operative paragraph 5, of the word “sixty” by “thirty”, the
General Assembly should be made aware of what the
consequences of the requested mission and its report should
be. The reason for the addition of operative paragraph 6 is
that, in view of past experience, especially that to which I
referred in connexion with resolution 267 (1969), it has
become obligatory for the Council to meet after a report
has been submitted to it.

154. Condemnation of the acts of Israel is a matter of
fact, but there are too the duties of the members of the
Security Council, Members of the United Nations. The
Security Council should therefore call upon all Member
States of the United Nations, in accordance with the
Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice, to
recognize the illegality and invalidity of Israel’s actions in
Jerusalem, and to refrain from giving any support or any
form of assistance to Israel because of its illegal annexation
and the other measures it has taken in Jerusalem.

162. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
United States on a point of order.
163. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): I am not clear
what the representative of Syria was proposing. Was he
indeed proposing another amendment, which would simply
change the word “he” to “they”? It is in good English as it
is written, and its meaning is very clear. I raised a point of
order because I was not clear about his proposal. Was he
proposing an additional amendment to those in the
document that we have been handed? As I say, the text
’ certainly makes good sense as it is. I think the sponsor was
well aware of the text being submitted in this form, and it
is good English as written. It is not a grammatical error. I
simply ask you, Mr.President, whether it is your understanding that we should add to this list what has been
submitted to us as a fourth amendment.

155. The second consequence of that would be the
application 0% sanctions; but, unfortunately, in spite of the
pious statements of some Member States, and even of the
Security Council, help is still being tendered to Israel,
encouraging it in its annexationist and expansionist measures-and first and foremost by the Government of the
United States of America.
156. My delegation would like to submit the following
amendments to draft resolution S/10337 presented by the
representative of Somalia. These amendments have already
appeared; they will be distributed to members in document
S/10338.

164. The PRESIDENT:
I was going to ask the same
question of the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic:
whether he is proposing a formal amendment-a fourth
amendment.

157. First, in the first. line of paragraph 4, after the word
“Israel”, the following would be added: “to rescind all
Previous measures and actions and”. The paragraph would
then resume with the words “to take no further steps”, and
so on.
158. Second, in paragraph 5, “sixty”
by “thirty”.

165. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Repu.blic): I suggested that
“he” be replaced by “they” on the basis of its being a
grammatical equivocation, because one could understand it
either way. Therefore I propose it as an amendment.

would be replaced
15

166. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on the list is the
representative of Saudi Arabia. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

prototype of a modern city. Apartment houses with all
conveniences are being erected and made available to
favoured immigrants from abroad.

167. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I should have preferred to make my statement after Mr. Tekoah’s speech,
but Mr. Tekoah and his delegation did not make an
appearance until this late hour. The reason for their absence
early this afternoon, I was told, might be that today is the
Jewish Sabbath, Others said that Mr. Tekoah and his aides
might come at 7.32 p.m.-the end, or at sundown. Indeed
the Israeli delegation entered the Council Chamber at
7.34 p.m. It must have taken them two minutes to come
from the entrance of the Headquarters building to the
Council Chamber when they thought they could start work.
I doubt whether Mr. Tekoah has turned so religious as to
think that his presence in the Security Council on the
Sabbath would be considered sacrilege. If that is the case,
then the Council should never meet on a Friday or Sunday,
which are days of rest for Moslems and Christians. I believe
that we have met many times on a Sunday and sometimes
worked until the early morning hours, regardless of whether
it happened to be holy for Jew or Gentile. Let US be
mindful of the fact that the monotheistic religions are not
the exclusive religions of the world. I believe there are
about 2,000 religions, and there are many adherents of
different religions around the Council table. There are
people with no religion whatsoever. If we are going to
respect the religious days of every denomination, I dare say
we had better close shop in the United Nations. Did the
Zionists consider it sinful to wage war on Saturday during
the six-day war in June 1967, or do they cease military
operations on any Sabbath, for that matter? I suspect that
Mr: Tekoah absented himself because to some extent he
treats the decisions of the Council with contempt. His
reaction in the past as far as General Assembly and Security
Council decisions were concerned indeed was the height of
cynicism.

170. Jerusalem is being changed to suit their long-laid
project of making the Holy City a magnet for all the Jews
in the world. Hence they say Jerusalem is the capital of all
Jewry. I mentioned in my last statement that we would like
to know whether many loyal Jews in countries all over the
world would declare themselves as Israelis or as nationals of
their respective countries and consider the capitals of their
respective countries as their own capitals. But I am not that
hopeful tha.t the Council will do something in that
direction, to hold a plebiscite and find out from the Jews or
resort to the gallup poll-you have a gallup poll here in
Princeton-to find out how many American Jews would
consider Washington as their capital and how many would
say that Jerusalem is their capital.
171. Something very serious happened. Where is
U Thant? I do not seehim sitting in his seat. I wish he were
here because this has a direct bearing on something that
U Thant said yesterday during a very sumptuous banquet
that was given at the Waldorf Astoria by an organization
known as “In the U.N. we believe”. I happened to be
present. U Thant is an honourable man, but he must have
been exasperated by the pressures that were brought to
bear on him by the Zionists. Some of you may have heard
what he said. Others, I am sure, did not take into account
what he said. So why try to paraphrase what our illustrious
Secretary-General said. Why not read excerpts from his
speech that relate to this very question, Here it is. I got it
this morning. I do not have to paraphrase any thing. He
said:
“In many ways the Secretary-General’s activities in the
sphere of good offices may be compared to an iceberg,
only a small portion is actually visible and a very
substantial part remains submerged. Tonight I am illustrating this point with a purpose.”

168. It may be recalled that in my last statement[1581st
meeting] I told the Council that I would dwell at some

length on why Israel has chosen to make old Jerusalem the
capital of world Jewry. Time and again I mentioned that
from the very beginning political Zionists had used Judaism
as a motivation for political and economic ends. We all owe
a great deal, especially those adherents of monotheistic
religions, to Judaism, to the prophets, who lived and
thrived in our midst-but not in the Balkans. Those
prophets were not descended, either by blood or by
culture, from the Khazars, who really introduced this
movement into the world in 1896, when Theodore Herzl
published what I would call the rules and regulations-or
call it the manifesto-of political Zionism.

Our beloved Secretary-General continues:
“In the course of the last two years many requests and
appeals from Soviet citizens of the Jewish faith wishing to
leave the Soviet Union for Israel have been officially
brought to my attention. I have received such appeals,
individually or collectively, from some 800 persons, and
have in all casesundertaken to do all within my power to
help, while at the same time pointing out that in such
matters the greatest discretion and lack of publicity are
essential.
“Last month I was gratified to be informed officially
that more than 400 out of 800 appellants on my list were
now in Israel. At the same time appreciation was
expressed for my efforts in this delicate matter. I very
much hope that this favourable trend will continue.”

169. After the occupation of the old pati of that city, the
Zionists tried to consolidate it with the part they had
occupied after the creation of Israel by usurping Palestine.
Jerusalem, they tell us, is indivisible and inviolable. That is
a big claim. But who is violating the decisions of the
Security Council and the many resolutions that have been
adopted by the General Assembly? If indeed old Jerusalem
was so holy to the Zionists they would not change its
character. Only the other day Mr. Tekoah told us what the
Zionists were doing in Jerusalem. They want to make it the

172. I am not going to read selectively all that the
Secretary-General said, but I have to quote another few
lines from his speech to show you to what lengths political
Zionism goes to attain its ends. And in retrospect I will read
a Fewpassagesfor the record about what they have done to
16

the host country of the LJnited Nations, trying to blackmail
or coerce or twist the arms of the officials of the
Government of the United States. Thank God we have the
Republicans in office, because all the ills came from the
Democrats in so far as Palestine is concerned. I do not
know, they may be just as bad. The Secretary-Generalgoes
on to say:
“In fact, my office hasbeenreceiving”-and mark those
words, please-“a continuous flow of criticism and
complaints, some of them violent to the point of
irrationality, on this matter.”
I do not know but that they may have threatenedto kill
the Secretary-General.How do we know?
“This tide of uninformed abuse comes from both
individuals and organizations which accusethe United
Nations”-meaning him, too,-“of indifference, apathy,
impotence and worse. In all fairness to the United
Nations, and indeed to all those with whom I have dealt
on this question, which is a difficult one for all
concerned, it therefore seemedto me necessarynow to
makea brief statementof the facts of the matter.”

176. Hereis a quotation from Colonel Eddy:
“The spokesmanfor the group, George Wadsworth,
presented orally an agreed statement in about twenty
minutes. There waslittle discussion,andthe President”meaning President Truman; rememberhe was a Democrat-“asked few questionsin the meetingwhoseMinutes
have been carefully guarded by the Department of State.
Finally, Mr. Truman summedup his position with the
utmost candour”-and now I am quoting Mr. Truman, a
former Presidentof the United States-“I’m sorry, gentlemen, but I have to answerto hundredsof thousandswho
are anxious for the successof Zionism. I do not have
hundreds of thousands of Arabs amongst my constituents.“’
Israel was therefore created to further the chancesof a
Presidentfor re-election.

177. But why quote only CoIonel Eddy, whom I happened to know personally, a very honourableman who was
there and heard what the President said? Why not quote
Mr, David Horowitz? Who is Mr. David Horowitz? He was
a member of the Jewish Agency Executive. He has said
what wasresortedto soasto createthe State of Israel, or at
173. What assurancedo the Moslemsof the world andthe
leastto lay the ground for the creation of the State of Israel
Arabs in particular have that those political Zionists will
by the partition of Palestine. I shall now quote
not continue their pressures,
their arm-twisting, sometimes Mr. Horowitz:
their blackmail, to attain their purpose? The Soviet Union
has3 million Soviet Jews.I doubt that they are disloyalto
“The fighting spirit rose in us again. We met at the
Agency offices and consulted on ways and meansto turn
the Soviet Union. There are many distinguishedJewsin the
the wheelof events once more. The strugglebeganagain.
Soviet Union. But the Soviet Jewsare human; they canbe
The telephonesrang madly. Cablegramssped to all parts
brainwashedby incessantpropaganda.There are many loyal
of the world. People were dragged from their beds at
American Jews in the United States,but we have seenhow,
midnight and sent on peculiar errands.And, wonder of it
within 20 years, they rousedthem into a frenzy on behalf
all, not an influential Jew, Zionist or non-Zionist, refused
of Israel. What assurancedo WChave that this Jerusalemis
not being prepared as a showcaseof the modern Israeli
to give ushis assistance
at any time. Everyone pulled his
State, setting aside the historic relics, bulldozing the
weight, little or great, in the despairingeffort to balance
the scalesin our favour”6 cobblestones,each stone replete with history, so that they
may have a showcase,they may have a modern capital to
the scalesof partition. Seehow Israelcameinto being? But
receivethose Jewsfrom abroadwlio like comfort and at the
that is not all, becauseMr. Horowitz goeson to say:
sametime bask in the sun of what the Zionists try to tell
themis their duty.
“Explanations, cajolings, pressure,and use of pull-all
these he operated with skill and success. He was
174. I have said that this is nothing new. In fairnessto the
glued to the telephone day and night, speakingwith the
Soviet Union I shall showyou what they have done-and I
capitalsof the Latin American republics,“was in this country dealing with the question, unfortunately for me and everybody concerned.
incidentally, Moshe Tox wasdoing this; he wasin chargeof
175. I knew Colonel Eddy. I think AmbassadorBushwas the Zionist political work in Latin American countries; he
too young to know him. He wasone of the most dedicated was here on assignmentto work on a few Latin American
countries-“and his emissariessped to every part of the
public servants of the United States.I shallquote what he
saidabout none other than George Wadsworth, who was continent.“7 I shall not mention any more names;I do not
one of my colleagues,the Deputy Permanent Represen- want to embarrasssomecolleagueswho are here. But that
tative during the days when Mr. Austin was the Permanent wasnot all.
Representativeof the United Statesto the United Nations.
178. I was at Lake Successand I am reminded of what
He was a Senator-Senator Austin-and is reputed to have happened.I read this out for the record:
asked: “Why do you Jews and Moslems not have the
Christian spirit and come together and finish this ques“However, the Philippine Ambassador in Washington
tion? ” That showshe wasa good man from Vermont. He
phoned President Roxas informing him of the great
thought the Christian spirit would enable them to come
together and solve their problem. What “Christian spirit”,
5 See Richard
P. Stevens, American Zionism and U.S. Foxign
when they were cutting one another’sthroats in Europe? Policy 1942-1947 (New York, Pageant Press, 1962), p, 138.
6 Ibid., p. 177.
The war was hardly over, in 194.7,when he saidthat. May
7 ibid., p. 178.
God rest his soul for beinga good Christian.
17

pressures being exercised to change that country’s vote.
While not himself in favor of partition, Ambassador
Elizalde reported that the United States seemed determined on partition and that it would be foolish to vote
against it”a -

183. We know, for our part, how Cohen, the spy-he has
been almost canonized by the Zionists; they do not believe
in saints anyway, but they have almost canonized himoperated in Syria. Now this gentleman, Igal Shamir, is a
very proficient violinist. Even that Princess in Belgium, who
is fond of music did not know that he was a spy and invited
him to perform in Brussels. It is all here in this magazine.
This is his interview. I am not going to burden the members
of the Council with a long article. But for the benefit of
those who still think that the Zionists, after all, should get
what they want in Jerusalem, for the benefit of those
friends of Israel, I think I must read how this gentleman
was even spying on the Soviet Union. He performed in the
Soviet Union. I do not know where you were, Mr. Malik.
With your indulgence, Mr. President, I shall read something
that is very relevant and clear: “A Soviet delegation arrived
in France at the time of the Salon du Bourget. There was
Gagarin, but primarily Ilyuchin, Tupolev and a third
aeroplane construction engineer who, I think, was called
Antonov.“a This is what is said by the spy musician.

because they would not receive aid. I could go on and on to
show that there is nothing new. And the efforts are now
snowballing. Those efforts, we are told by the SecretaryGeneral, are efforts that may be like the lower part of an
iceberg-hidden from us.
179. Only last night the Secretary-General slipped, I think,
and gave away what was happening. He must be very
embittered, because he has been the butt of a campaign in
the Zionist press. They always remind him: “You said YOU
are not going to serve again” a broken record in the Zionist
press: “the Secretary-General has said time and again that
he would not serve any longer: even if it were in the
interest, of the United Nations for him to stay on a little
longer until the Organization finds a suitable successor”.

“After the official reception in Paris, they were
supposefi to visit the Sud-Ouest aeroplane factories under
the aegis of a great French plane constructor, whom I
shall call Serval. I had already played for Serval because
Mossad had very often arranged private concerts for me at
the homes of Ministers or of important persons. I met
him at Bourget, and I managed to convey to him the idea
that the Soviets might be interested in hearing some
concerts, I accompanied the France-Soviet group in all
their travels including the visits to the plants and
factories, and I was able to gather interesting information
on the course of the negotiations. My report filled 40
pages.“9

180. Jerusalem is the symbol of Israel, a State created
artificialiy, as I have shown, at the expense of the
indigenous population of Palestine. They could not have
been Arabs; they could not have been Moslems; they were
the indigenous people of Palestine. And when Mr. Tekoah
tried to prove his argument with figures I reminded him in
my last intervention that in 1919 the Jewish population of
Palestine had been less than 6 per cent. Mr. Wilson, a
former President of the United States, was persuaded by
none other than Judge Brandeis-a confirmed Zionist, a
member of the Supreme Court of the United States. And
on behalf of the Zionists that fellow Malcolm, originally an
Armenian, persuaded Sir Percy Sykes of the United
Kingdom to bring pressure to bear on the Cabinet during
the First World War to make a promise to the Jews which
was crystallized in the Balfour Declaration.

184. The alleged Soviet spies in London are child’s play.
Listen to what is happening here: “How did Mossad cover
up the project? “a
185. I will not mention now the name of General de
Gaulle because, really, it is not appropriate to see how he
was being maligned. But I will mention here what is said by
Mr. Igal Shamir :

181. The price was that the Zionists in the United States
would railroad the United States into the First World War.
Mr. Wilson, if one reads the records, promised the people of
the United States that he would keep them out of war, I am
not talking about theory; the record stands. History
speaks-and not Baroody claims, We Arabs are afraid that
Jerusalem will become the symbol of a State that is set to
exploit not only the Arab world economically but the
whole Middle East, which is the gateway to the continent
of Asia from ,the west. They have used their artists to attain
their ends,

“Is the collaboration between Mossad and the CIA
permanent? “--he is asked. “Yes. Jordan, for example,
the Zionist leader whom the Czechs liquidated in Prague.
Jordan was at once a great agent of Mossad and a great
agent also of the CIA. And I myself, in 1964, carried out
a mission in the Soviet Union in order to contact
clandestine Zionist organizations, and I had some very
serious troubles. It was the Americans that saved my life.
But I prefer not to speak of that.“9

182. I was in Paris on 7 September, at Orly, and I saw the
’ Zionist emblem, which is called the Star of David. If King
David only knew what the political Zionists would do I
think he would shed tears to see so much suffering
prevailing now in the land of Palestine. I have before me the
magazine Le Nouuel Observateur. It says: %a Confession
d’un Espion ha&lien “. Then there is the following: “Notre
Epoque-Les Dew Violons de Shamir”. Shamir is a very
proficient violinist, It goes on to say: “A sabra virtuoso says
how one enters the Secret Service and.how one gets out
of it,“9

186. At the end of the interview, he says: “I would like
the article to end with a comma and not a full-stop.“9 The
written comma means a pause, a short one.
187. What assurance do we Arabs have, with all those
attempts, machinations and pressures? Everything is permissible nowadays. They say “Alps fair in love and war+‘.
There is a war-to establish a domain, an empire, with
Jerusalem as its capital, for the ingathering of the Jews
from all over the world, Jews who would like to identify
themselves with the countries of their birth or adoption.

8lbid, pp. 180 and 181.
9 Quoted in French by the speaker.
18

Therefore we join with those who have reiterated their call
to Israel to rescind all legislative or administrative measures
already taken and to desist from taking any further action
which would alter the status of Jerusalem.

188. Do you blame us Arabs for coming here and
unfolding before you the reasons for our apprehension, our
fear? Assurances will be given to us? By whom? By the
great Powers? The great Powers do not want to have a
confrontation
on our account. Each pursues its own
interests-legitimate
or illegitimate; we shall not go into
that because we shall then be digressing from the item
before us.

195. In that connexion we have taken note, with deep
sympathy and understanding, of the Secretary-General’s
report of 18 February 1971 (S/10124],
as also his
subsequent
follow-up
reports dated 20 April [S/
10124/Add.I]
and 20 August [SflOl24/Add.2]
respectively on the status of Jerusalem and the problem of the
United Nations premises in that city. It is deplorable that
despite the repeated requests of the Secretary-General for
detailed information relative to the so-called master plan
there has so far been no satisfactory response from Israel.

189. I maintain that when some wealthy Zionists find out
that the pressures in the Western democratic countries are
great, that their capital is being taxed, they look to a virgin
territory, the portal of Asia. “Why not establish ourselves in
Israel and make it the headquarters for economic expansion? ” That is why the Zionists do not want to accept an
economic peace with the Arab States so that they can trade
and flourish.

196. We hope that the Secretary-General is correct in Iris
understanding, mentioned in his latest report, that

190. As I have said time and again, within thirty-two
years-I witnessed it myself-they have made this city of
Manhattan their own. Why should we not be apprehensive
that they wiII exploit the whole of the Middle East, the
whole of the Moslem world that starts in North Africa and
ends in Afghanistan-Turkey,
Iran, down the Sudan and the
littoral of the Red Sea? Anyone would be afraid, and it is a
Iegitimate fear.

“the Government of Israel, having already discontinued
all construction and other work within the area of the
United Nations premises at Government House as constituted on 5 June 1967, will refrain from reinitiating such
construction and other work within the said area until the
difference of opinion reflected in the 1967 exchange of
letters has been satisfactorily resolved”.
197. Furthermore,
the Japanese delegation wishes to
reaffirm a principle already established by a series of United
Nations resolutions-namely,
the desirability of establishing
an international regime for the city of Jerusalem.

191. The hour is late. I shall have an occasion to present
more documents-documents
not concocted by any propagamiists but prepared by historians. I will adduce arguments
based on facts to show that if the members of the Council,
who are entrusted with questions of security, do not act the
Zionists will not only treat us all with contempt but they
will
continue doing what they have been doing with
impunity, because they have found that through their
agents, through their bankers, through politicians in almost
every country, they can influence votes, can bring pressure
to bear, can keep us in subjugation. And we, the Arabs, are
still
alive. You cannot do away with 110 million of us. And
one day if the Moslem world is roused-and it might
be-there could be a holocaust in certain parts. That would
be deplorable, and you, the members of the Security
C~~ncif,
would have to account to your consciences.

198. We cannot overstress the importance of a fair and
unbiased approach to the Middle East question. In the view
of the Japanese Government the Council should strongly
oppose all unilateral measures that might alter or prejudge
the status of Jerusalem. At the same time, we call upon the
parties concerned to use self-restraint regarding any actions
that may tend to have an adverse effect upon the
achievement of a just and lasting peace in the area
concerned.
199. In view of the prevailing circumstances we might well
ask the Secretary-General, in consultation with the President of the Security Council, to designate a representative
or a mission to look into the situation and report to the
Council within a reasonably short time. What is most
important in this regard is securing the maximum necessary
co-operation from the parties concerned so that such an
instrumentality as a representative or mission would be able
to pursue its mandate effectively. For that reason my
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution
introduced by the representative of Somalia.

192. The PRESIDENT: I should now like to make a few
observations on the subject under discussion in my capacity
as the representative of JAPAN.
193. It is extremely disheartening to note that we are once
again caBed upon to discuss this most difficult and complex
probIem of Jerusalem. The root of the question runs deeply
into the long history of the Holy City, which is the spiritual
cradle for the Jews, the Christians and the Moslems. We, the
people of Japan, with our own strong spiritual tradition,
have feelings of deep sympathy with ‘the historical and
cultural heritage of Jerusalem which should be shared and
appreciated by all humanity without distinction as to race,
language or religion. In this respect, the question of
Jerusalem is unique indeed,

200. Speaking in my capacity as PRESIDENT the next
name on the list of speakers is that of the representative of
Israel, on whom I now call.
.
201. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I should appreciate it if it
were recorded that today’s meeting of the Security Council
was called over my delegation’s objections to convening a
meeting after a lengthy interval in our debate on the
Sabbath of Atonement and that the Israeli delegation
absented itself from this meeting until the end of the Holy
Day.

194. Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) lucidly
emphasizes in its second preambular paragraph the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war, and this
fundamental principle is applicable in the case of Jerusalem.
19

209. Mr..TEKOAH (Israel): Had the Soviet representative
allowed me to proceed with my statement he would have
heard that although at present little value can be attached
to Soviet observations concerning the rights of peoples and
of individuals in other countries, as the situation of Soviet
Jewsimproves the voice of the USSR on these matters will
undoubtedly be heard with growing respect. Indeed, it is
natural to expect that the permanent members of the
Security Council not only live up to the tenets of the
United Nations Charter to the same degree as other Member
States, but serve by their behaviour as examples to others.
And it is in this spirit that I should like to express the hope
that the Soviet representative-and I am replying to his
statements-will abandon his gratuitous abuse of Israel, the
Jewish people and the Jewish people’s national movement
of liberation, Zionism. The Soviet Government knows truly
what Zionism is. The present Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Soviet Union, Mr. Gromyko, stated in the Security
Council on 2 1 May 1948 :

202. I have asked to speak to reply to some of the
statements made by members of the Security Council. It
would of course be impossible for me, and I do not intend,
to react to all the wide-ranging dissertations and sometimes
almost childish distortions on such subjects as Khazars, the
Sabbath, the Secretary-General’s views on Soviet Jewry, on
spying and so on which previous speakers voiced without
being called to order and without being interrupted by
anyone. Neither will I stoop to reacting to the Syrian
representative’s cry to chase the money-lenders out of the
temple, If there were any doubt concerning the true
character of the charges put forward by Arab delegations
against Israel, this Syrian battle-cry will dispel these doubts.
203. There is a land in which the Jewish minority, several
million strong, is deprived of its national and individual
rights. The Jews of that country are not permitted to lead
Jewish lives. They are prevented from studying the history
and language of their people. It is a crime for them to
possess Hebrew language textbooks and some have even
been jailed for it. Jewish organizations are prohibited and
Jewish schools, theatres, newspapers and publishing houses
are closed. Communication with Jewish communities
abroad is curtailed. The right to reunite with their families
and to join their people in the Jewish homeland is severely
restricted. Yet the representative of that State professed
concern for a situation in which an Arab minority in
Jerusalem possessesall the rights that Jews in his country
are denied, basks itself in the splendour of the Arab cultural
and religious heritage, enjoys freedom of movement and
communication and lives through a period of unprecedented progress and prosperity.

“The USSR delegation cannot but express surprise at
the position adopted by the Arab States in the Palestine
question, and particularly at the fact that those States-or
some of them, at least-have resorted to such action as
sending their troops into Palestine and carrying out
military operations aimed at the suppression of the
national liberation movement in Palestine” [299th meeting, p. 71.

210. It does not augment the Soviet Union’s repute if it
heaps invective on the Jewish people’s love of Jerusalem, of
Zion, on its aspiration to freedom and equality with other
nations. After all, this is what Zionism is. One cannot but
express also the hope that the Soviet Union will eventually
discard those patently untruthful cliches which we heard
again today to which it invariably resorts on Middle East
questions. The Soviet Union is fully aware who is the
aggressorin the Middle East. It knows who started the war
in 1948 and who has refused to terminate it until this day.

204. There is a capital city in the world with a Jewish
minority of half a million. There is not a single Jewish
school in it. In Jerusalem the Arab minority which numbers
less than 70,000 has 53 Arab schools. The half-million Jews
have one rabbi, one synagogue and two small houses of
worship. The Moslems of Jerusalem have 36 mosques and
11 prayer rooms. In addition there are 54 Christian places
of worship and sanctuaries. And therefore I would simply
say to the representative of the Soviet Union that as long as
the situation of Soviet Jewry remains as it is today, Soviet
views . . .

211. The fact that Arab aggression failed in 1948, that it
was contained during the Armistice period and then
effectively defeated in 1967 does not turn the Arab
aggressorinto a victim of aggression. What would the Soviet
representative say if anyone were to suggest that until the
Battle of Stalingrad Nazi Germany was the aggressor but
that when Soviet forces succeeded in pushing the invading
armies back and occupying part of Germany, it was the
Soviet Union that became an aggressor?

20.5. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
USSR on a point of order.
206. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I strongly protest against the
insolent and cynical attacks by the Israeli representative
against the Soviet Union. We are considering here not the
problem of the Soviet Union but the crimes committed by
the Israeli aggressorson Arab territory, in Arab Jerusalem.
In making such statements, the Israeli representative is
defying you, Mr. President, and is showing a lack of respect
for your appeal that we should limit ourselves to the
problem under consideration, namely the question of
Jerusalem.
(translated from Russian):

20’7. I would ask you to call the Israeli representative to

212. The Soviet representative time and again, unfortunately, throws at us the profanity of such epithets, again
reiterated today, as “Hitlerite” and “Nazi”. In it he follows
those backward Arab States which, having collaborated
with or sympathized with Hitler, and continued his policy
of oppression against Jews, now try to sling at others the
mud with which they are covered. To apply to Jews the
epithet “Hitlerite” is to insult the memory of 6 million
Jews killed by the Nazis. To call Jews “Hitlerites” makes ss
much sense as to call Communists Nazis-and is certainly
more despicable.

208. The PRESIDENT:

213. I am certain that when the Soviet Union frees itself
of these blemishes, when it stops identifying itself blindly

order.

Please proceed.
20

with Arab aggression against Israel and supporting it in a
manner which displays little regard for the Soviet Union’s
obligations and responsibilities under the Charter, it may be
able to encourage peaceful agreement between the parties.
AS long as it persists in its present attitude, its role remains
negative and even destructive.

“Since the reunification of Jerusalem four years ago,
the Moslem population of the city hasgrown. This is not
surprising, as one knows that the municipality has
devoted great efforts to improve housing conditions in
the eastern part of the city and that it has offered work
to those who previously. had known what unemployment
meant.

214. For four months the Jordanian Government talked
of raising the Jerusalem situation in the Security Council.
For four months members of the Security Council tried to
dissuade it from doing so. In fact it is clear to all that
nothing has occurred in Jerusalem that warranted an urgent
debate of the Council. It is clear that Jordan’s internal and
inter-Arab difficulties cannot justify an attempt to mobilize
the Council in opposition to Jerusalem’s happiness and
progress. Our debate has demonstrated the veracity of these
assumptions. The record of our discussion shows how
Jerusalem has been restored to its natural state of unity and
integrity, how its life and growth have since 1967 proceeded again on a normal course, how the sanctity of
Jerusalem’s Holy Places has been safeguarded and strengthened, how the rights of all its inhabitants are protected.

“The Jordanian accusations, therefore, are even more
extremist in that they tend to make one believe that
before 1967 the eastern part of Jerusalem has known a
normal situation. In fact, during the whole of the period
of Jordanian administration, the Israelis were deprived of
free accessto their holy sites. It was made impossible for
them to make use of their cemetery on the Mount of
OliVeS
in flagrant violation of article 8 of the Armistice
Agreement. We saw their tombs desecrated and 34 of
their synagoguesout of 35 were destroyed.”
218. The Times of London of 14 July 1971 echoes this
evaluation of Israeli actions. It declared: “There is no doubt
that most East Jerusalem people are better off under the
Israelis “. How can one justify then the suggestion that
Israel should have refrained from taking the aforesaid
measures? How can one vindicate the idea that Jerusalem
should have been abandoned, abandoned in the state in
which Israel found it on 7 June 1967-devastated and
desecrated, stagnating in ruin, slum and squalor? Does
anyone really believe that such an attitude can be accepted
by enlightened public opinion? Does any one of the
representatives at this table really feel that history’s verdict
on such a view can be anything but negative?

215. Indeed, the only event to mar this situation wasan
Arab assault last Sunday on Christian pilgrims in Via
Dolarosa resulting in the death of an Arab girl and the
wounding of five American tourists. It is to be observed
that this attack on Jerusalem’s peace and sacrednesswas
carried out by a terror organization based in Lebanon,
which used Lebanese media of information to confess
responsibility for this criminal act. This is the same
Lebanon which shed crocodile tears before the Security
Council, alleging interest in the religious attributes of
Jerusalem, while harbouring the machinery of terror warfare always on the ready to murder children and profane
the holiness of a Sunday morning on Via Dolorosa, simply
to score a point in the Security Council argument against
Jerusalem.

219. Those who cherish Jerusalem will readily recognize
what love for Jerusalem means to the Jewish people and
what labour of love Israel has infused into Jerusalem. The
most reverend George Appleton, the Anglican archbishop
of Jerusalem, declared in London on 10 June 197 1:
“Let us gladly admit that the memory of the physical
city and the symbolic Jerusalem have kept the Jewish
faith alive not only in one lifetime spanof the first exile,
but through nearly 2000 yearsof the second exile. One
cannot help feeling that Jerusalem meansmore to the Jew
than it does to the Christian or the Moslem.”

216. One cannot but wonder whether, in lending support
to Jordan>s irresponsible complaint and to the equally
irresponsible draft resolution before us, sufficient thought
has been given to such foreseeable consequences.
217. Having listened to the statements made today by
Members of the Council, one cannot but wonder also
whether the true interests of Jerusalem and its population
and the situation of the holy places are in fact the
considerations which guide this debate to the extent that
they deserve to do. If they did, how could one explain
opposition to measures undertaken by Israel since 1967 to
ensure progress, prosperity and peace in Jerusalem? The
following description of Israel’s measures appeared in the
respected Paris daily Le Figaro on 15 September 1971:

And then he continues:
“People readily appreciate Jerusalem is a living city and
the development is inevitable, though it must be planned
and control&d It is good to note the beginning of
building plans for Arab flats and houses both in Israeli
Government schemesand in West Bank initiatives. May it
increase rapidly.”
220. Monsignor John M. Oesterreicher, Director of the
Institute of Judeo Christian Studies at Seton Hall University, wrote in an article published in The New York
Times on 26 May 1971:

“The Government of Israel is in a position to produce
substantial testimony not only on the respect accorded
by Israel to the universal character of this city and the
scrupulous protection of holy sites safeguarded by law
passed in 1967, but also as to the living conditions of the
various communities, conditions which are tranquil and
which, on the contrary, have contributed to the restoration of peace and security in Jerusalem.

“Last March, talking to the multitude in St. Peter’s
Square, Pope Paul spoke of ‘the recognition of the

extraordinary requirements of the holy places’ is Israel
and of a ‘p~~~al&n of historic and religious rights’

21

interests are more fully protected and respected, what
remains then to serve as an explanation for the reservations
voiced today regarding Israel’s policies and actions in
Jerusalem? Israel-it was stated by some-should refrain
from changing the status of Jerusalem. Which status? The
one of illegal and unnatural partition and mutilation of the
city brought about by Jordan’s invasion of 1948 in open
defiance of the Charter and of United Nations resolutions?
Since when does the United Nations Charter require, or
even justify, the preservation of a situation brought about
by the use of force-not in self-defence but in flagrant
aggression?

converging in Jerusalem. He did not, as alleged, call for its
internationalization. When one knows that his comments
were elicited by an alarmist letter from three Jordanian
bishops who envisioned an Israeli plot to oust Christian
Arabs from the city and impede free accessto the shrines,
then the Pope’s words appear rather low-keyed.”
Monsignor Oesterreicher continues:
“At present dilapidated houses in the old Jewish
quarter which Arabs took over under Jordanian rule are
being rebuilt. The Arab inhabitants who had to vacate
them were either fully compensated or moved to new
quarters. Israel thus cares for its Arab population . . .“.

225, References were made to resolutions calling on Israel
to refrain from changing Jerusalem’s status. Since when do
political resolutions which reflect Israel’s known parliamentary disadvantage in the United Nations votes supersede
principles of international law, justice and morality?

221. The following declaration was issued on 17 June
I971 during an international conference of evangelical
Christian leaders held in Jerusalem.
“We, the undersigned evangelical Christians committed
to the integrity of Jerusalem the Holy City as the
birthplace of our faith, want to commend the State of
Israel for the scrupulous care with which it has protected
Christian places and people. Taking note that throughout
history Jerusalem has never been the capital of any
people except for the Jewish people, we are struck by the
fact that since the six-day war all people are free to
worship in the place of their choice unlike the situation
that obtained during the period 1948.1967. The unity of
Jerusalem must be preserved at all costs.”

226. References were also made to the Geneva Convention
and other similar conventions which deal with the territory
of one State occupied by another in armed conflict. Those
referencesdid not take into consideration one fundamental
fact. There are no State boundaries. There have been no
political boundaries between Israel and the Arab Statesnot because of Israel’s fault. The Middle East has lived since
1948 in a state of continuing war and juridical chaos. The
only lines separating Israel from the Arab States have been
military lines-at first truce lines, then armistice lines, now
cease-fire lines. The recognized boundaries are still to be
agreed upon between the parties.

222. Similarly attested are the respect, protection and
immunities enjoyed by the religious interests of Islam. To
the declarations brought by me before the Council in
previous meetings I should like to add a statement of
special significance and interest in this debate. The President of the All-Moslem Congress of Sierra Leone broadcast
on 30 June 1967 the following message, after a visit to the
Al Aqsa Mosque :

227. I have also heard reference to the status of Jerusalem
coupled with allusions to General Assembly recommendations of 1948. Those recommendations, however, were
trampled into dust by the Arab States. Besides, even those
recommendations-had they been accepted and implemented-would have created only a temporary status for
Jerusalem pending a referendum to ascertain the wishes of
the city’s population. Since 1948 the inhabitants of
Jerusalem have expressed their wishes time and again, most
recently in the municipal and national elections of 1969, In
1971 there is not the slightest doubt that the great majority
of the inhabitants of Jerusalem long ago have established
their inseparability from the State of Israel.

“From this Holy Place I declare frankly and with
conviction that places holy and consecrated to Islam, the
Mosques and the Chapels, are properly guarded and that
there is no violation of them. The Gates of the El-Gazzar
Mosque, as well as the Mosques of all towns and villages,
are wide open and filled with worshippers who fulfil their
religious obligations in complete freedom.”

228. In conclusion I should like to recapitulate Israel’s
policy on Jerusalem as enunciated in a letter from Isarel’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs to the Secretary-General which
is contained in the Secretary-General’s report of 10 July
1967 (S/8052] :

223. A Moslem visitor from the Asian continent was
impressed in the same manner. Mr. Salih Ututalum, a
Moslem Minister in the Philippines Government, stated in a
radio broadcast on 5 June 1969:

“The measures taken by [the Government of Israel] to
secure the protection of the Holy Places a part of Israel’s
effort to ensure respect for universal interests in Jerusalem. It is evident from United Nations discussions and
documents that the international interest in Jerusalem has
always been understood to derive from the presence of
the Holy Places. Israel does not doubt its own will and
capacity to secure the respect of universal spiritual
interests. It has forthwith ensured that the Holy PIaces of
Judaism, Christianity and Islam be administered under
the responsibility of the religions which hold them sacred.
In addition, in a spirit of concern for historic and spiritual

“I have met with Arab leaders-those in the old Israeli
territories and those in occupied territories-and have
talked with them, I have discussed the Moslem cornmunities with them concerning their status and living
conditions-discussed in private and in public-and
judging by their frank answers I feel that everything is
well. I found all Holy Places in tine condition. I have been
told that the Government even contributes to the upkeep
and the safeguarding of the Holy Places.”
224. If this is the situation in Jerusalem, if its population
is better off now than ever before, if the universal religious
22

traditions, [the Government of Israel] has taken steps
with a view to reaching arrangements to ensure the
universal character of the Holy Places. In pursuance of
this objective, the Government of Israel has now em
barked on a constructive and detailed dialogue with
representatives of universal religious interests. If these
explorations are as fruitful as we hope and expect, the
universal character of the Holy Places will for the first
time in recent decades find effective expression.

beats around the bush and tries to evade the basic issue:
that Zionism is an alien movement in our midst-a
movement which is at the expense not only of the
indigenous people of Palestine, but of the whole Arab
world, so that they may be exploited, so that they may be
enslaved, so that they may be a source of revenue for all
those Jews who would like to settle in the area and who are
consistently indoctrinated with the idea that it is God’s will
that they should go to Palestine.

“The changes which have affected Jerusalem’s life and
destiny . . . may therefore be summarized as follows:
where there was hostile separation, there is now harmonious civic union. Where there was a constant threat of
violence, there is now peace. Where there was once an
assertion of exclusive and unilateral control over the Holy
Places, exercised in sacrilegious discrimination, there is
now a willingness to work out arrangements with the
world’s religious bodies-Christian, Moslem and Jewishwhich will ensure the universal religious character of the
Holy Places.”
229. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Saudi Arabia, who wishes to speak in exercise of his right of
reply.

237. I must also remind Mr. Tekoah that our fears are real,
and not imagined; that our apprehensions are based on
what has happened during the last half century. We
witnessed the massacres that took place and the excessesno doubt on both sides, on the part of Arabs and
Jews-during
the mandatory period. The Government of
the United Kingdom, the Mandatory Power tried its best to
mediate; it sent many commissions. Finally it gave up; it
threw the whole question into the lap of the United
Nations because the Second World War had made it almost
bankrupt and it could not shoulder further expenses. That
was a mistake, but we are not here to bemoan what
happened in the past. We are faced with a colonial question
at the expense not only of the indigenous people of
Palestine, but of the whole Middle East,

230. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I should like to
remind Mr. Tekoah of a few simple facts, without elaborating on them, because the hour is late and I think the
Council has some more business to attend to in regard to
the draft resolution that was submitted to it this afternoon.

238. Therefore, since we have stated time and again that
our fears are real and that the fever is there and that the
abscess is festering, it is up to the United Nations-and, in
particular, to the Security Council-to do something drastic, lest the situation deteriorate even further.

231. The first fact: Zionism is an Eastern and Central
European movement predicated on colonizing-nay, usurping-the whole of Palestine.

239. I should like to remind Mr. Tekoah of the slaying of
Count Bernadotte, of the shooting of Lord Moyne, of the
blackmailing of many United Nations officials who had
gone to see what was happening in the area. They even
hanged British Tommies during the period between the two
world wars. And Mr, Tekoah comes here and rationalizes all
that has taken place on the premise that Jerusalem was
divided because Jordan invaded it, and because for 2,000
years there had been an indigenous population which
happened to be Arabized after the seventh century, but
which still, ethnologically speaking, was the population of
Palestine-the natives of Palestine, including Jews who may
have been converted to Judaism.

232. Secondly, the Sephardic Jews have become victims of
political Zionism, in that they have been used as a vehicle
for promoting that Western European movement alien to
the indigenous people of the Middle East, including our
own Oriental Jews.
233. Thirdly, from a minority of 6 per cent of Palestine’s
population in 1919, within 50 years-consummating their
plans of immigration and political collusion-the Zionists
succeeded in usurping the land of Palestine; and, unfortunately, all this has happened under the aegis of the United
Nations, which set aside the principle of self-determination
enshrined in the Charter.

240. When we repeat all those arguments to him, they
seem to fall on deaf ears, but those are the facts, And let
me remind him that that area has witnessed many invasions;
and if history affords us any lessons, I think we should
profit by the facts. I would not go back to before the time
of Alexander the Great, but Alexander the Great took that
area; then the Romans; after the Romans, the Eyzantines;
after the Byzantines the Crusaders; after the Crusaders the
Turks and Qre Mongols; and after the Turks and the
Mongols came the Mandatory Powers from Europe. And
now, it seems, it is the turn of the Eastern Europeans who
happen to be Jews to try and take the land by using a noble
religion, Judaism, as a motivation for their political and
economic ends.

234. Fourthly , the Zionists are a foreign element in the
body politic and body social of the Middle East. That
element has caused an abscess, which explains why the
whole region is suffering from a fever which will continue
as long as that eIement is the cause of the trouble.
235. Fifthly, the objectives of political Zionism to exert
continuous and unflagging efforts for the ingatheringrepeat, for the ingathering-of
millions of Jews have
become clear. Hence, everybody in our part of the world
knows that Zionism is an expansionist movement.

241. That was by way of summing up the question before
the Council proceeds to the vote. I am sure that this draft
resolution before the Council will be adopted, but I beseech

236. I am not going to rebut many of the arguments that
Mr. Tekoah adduced today, in spite of the fact that he
23

you to pause. Are you going to adopt this draft resolution
so that it may become another leaflet in the archives of the
United Nations, or is the Security Council going to act in a
drastic manner this time-and not merely say to Jordan:
“What more could you expect us to do, other than giving
you our vote? ”
242. That is the crux of the question. Is the Council going
to act, or will we let Mr. Tekoah laugh up his sleeye? And I
am sure he would be justified in laughing up his sleeve,
knowing very well that the various condemnations-22 or
23 of them-had meant nothing, had not changed his
country’s policy by an iota. I do not blame him if he
sometimes treats the whole United Nations with contempt.
243. Mr.

MAGENGE (Burundi) (intquretation
from
I should like to apologize on behalf of the leader
of the delegation of Burundi, who has been called away to
other pressing duties. If time had allowed, he would have
preferred to reiterate the position of Burundi on the matter
before the Council at present.

French}:

244. The position of my country which will dictate our
vote flows from the latest position adopted by the
Organization of African Unity. Once again my delegation
would like to reiterate a view that has been repeatedly
expressed in the past, inviting Israel to remain within the
limits of the territory recognized to it legally and internationally. The occupation of territories acquired after a war
cannot today be a guarantee for peace.
245. Additional reasons will lead us to vote in favour of
the draft resolution in document S/10337. It is the very
status of Jerusalem, which, apart from possessing its own
sacred character, calls for respect from all parties and
should also relieve it of the danger that anyone may’ fall
into the temptation of appropriating it.
246. At a time when steps for peace are being taken
everywhere, when glimmerings of a solution to the Middle
East crisis appear on all the horizons, including that of
Africa, surely it is imperative that the parties do nothing at
the moment that might in any way contribute to making
the situation in the region more dangerous.
247. The Holy Land and Jerusalem itself more than any
other part of the world deserves to enjoy peace and
collective protection. Jerusalem, the cradle of three religions, must be the place of pilgrimage of the adherents of
all three religions.

General and the President of the Security Council, who are
asked to devise ways of convincing the Israeli authorities to
rescind their decisions whereby they are expropriating
Jerusalem itself-an expropriation which may become
irreversible, to the prejudice of all concerned.
250. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretation
I should merely like to say a word
concerning the amendments that were submitted to us by
the delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic. Our colleague,
Mr. Tomeh, understands that we are aware of and touched
by all he saysand does. He knows how much we appreciate
his knowledge of the problems, particularly those confronting us now, and his disciplined mind. I must say that the
political and legal, as well as logical, reasons with which he
justified his amendments and the explanations he gave us
have succeeded in convincing us, and in this case we shall
have no difficulty in supporting them.
jkom French):

251. However, today it is not a question of our pronouncing ourselves on a word or selecting one word rather
than another. We know, unfortunately, that this problem
may well come back to this Council, and it is even foreseen
and provided for in the draft resolution, and each and every
one of us can then take categorical positions.
252. Today we have a draft resolution, as I said earlier,
that, with its imperfections, still seemsto be a valid, but the
amendments submitted by Syria may, either rightly or
wrongly, disturb a number of delegations-not my own.
Therefore the choice is open to us. I believe that unanimity
on a resolution of this nature at the present time would be
of positive value-unanimity that would be a unanimity of
presence and not a unanimity caused by partial absence. I
think that if the vote were not unanimous it would lose its
effectiveness, just as this draft resolution draws it effectivenessfrom its very careful and moderate nature.
253. I would urge the delegation of Syria to consider the
possibility .of withdrawing its amendments. I think that, fsr
from reducing the value of the vote, it would increase the
value of it. We know this is a difficult problem, There is
always a choice to make. We sincerely feel that it would be
an act of political wisdom, and let me telI Mr. Tomeh that
if he meets my appeal the French delegation will be
extremely grateful to the Syrian delegation.

248. The draft resolution and the amendments submitted
confirm the collective feeling of the Council, namely, the
need to protect the status of the Holy City, its inhabitants
and its three religions on an equal footing and without
excluding any. Quite justifiably, the draft resolution rejects
any annexation by a neighbouring country-in this case
Israel.

254. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): I certainly
support the eloquent appeal just made by the Ambassador
of France. Although the draft resolution submitted by our
colleague from Somalia gives us some problems we had
decided to vote for it. Ambassador Farah talked eloquently
of unanimity of action and purpose and the same appeal
has just been reiterated by our colleague from France. I
think Ambassador Farah in his presentation read the mood
of this Council. I think he read it well when he felt that his
was a reasonable draft resolution which could get a
consensus.

249. As far as my delegation is concerned, the responsibility of this Council lies in re-establishing an atmosphere
conducive to prayer and meditation in the.Holy City, and
this calls for complete compliance with the views of the
main officials of this Organization, namely, the Secretary-

255. In the interest of trying to achieve unanimity I would
join in asking our Syrian colleague not to insist on his
amendments. If for some reason he felt that he could not
accede to this request, we certainly would reserve the right
to reassessour position regarding final passageof this draft

c

resolution. In the event that he did not feel that he could
withdraw his amendments, we would certainly request a
separatevote on each of them.
256. Mr. SAVAGE (Sierra Leone): The delegation of
Sierra Leone will vote in favour of the draft resolution in
document S/IO337 because it is convinced, after listening
carefully to the various speakers on the subject on the
agenda, and after assessingthe situation from the evidence
available, that only a return to the pre-1967 status qua can
bring peace and tranquillity to the Middle East and prevent
it from being plunged into a religious war backed by
massiveracial overtones.
257. While accepting as inviolable the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by conquest, my Government
has repeatedly called attention to the fact that lasting peace
is altogether impossible unless there is a willingness on the
part of the disputing countries to accept in their entirety
the stipulations of Security Council resolution 242’(1967).
But this unfortunately does not seem acceptable to Israel
which, counting on its military power, rejects the political
will to come to terms with its neighbours, to implement
resolutions of both the General Assembly and the Security
Council and to desist from adopting a posture of consummate arrogance like that to which we have been treated this
evening.
258. We observe from the reports of the Secretary-General
that important questions raised by him, relating to serious
allegations that Israel was changing the face of Jerusalem,
have gone unanswered. Meanwhile accusations continue to
multiply that steps are being taken to Judaize that city and
subject it progressively to a unified administration at the
expense of the Arab population and their sacred places.
259. We wish to state without reservation that Jerusalem
does not belong to one religious group of people only.
Three of the major religions of man have their foundations
in that Holy Place. Jews, Christians and Moslems look up to
it as their spiritual home and rededicate themselves through
frequent visits to its shrines. It is therefore essential that
Arabs and Christians must have continued accessto their
various place of worship. But freedom of movement for
religious worship as well as for other purposes cannot be
possible if the international aspects of the City are altered
and Jewish laws and culture imposed exclusively on it.

doubt talking for himself and not for the Government of
Sierra Leone.
262. The PRESIDENT:
Egypt.

I tail on the representative of

263. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): A renowned architect-I
think he is Jewish-invited by the Israeli rulers to inspect
their so-called master plan, called this master plan “collective hara-kiri”. Since the weapon in the hand of Israel is not
aimed at itself but at the culture and heritage of people
who have lived in Palestine for 1,971 years, I thought at
first that this description of “harakiri” was not relevant.
However, when I heard the enlightened spokesman of
Israel, speaking in his colonial language about the backward
Arabs and Arab countries-after hearing the representatives
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Belgium,
France, Italy, Poland, Somalia, Argentina, Japan, Burundi
and Sierra Leone, not to mention the Syrian Arab
Republic-I understood why the actions of Israel are indeed
hara-kiri.
264, The battle which Israel is waging against the morality
of the world and its Charter-coming here as a Member of
the United Nations and saying that “This crooked majority
of yours and of your Councils will never make us desist
from anything we would like to do”-cannot but terminate
in the victory of the morality of the world. Thus it is
hara-kirl.
265. When I asked for the floor I wanted to say that the
draft resolution, correctly described by the Ambassador of
France as moderate and measured, is, in the opinion of our
delegation-and this is why it is acceptable to our delegation in its present form-only a reaffirmation of Security
Council resolution 267 (1969), giving more time to the
rulers of Israel to abide by the principles of the Charter and
by the Council’s resolutions; or to face the Council
again-boldly as they do-and to hear from the Council
what action it chooses to take.
266. That action cannot but be, in my humble opinion, a
positive response to the five points put forward in my
delegation’s first intervention in this Council, which the
voices of the nations just heard in this Chamber have clearly
and eloquently upheld.
267. I should like to reiterate that the only dignified
response to the undignified defiance of Israel and its
representatives is for this Council to determine that the
Charter will be a living instrument in all its parts, especially
its Chapter VII.

260. We do not want to see a continuation of such a
policy. It should be swiftly put to an end. Unless this is
done, and without delay, the dreadful result will be an
intensification of hostility involving Moslems, Jews and
Christians alike. For the preservation of international peace
it is important that Israel should immediately desist from
this Judaizing process and restore the Holy City of
Jerusalem to its peaceful and sacred surroundings and above
all to its sanctified charm.

268. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated porn Russian):I intend to state the views of the

Soviet delegation on the draft resolution introduced by the
representative of Somalia.

261. For the record, my delegation would like to clarify a
statement said to have been made by the President of the
Moslem Congress of Sierra Leone during a visit to the State
of Israel. Since my country boasts of free institutions, it
does not hinder the movements of its nationals. The
President of the Moslem Congress wasbeyond a shadowof

269. But before I speak on the substance of the matter, I
should like briefly to dwell on some points raised in the
statement of the Israeli representative.
270. From his statement it is absolutely clear that he has
forgotten nothing and learned nothing as a result of his
2s

what external signs the Zionists have, but the racist essence
of Zionism is the same. Fascism taught the supremacy of
the Aryans and hatred for other peoples. And Zionism
teaches the theory of the “chosen people”. Is this not
racism? In what way is Zionism different from fascism if
the essence of its ideology is racism, hatred for other
peoples and the concept of the chosen people, the people
chosen by God. Where in the second half of the twentieth
century does one hear anyone preach this preposterous,
infamous, criminal theory of the supremacy of one race,
one nation, one people over other peoples? Try to prove,
from the rostrum of the United Nations that you are the
chosen people and that the others are nothing. Nobody will
support you however zealous you may be.

presence at the meetings of the Security Council where the
question of Jerusalem is being considered. None of the
members of the Security ,Council have justified Israel’s
position and actions and its aggressive expansionist acts in
Jerusalem. Consequently, as a result of the Security
Council’s consideration of the question raised by the
representative of Jordan, Israel has been the subject of
international condemnation. Regardless of what kind of
resolution will be adopted, it is clear that none of the
members of the Security Council have come to the defence
of Israel. And from that, Mr. Tekoah, you should draw a
conclusion.
271. You have chosen, however, to attack only the Soviet
delegation and to reply only to the statement by the Soviet
representative. Why did you not refer to the statements of
other representatives, too? Israel’s policy has been condemned by the representative of Belgium who adduced
splendid international legal arguments. That policy has been
condemned by all the representatives who have spoken
here, Why, therefore, is all the fire of your anger directed
always against the Soviet statement? We have said the same
things as others have said. No more and no less. We have
referred to the Charter of the United Nations, we have
referred to the Charter of the International Tribunal, we
have referred to the decisions taken by the Assembly at its
twenty-fifth session reaffirming the main principle of
Security Council resolution 242 (1967), namely, that the
acquisition of territory by force or by war is inadmissible.
We have acted strictly on the basis of the Charter of the
United Nations and in accordance with the provisions of
that Charter.

273, I can only regret that some political figures, including
some in this city where we find ourselves, under the
influence of and pressure from the Zionists, either for
commercial or electoral considerations, trail along behind
the Zionists and agree with them. But let that be on their
conscience.
274. The Israeli representative referred to 6 million Jews
killed by the fascists. We grieve over that. But the Israeli
representative has forgotten that the Soviet Union lost 20
million Soviet people in mortal combat with fascist tyranny
during the Second World War. If Hitler, who dreamed of
being the ruler of the world, had conquered the whole
universe, if he had captured the world, if we had not won,
if there had been no Stalingrad, if there had been no battle
of Kursk, if there had been no victory of the Soviet armed
forces, no victory of the Soviet people who bore on their
shoulders the whole weight of the Second World War and
saved mankind, including the Jews of all countries of the
world, from the plague of fascism, what would have been
left of world civilization? You should be grateful to us,
you should erect a monument to Soviet soldiers in the
centre of your capital as a sign of gratitude for the fact that
20 million Soviet people, at the cost of their lives, savedthe
Jews of the whole world from destruction. And yet you
slander the Soviet Union. This is a disgrace to the country,
to Israel as a whole and to its representative to the United
Nations.

272. The Israeli representative has once again mentioned
Soviet Jews. Soviet Jews are not your affair, Mr. Tekoah.
Don’t poke your long nose into our Soviet garden. History
shows that those who have poked their noses into our
garden have lost them. As a former Ambassador of Israel to
the Soviet Union you know that very well. You have
defended Zionism. In this connexion you quoted the words
of one of my predecessors here. Yes, those words were
uttered. The statements which were made at that time were
a reflection of the great humanitarian foreign policy of the
Soviet Union and its people. We are internationalists, as all
Communists are, internationalists. We are in favour of all
peoples having the right to a self-determination and
independence, At that time Israel was not an aggressorand
we had one policy towards Israel. Now Israel is an
aggressor; it has attacked the Arab States, seized the lands
of other peoples and is attempting to appropriate them,
including even Arab Jerusalem. We are internationalists and
have given all our strength to the struggle for justice,
equality, freedom, independence and friendship among
peoples. It is for this reason that we strongly condemn the
Israeli aggressors and stand on the side of the victims of
aggression offering them all possible assistance and cooperation and defending their just cause in the United
Nations. But Mr. Tekoah cannot understand this.
Mr. Tekoah was indignant because we drew a parallel
between Zionism and fascism. It is very simple. Both these
ideologies are racist. Fascism taught that ,the Aryan race
was a superior race, standing above all races, peoples and
nations on the earth. Fascism considered that the ideal man
was an Aryan with blue eyes and blond hair. I do not know

275. Why do Israel and its representative need to slander
us? To divert attention from the aggression in the Middle
East, to obscure the situation, to conceal Israel’s violation
of the elementary rules of international law, and to conceal
the fact that Israel is defying the United Nations, the
General Assembly and the Security Cduncil and is failing to
implement the decisions of the United Nations on Jerusalem and on the Middle East in general. That is why they
need to resort to slander. But you will not get very far with
your slander. The just cause will triumph and today we are
witnesses to the fact that no member of the Security
Council who has spoken here, not even your closest friends,
has taken your side, has come to your defence. Those are
the facts, that is the reality. No slander against the Soviet
Union, no infamous fabrications about the situation of
Soviet Jews by you and by those who help you can conceal
the crime of the Israeli aggressors, your aggression and
everything that you are doing in the Arab lands, and your
unwillingness to settle the Middle Eastern problem by
peaceful political means and to withdraw Israel’s occupa26

tion troops from the Arab territories. Without that there
canbe no solution to the problem of the Middle East.

Ambassador of the Syrian Arab Republic would improve
this paragraph. Without those amendments, we shall have
serious reservations regarding paragraph 5.

276. That is the reality, those are the facts. I think that it
is time for you, Mr. Tekoah, to stop speculating here on the
question of Soviet Jews. Soviet Jews are full and equal
Soviet citizens, many of them are Communists. They do
not need synagogues, they need universities, theatres, clubs,
but not synagogues.

281. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Israel who wishes to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
282. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I shall be very brief indeed.
283. First of all, I should like to second the suggestion
made here by the representative of Egypt that it is the
responsibility of the Security Council and the United
Nations as a whole to see to it that Charter principles are
respected and implemented in the Middle East. Indeed, I
should like to draw the Security Council’s attention to
Egypt’s continuous policy of belligerency, Egypt’s continuous warfare, started in 1948 against Israel and still
continuing today. I should like to draw the Security
Council’s attention to a document signed by the Government of Egypt only a few weeks ago, on 20 August, in
Damascus, that says clearly there will be no peace and no
negotiations with Israel,

277. I remember that the former Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Israel, Mr. Sharett, who wasborn in Russia, once
invited me to lunch in New York and appealed to me, as
the representative of the Soviet Government, to allow all
Soviet Jews-at that time I think there were about two
million-to be sent to Israel. I said to him: “Mr. Sharett, we
are friends, we value friendship, we want to be friends with
all peoples of the world-that is at the very basis of the
Soviet Union’s foreign policy. From time immemorial, the
popular approach to a friend in our country has been to
consider, before giving a souvenir or a gift to a friend,
whether it will be good for him or bad, Why did you come
to the United States? Quite simply, to collect $500 million
from the rich Jews in America, I can assureyou that if our
Soviet Jews go to Israel and two thirds of them are
Communists and declare Israel a Soviet republic and ask to
join the Soviet Union, your rich American Jewish friends
will not give you one cent. I can assure you of that
absolutely”. Sharett replied: “Yes, Mr. Ambassador, I never
thought of the problem from that point of view”. I advised
him to think about it. And he never reverted to the
problem,

284. Indeed, it is high time for the United Nations to see
to it that Egypt does abide by its international obligations
emanating from the Charter of the United Nations.
285. As for the statement we have just heard from the
representative of the Soviet Union, I can of course
understand his concern and his regret that I singled out his
words today for reaction, I should like to assurehim that I
regret having had to do so as much as he regrets having had
to hear my statement in reply to his.

278. And I advise you, Mr. Tekoah, to think about it.
279. And now let us turn to the draft resolution. The
Soviet delegation has already stated its position of principle
with regard to the question under consideration and the
illegal acts committed by Israel in Jerusalem. The arbitrary
measures taken by the occupiers must undoubtedly be
condemned. Nobody here has offered any justification for
them. We consider that the draft resolution introduced by
our distinguished colleague and friend, the representative of
Somalia, is weak. But in view of the fact that the Arab
delegations support it and consider it possible to adopt it,
there will be no objection on our part to the adoption of
the draft resolution, both the preamble and the operative
part. We have, however, serious doubts concerning paragraph 5. The wording of that paragraph is not in keeping
with the Charter and is not in keeping with the role which
the Security Council is called upon to play in achieving a
settlement of the Middle Eastern crisis, including the aspect
of that crisis relating to Jerusalem. The wording of
paragraph 5 of the draft resolution is so vague that it allows
for too broad an interpretation. Moreover, that kind of
broad interpretation would represent a departure from
precedents already established in the Security Council’s
work. A mission of this kind must be sent by the Security
Council and must be composed of members of the Security
Council. Paragraph 5 does not state this. We find this
paragraph unacceptable and we shall act accordingly with
regard to this paragraph when we come to the vote.

286. There were two reasons for my responding to his
statement today. First, because the question of Soviet Jews,
like any problem of human rights in any part of the world,
is of concern to every State Member of the United Nations
and to the United Nations as an organization. The
representative of the Soviet Union expressed doubt whether
the people of Israel would benefit by receiving the millions
of our brethren in the Soviet Union who desire and speak
loudly of their longing to join their families and their
people in the Jewish State. I would suggest to the
representative of the Soviet Union that he leave to Israel
itself the decision whether it would be to Israel’s benefit to
accept those millions of our brethren. I would assure him
that we would welcome them, as we would welcome all our
other brothers and sisters in all other parts of the world
who wished to come and build with us a State of Israel
after an interval of thousands of years of dispersion, exile
and suffering.
287, The representative of the Soviet Union recalled
conversations he had with the former Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel, the late Mr. Sharett . I
too remember some conversations I had in Moscow,
especially a very significant one at the time of the
presentation of my credentials to the acting President of
the Soviet Union, who happened to be a distinguished
leader of the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic, He
opened the conversation by recalling to me how the h&tory
of the Armenian people and the history of the Jewish
people have certain parallel lines, because both nations have

280. It seems to us, and we are convinced of this, that the
amendments submitted by our distinguished colleague, the
27

was Zionism. Zionism is one of the world’s oldestanti.
imperialist movements. It aims at securing for the Jewish
people the rights possessed by other nations. It harbours
malice to none. It seeks co-operation and under.standing
with the Arab nations and with their national movements,

suffered through long agesdiscrimination, Persecution, and
absence 0f freedom and independence. “And now in the
Soviet Union,” he ended his expose, “both the Armenian
and the Jewish peoples live happily, free together.” And I
said, “I do agree with you, Mr. President, as far as the
Armenian people is concerned. But, you see, there is one
small difference between the Armenian people and the
Jewish people. The national homeland of the Armenian
people happens t0 be within the frontiers of the Soviet
Union; the national homeland of the Jewish people happens
to be outside the borders of the Soviet Union. And in
exactly the same manner that the entire world recognizes
the good and the right of the Armenian Soviet Republic
and of the Soviet Union as a whole to call on Armenians all
over the world to come back to their national homeland, t0
build together, to reconstruct the ruins left behind by
foreign oppression and occupation, we Jewsin the independent State of Israel have exactly the same right towards our
brethren in other parts of the world, including the Soviet
Union .”

290. Therefore may I suggest to the representativeeftlre
Soviet Union if he wonders why I had to reply to him tkat
he ponder and give some thought to what Zionism has
been, to what Jewish history has been, and then perhapshe
will understand the longings, the aspirations 0f Jewish
people in the Soviet Union, of Jewish people evewhere
and the hopes 0f the State of Israel for peacea,,;
co-operation, for friendship and fraternity witi their
neighbours and with other countries large and small,
291. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeoi
Egypt, who wishes to speak in exercise of his right of reply,

292. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): First of all, asregards
the
poor non-imperialist Zionists, I have here an Agence&nce
Presse dispatch from Tel Aviv dated today speakingof
yesterday, that touring the colonies-the word “c0loniaa”ir
mine-the Prime Minister of Israel has arrived ia fie
Syrianoccupied town of Kuneitra. Visiting the new“Ianeli
establishment” in the Golan Heights, Mrs. Meir is reported
by Agencc France Prcssa to have said that “no foreign
pressure would ever make Israel leave Jerusalem or Sharm.
el-Sheik11 or the Golan Heights.” If it does not leavethe
occupied territory of Egypt and of all other Arab countries
there can be no peace, By asserting that Israel wouldnever
leave, Mrs. Meir, in her imperial tour, is assertingthat she
will never accept peace. In the same story it saysthatshe
went on to address whoever was listening to her, inviting
the new Soviet Russian Jews to establish themselvesin the
Golan Heights. She said that she would like to havehere
“new Israeli establishments in this region which represents
great strategic value for Israel”.

288. My second reason for singling out the statement
made by the representativeof the Soviet Union for reaction
was a rather unfortunate one. And that was that out 0f all
the statements heard today it was in his words that we
heard a terminology that regrettably had some Stalinist
echoes, It was only in his statement that I heard epithets
like 7Iitlerite”, “vandals” and “barbarians”. It wasonly in
his statement that I heard invective and abuse about the
national liberation movement of the Jewish people,
Zionism.

289. And may I sayto him, if he still does not know what
Zionism is, that when Jewswere exiled from their land as
far back as the seventh century before the Christian era,
when Jews sat by the rivers of Babylon and wept but also
sought ways to go home, that was already Zionism,
Mr. Malik. When, in a mass revolt against their exile, they
returned and rebuilt the temple and re-established their
State a few thousand years ago, that was already Zionism.
When they were the last people in the Mediterranean basin
to resist the forcesof the Roman empire and to struggle for
independence, that wasZionism. When, for centuries after
the Roman conquest they refused to surrender and rebelled
again and again against the invaders, that wasZionism. And
when, uprooted from their land by the conquerors and
dispersed by them all over the world, they continued to
dream and strive to return to Israel, that was Zionism.
When, during the long successionof foreign invaders, they
tried repeatedly to regain sovereignty at least in part of
their homeland, that was Zionism. And when they volun.
teered from Palestine and from all over the world to
establish Jewish armies that fought on the side 0f the allies
in the First World War and helped end Ottoman subjugation, that was Zionism. When they formed the Jewish
brigade in the Second World War to fight Hitler while
certain 0f Mr. Malik’s present Arab allies supported him,
that Was ~kism. When Jews went to Nazi gas chambers
with the name of Jerusalem on their lips, that wasZionism.
When, in the forests of Russia and the Ukraine, Jewish
Partisans fought the Germans and sang of the land where
Palms were growing, that was Zionism, And when Jews
fO@# British colonialism while the Arabs of Palestine and
the neighbouring Arab States were being helped by it, that

293. So the Russian Jews, so pathetically invited to goto
Israel, will find when they arrive that they are being
brought there to be warfare material to build establish.
ments, not in the part given to Israel by the 194’7
resolution, not in the whole territory of Palestine which
they invaded, occupied and try to colonize now,but iaa
neighbouring country which is not Palestine. They aregoing
to be soldiers to stand guard, to occupy the land of SYnfi~
the land of Egypt. That is what they are being askedte de
and that is why they are asking to go back in answerto the
longing of spiritual attachment to the land of Israel.
294. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeefthe
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, who wishesto sPeakin
exercise of his right of reply.
295. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): I shall be very brief. FirstOfaUl

should like to draw the attention of the Security Councilto
the fact that Israel, without any justification, claimsto
represent the Jews of the whole world, the Jewsina1’
countries. This is an absurd claim and it is surPrising*at
Israel’s leaders cannot understand this. This claim hasbeen
categorically rejected not only by all States of the w”!d
and by international law, but also by the ove~helrmn~
28

majority of Jews living outside Israel who are citizens of
other countries.

arriving in Israel. We are proud of that fact. We Soviet
people, we educated them, the Jews, we gave them higher
education, The working people and peasants in the Soviet
Union, by their own efforts and with their own minds, have
raised the cultural level of the Jews. As a result, educated
people came to you.

296. What right does Israel have to speak on behalf of
Soviet, Italian, French, English or American Jews-what
right? Who gave Israel that right? It is unheard of. That is
why we consider that such a claim represents expansionism,
aggression, an infringement of the rights of other peoples
and States, interference in the internal affairs of other
countries which is forbidden under the United Nations
Charter. No references by Mr. Tekoah to ancient history, to
Sinai, to the Tablets of the Law, to the legacy of Moses, to
the Bible, can conceal Israel’s aggressiveplans with regard
to the territories of other peoples.

302. The second point in that article was that the Soviet
Jews lead a secluded life in Israel. That is natural. They are
accustomed to a free life in a free socialist country but in
Israel they have come up against a different state of affairs
in which they have had to join together in a narrow
community, finding themselves in an alien environment.
303. Thirdly, the article quoted the example of a highly
qualified furrier from Leningrad who emigrated to Israel.
For a long period he was a docker in an Israeli port. A
correspondent for an Israeli newspaper met him by chance
and he described the disastrous situation of this furrier, a
great specialist in furs-we understand that in Israel fur
coats are not needed since it is very hot there, but
nevertheless he was a highly qualified specialist and he had
to work as a docker. Thanks to that story by the Israeli
newspaper correspondent, he got a better job. But, as the
American correspondent, the correspondent of 7%e New
Yorii: Z%zes,writes, this highly qualified furrier, having got
a better job, complains that he has to pay almost half of his
salary for his apartment. In the Soviet Union he paid only 5
to 7 per cent of his salary for his apartment. Apartments
are cheaper in our country for everybody, including Jews.

297, Mr. El-Zayyat cited concrete examples of why Israel
needs foreign Jews including Soviet Jews. Soviet Jewslive
in the Soviet Union and enjoy all the rights of citizens of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. We have more than
100 nationalities: I am a Ukrainian and I represent the
Soviet Union, my deputy is an Armenian and representsthe
Soviet Union and the senior Counsellor is a Russian. We
work in a single friendly collective like a friendly family
because we have been brought up to do so by our Party,
our country and our people. We have an inherent profound
respect for other nationalities, for all peoples. We have no
racial differences or discrimination such as exist in many
other countries.
298. Why do we all hate Zionism? Because of its racism,
Mr. Tekoah. Because Zionism is a racist ideology, because
Zionism has a single slogan, a single credo, that of the
“chosen people”, and for that reason we hate it and will
fight with all the means at our disposal against Zionism and
its expansionist aims.

304. So in Israd things are not as good as you and your
Zionist propagandists, who attract Jews from other countries with their racist ideology of the “chosen people”,
promise. Therefore there are few willing to go to your
country. After hearing the explanation given to the
Security Council by Mr. El-Zayyat, it is clear to all of us
why you need our Jews-educated, wellqualified specialists, engineers, good officers, people who know how to
work and to defend their homeland, It is to use them as
cannon-fodder for aggression against neighbouring Arab
countries. You will not succeed in getting them, no matter
how much you slander us.

299. You have called to mind the good times when we
were friends, when we voted in favour of the people of
Israel being given the right to self-determination and
independence. We do not deny that. We are proud of it. But
HOW we strongly condemn Israel as an aggressor, as a
usurper, as a plunderer flouting the rights and interests of
other peoples and defiling the sacred places, the unique
cultural property of the deeply-rooted ancient Arab culture, monuments to the history of mankind, We categorically oppose this policy of Israel’s, and nobody here in
the Security Council is justifying you. You have satisfied
yourselves of that, whether you like it or not. You have
been unable to conceal the aggressiveand racist character of
Zionism by slandering the Soviet Union and by dragging in
the non-existent question of the so-called situation of the
Jews in the Soviet Union. There is no such question. The
Jews in the Soviet Union enjoy exactly the same rights as
any other Soviet citizen of whatever nationality.

30.5. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic, who wishes to speak in exercise of
his right of reply.
306. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): I have asked to
speak in order to exercise my right of reply to Mr. Tekoah.
There is one point on which I agree with Mr. Tekoah, and
that is that the fundamental issue is really Zionism, because
from a political ideology or a doctrine or a belief everything
else emanates.

300. YOU need cannon-fodder for your aggression against
the Arabs. But we will never meet you half way in this. Do
not expect any Soviet Jewsfor that purpose.

307. Mr. Tekoah in a very emotional manner elaborated
on what Zionism is, putting a stop after the word Zionism.
But Zionism has entered history, and we the Arabs have our
own view of Zionism and we are entitled to give our
assessmentof Zionism,

301. Even The New York Times, a newspaper which
protects and defends you, recently published an article
which described the situation of Soviet immigrants in Israel.
First, it acknowledged that the Soviet Jewish immigrants
were the most educated and cultured of the immigrants

308. Not long ago, on 26 August 1971, I addressed a letter
to the Secretary-General, which appears in document
S/10300. In that letter a statement is quoted which was
29

-,

occupied by our settlements, turning them into basesof
expansion and occupation, when the high command will
go on from defence to conquest of all the areas, those
designated for the State, and beyond.”

published by the Jewish Telegraphic Agency-part Of the
Government of Israel, but that part which operates here in
the city of New York-stating that five more settlements
would be established in the Golan Heights in the next two
years, making the number of settlements in the Golan
Heights thirteen. The number of Israelis settling in the
Golan Heights wasexpected to reach 20,000 in a few years.
That was after the Security Council had unanimously
adopted resolution 237 (1967) and the General Assembly
had adopted a resolution by over 100 votes in favour, with
only Israel voting against, calhng upon Israel to allow the
return of all newly displaced persons. To us, that is
Zionism.

To us, that is Zionism.
312. In the same book, Yigal Allon wrote:
“The truth of the matter is that the war of independence did not start on the 15th of May 1948, with the
Declaration of the State and the invasion of the Arab
armies.

309. At the last meeting of the Security Council, held on
17 September, I brought to the attention of the Council a
statement on 20 August 1971 by Defence Minister Dayan,
in which he said that “Israel must regard herself as the
permanent regime in the occupied Arab territories, and
must carry out necessaryprojects there without waiting for
the day of peace since it may be very late in coming.” I
now challenge Mr. Tekoah to deny that statement, which
was published by the Jewish Telegraphic Agency, the
Christian ScienceMonitor and The New York Timesof 21
August. To us, that is Zionism.
310. Mr. Tekoah is fond of making derogatory remarks
about the Arabs. We heard him speak this time about Arab
backwardness. I need not recall here the Arab contributions
to history. However, I should like to emphasize one aspect
of what Zionism is and how it appears to us. It is not only
the score of villages destroyed; it is not only the geopolitical murder of a whole people, the Arab people of
Palestine; it is not only the 1.5 million Arab refugeesliving
in camps, in spite of all the resolutions of the United
Nations giving them the right to return to their homeland,
Palestine. It is something more. It is terrorism in its‘ugliest
form directed not only against the Arabs now-when there
are 13,000 to 14,000 prisoners rotting in Israeli gaols-but
even against the Jews themselves. At the last meeting of the
Council I quoted what the Jewish terrorists have done
against Jews in order to further their aims, I quoted no less
a man than Menachem Begin, who stated that in order to
attract world attention to their own aims of expansion,
they had exploded a bomb on a ship carrying Jewish
immigrants. This is what he said:

“One cannot even say that it began with the day the
United Nations resolution of 29 November 1947 was
announced. It is more correct to put the beginning of the
war of independence as the date of arrival of the first
refugee ship ‘Dahn’ after the Second World War in August
1945.”
To us that is Zionism.
313. Zionism is predicated on the premise that the Arabs
should not exist, that they should be dispossessed.The fact
we are facing now is that Zionism has dispossessedthe
Arabs, is dispossessing the Arabs, and is expanding more
and more. There is no other fact than that, The fact that we
are discussing today the problem of Jerusalem and the
expansion of Israel in one city only, Jerusalem, is another
proof of what Zionism is.
314. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): I shall state the
views of my delegation after the vote. In the meantime I
should like to associate myself with the appeal of our
French colleague to our Syrian colleague to withdraw his
amendments in the interest of unanimity.
31.5. And may we please, Mr. President, move on to the
vote? I -have a feeling that the discussion has moved rather
a long way from Jerusalem.
316. The PRESIDENT: In view of the lateness of the hour
I should like to appeal to the members of the Council and
to those who are participating in the debate to defer any
exercise of the right of reply until the vote in order to
facilitate our proceeding to the vote.

“The bomb exploded and more than two hundred Jews
were killed or drowned. The British authorities noted the
fact that this was not an Irgun Zvai Leumi operation; it
wasthe Haganah which had placed the bomb .“I 0
He referred to those who had committed that act as Jewish
terrorists. To us, that is Zionism. Mr. Tekoah., that is not
only Zionism, but Zionist bestiality.

317. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I should like to endorsethe
appeal which the representative of France has addressedto
my dear friend and colleague the Ambassador of the Syrian
Arab Republic to withdraw the amendments ‘he has
submitted to my draft resolution.

311. Mr. Tekoah is fond of saying time and again that in
1948 the Arabs committed aggression against Israel. I refer
to a Jewish book called Sefer Hapalmah, the book of the
Palmach. This is what Israel Gahli told Haganah officers on
20 October 1947:

318. Like the French delegation, the Somalian delegation
would have no difficulty in accepting the substanceof
those amendments. But our prime purpose is to ensurethat
the united front this Council has adopted hitherto towards
this question should be maintained.

“Holding the yishuvs”-that is, the Israeli settlements“gets US in control of all the areas which have been

319. AS I explained in my introductory statement the
provisions of the draft resolution do not express the full
range of actions which my Government would wish the
Council to take in the matter. But my delegation has had tc

10 Menachem Begin, 7%eRevolt, Story of the &gun (New York,
Henry Shuman, 1951), p. 3.5.
30

-

L

take into account certain realities. This draft resolution was
not conceived overnight; it represents weeks of patient and
tireless efforts on the part of many delegations, including
those of the Arab bloc; it represents a maximum degree of
agreement among delegations on the action to be taken by
the Security Council at this juncture. It does not satisfy my
delegation; it does not satisfy the Arab countries which are
directly affected by it. But it does mean a small step
forward and it does make a commitment that the question
will be considered further by the Council within the next
two months, when discussions will be resumed in the.light
of the report to be submitted by the Secretary-General.

forward by Ambassador Kosciusko-Morizet as well as by
Ambassador Farah. I think that at this stage there is much
more at stake than scoring some single points on secondary
parts of the draft resolution. We are convinced that at this
stage the wisest course of action to take is to allow the
Security Council to speak with one single voice to show
that the international community is for once united and is
taking a clear, joint position through this body.

320. Members have no doubt taken note of the position of
the representative of the United States on this draft
resolution and on the amendments. He has made it clear
that, while he would be in a position to support the draft
resolution, the United States would have to reconsider its
whole position should the Syrian amendments be pressedto
a vote.

328. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): I have listened
very carefully to the appeals made to me by the representatives of France, Itaiy and Somalia and others, and I
appreciate the very constructive spirit in which they have
approached the problem. In response to their appeal, I
withdraw the second, third and fourth amendments which I
had submitted. However, I should like a vote to be taken on
the first amendment.

327. I think those reasons are of overriding importance,
and I would hope, like the previous speakers, that Ambassador Tomeh will heed our appeal.

321. In those circumstances, and since no principles are
being compromised and it is important that the Council
maintain its unity of action on a delicate and pressing
problem, I appeal to the representative of Syria not to press
his amendments. We know that they have been submitted
in good faith, with the object of clarifying and strengthening the commitment of the Security Council on this
matter. I trust that he will respond favourably to my appeal
so that the Security Council can proceed in unison along
the road charted by resolution 267 (1969).

329. The PRESIDENT: Before the Council proceeds to
the vote, I should like to have a clarification in connexion
with certain remarks made by the representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on paragraph 5 of the
draft resolution.
330. Does the Soviet representative wish to have a
separate vote on that paragraph?
331. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): Yes, Mr. President.

322. I agree with the observations of the representative of
the Soviet Union in that the draft resolution I have
submitted is relatively weak. But an even weaker draft
resolution would be one which caused division in the
Council. My delegation is conscious and appreciative of the
position which the Soviet Union has taken on the Jerusalem
question, a,position which is identical to that taken by my
Government. But this draft resolution has the agreement of
the Arab countries with which both our Governments have
close relations and which are directly affected by the
probIem+

332. The PRESIDENT: Before the Council proceeds to
the vote, I wish to sumrnarize the situation in respect of the
draft resolution before us:
(a) The draft resolution submitted by Somalia is contained in document S/10337;
(b) The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has
proposed an amendment to that draft resolution. It appears
as the first amendment in document A/l 0338/Rev. 1;

323. While my delegation is appreciative of the observations which the representative of the Soviet Union has
made on paragraph 5 of the draft resolution, it is our hope
that he will vote in favour of the draft resolution as a
whole.

(cl In addition, the representative of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics has indicated that he wishes a separate
vote on paragraph 5.
333. It is therefore my intention first to put to the vote
the amendment proposed by the representative of Syria:
then to put to a separate vote paragraph 5; and, finally, to
put to the vote the draft resolution as a whole.

324. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I wished to speak just to associate
myself with the appeal made by the representative of
France and supported by the representatives of the United
Kingdom and Somalia.

334. As there is no objection, I take it that the Council
agrees to the suggested procedure and is ready to proceed
to the vote.

325. I think that Ambassador Tomeh-whom I consider a
very good friend-knows the esteem and the respect I have
for his knowledge, for the way he deals with our affairs in
this body and for whatever he does in the United Nations,
which is a very serious, important and significant contribution to our work,

335. I shall now put to the vote the first amendment
proposed by the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
in document S/10338/Rev.l.

326. If I am associating myself with that appeal it is
because I share completely all the reasons that were put

I?r favour: Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France,
Italy, Japan, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab

A vote was taken by show of hands.

31

Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

that has just been adopted by the Security Council. Our
views on the subject are well known. Nevertheless, I should
like to recall what the former British Foreign Secretary,
Mr. George Brown, as he then was,said in his speech to the
General Assembly on 2 1 June 1967:

Against: None.
Abstaining: Nicaragua, United States of America.

“Reports suggest that one particular point may be of
special urgency. This concerns Jerusalem. I call upon the
State of Israel not to take any steps in relation to
Jerusalem which would conflict with this principle”-that
is, that war should not lead to territorial aggrandizement.
“I say very solemnly to the Government of Israel that, if
they purport to annex the Old City or legislate for its
annexation, they will be taking a step which will isolate
them not only from world opinion but will also lose them
the support that they have.” /1529th pbnaiy meeting,

The amendment was adopted by 13 votes to none, with
2 abstentions.

336. The PRESIDENT: I now turn to paragraph 5. A
separate vote on this paragraph has been requested by the
representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
337. Rule 32 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council provides that ‘Parts of a motion or of a
draft resolution shall be voted on separately at the request
of any representative, unless the original mover objects.”
Therefore, if I hear no objection from the sponsor of the
draft resolution I shall put operative paragraph 5 to a
separate vote.

para. 16.1

342. It has consistently been the position of my Government that no unilateral action should or can change the
status of Jerusalem and that no such action should be
allowed to prejudge the future of that city. In the light of
this attitude, it will be no surprise that my delegation
deplores the way in which Israel has acted to change the
physical and demographic character of Jerusalem since the
June war that we deplore the fact that Israel has failed to
heed earlier resolutions of the United Nations about its
behaviour in East Jerusalem, and that we hope that this
attitude will now change.

338. There being no objection, the Council will now
proceed to vote on paragraph 5 of draft resolution
s/10337.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France,
Italy, Japan, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone, Somalia, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and ‘Northern Ireland, United
States of America.

343. My delegation welcomes the fact that the Council has
been able to agree today, and we sincerely hope that the
Government of Israel will heed the resolution’s call. We also
hope that the Secretary-General will receive the full
co-operation of the Government of Israel in the task he is
given in paragraph 5 of the resolution.

Against: None.
Abstaining: Poland, Syrian Arab Republic, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics.

344. In the course of the debate the representative of
Syria has twice referred to the earlier Security Council
resolutions and quoted, in connexion with them, parts’of
the recent Advisory Opinion of the International Court of
Justice on South West Africa. The attitude of my delegation to these and other aspectsof the Advisory Opinion will
be made clear when the Opinion is under discussion in the
Council. In the meantime I will say only that our viewson
the legal force in terms of the Charter of the earber
resolutions and of the resolution just adopted by the
Council continue to be determined in accordance with the
criteria that we have applied hitherto I

Paragraph 5 was adopted by 12 votes to none, with
3 abstentions.

339. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now proceed to
vote on the draft resolution, as amended, as a whole.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In fnvour: Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France,
Italy, Japan, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.

345. The PRESIDENT:
Jordan.

Against: None.
Abstaining: Syrian Arab Republic.

I call on the representative of

346. Mr. TOUKAN (Jordan): The resolution adopted by
the Security Council tonight is taken by my Government to
represent a landmark, inasmuch as its adoption represents
the collective will of its members, including the permanent
members. There have been many resolutions before by the
General Assembly, representing the conscience of mankind,
and by the Security Council, representing as it does its
effective and executive instrument.

Draft resolution S/10337, as amended, was adopted by
14 votes to none, with I abstention.1 1

340. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those representatives who wish to explain their votes.
341. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): My delegation
had no hesitation in voting in favour of the draft resolution
11 Seeresolution 298 (1971).

347. Israel has chosen on this occasion, as on all previous
occasions, arrogantly to disregard the collective will of
32

il
humanity over an issue that represents a tragedy of
profound and crucial importance to mankind. This unparalleled and bellicose contempt on the part of a Member
State of the United Nations towards the highest authority is
only matched in gravity by its self-bestowed right to alter
drastically and deface the status and character of Jerusalem,
that beautiful, eternal and majestic city of peace. Israel,
therefore, today stands rebuked and isolated as never
before for its onslaught upon a legacy of civilization which
belongs to its indigenous and legitimate inhabitants aswell
as to the whole of mankind.
348. My Government deems it its duty on this solemn
occasion to express to the President and the members of
the Council and to the esteemed Governments they
represent its deepest appreciation and gratitude for the
understanding and concern they have shown towards the
fate of that Holy City. I also wish to thank most deeply the
representative of Somalia, the sponsor of the resolution,
and our brothers and colleagues who have defended with
great conviction the cause of Jerusalem as participants in
the debate.
349. By the same token, in recognition of the fact that the
Security Council is not a debating club but is the highest
executive organ of the United Nations, upon whose power
and prestige the fate of peoples, civilization and peace
depends, it is the earnest hope of my Government, and of
almost all governments of the world as well, that the
Security Council will take whatever executive steps it
deems necessary to ensure compliance with its unanimous
will and to compel Israel to desist forthwith from its frantic
and illegal measures to create a new fait accompli in
Jerusalem.
350. My Government is convinced that, in the absenceof
an affirmative answer signifying Israeli compliance with the
Council’s resolution, the last and only avenue left is the
application of Chapter VII of the Charter, as I requested in
my main statement.
351. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): Once again
we have met to consider Jerusalem, an issue of long
standing in this body and other organs of the United
Nations. In our view, the ultimate status of Jerusalem
should be determined through negotiation and agreement
between the Governments of Israel and Jordan in the
context of an over-all peace settlement, taking into account
the interests of its inhabitants, of the international religious
communities who hold it sacred and of other countries in
the area.
352. In December 1969, Secretary Rogers stated:
‘&Wehave made clear repeatedly in the past two and
one-half years that we cannot accept unilateral actions by
any party to decide the final status of the City.“12
The Secretary then delineated a number of principles which
m our view would provide an equitable framework for a
final Jewish settlement:

(b) There should be open accessto the unified City for
persons of all faiths and nationalities;

fcj Administrative arrangements for the unified City
should take into account the interests of alI its inhabitants
and of the Christian, Jewish and Moslem communities;
(d) There should be roles for both Israel and Jordan in

the civil, economic and religious life of the City.
353. Earlier in 1969 in this very hall, my distinguished
predecessor, Charles Yost, addressed himself more specifically to the kinds of matters which are responsible for our
presence here today. He said-and let me just review it
briefly:
“The expropriation or confiscation of land, the construction of housing on such land, the demolition or
confiscation of buildings, including those having historic
or religious significance, and the application of Israeli law
to occupied portions of the Citv are detrimental to our
common interests in the City.” [1483rd mel?ffug-,
para. 97.1

He noted as well that the United States considers that part
of Jerusalem which came under Israeli control like other
areas occupied by Israel in the June 1967 war, as occupied
territory and thereby subject to the provisions of international law governing the rights and obligations of an
occupying Power.
354. We regret Israel’s failure to acknowledge its obligations under the fourth Geneva Convention as well as its
actions which are contrary to the letter and spirit of this
Convention. We are distressed that the actions of Israel in
the occupied portion of Jerusalem give rise to understandable concern that the eventual disposition of the
occupied section of Jerusalem may be prejudiced. The
report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
Organization, 1970-1971, reflects the concern of many
Governments over changes in the face of that City. We have
on a number of occasions discussed this matter with the
Government of Israel, stressing the need to take more fully
into account the sensitivities and concerns of others.
Unfortunately, the response of the Government of Israel
has been disappointing.
355. All ef us understand, as I indicated earlier in these
remarks, that Jerusalem has a very special place in the
Judaic tradition, one which has a great meaning for Jews
throughout the world. At the same time Jerusalem holds a
special place in the hearts of many millions of Christians
and Moslems throughout the world. In this regard, I want
to state clearly that we believe Israel’s respect for the Holy
Places has indeed been exemplary. But an Israeli occupation
policy made up of unilaterally determined practices cannot
help promote a just and lasting peace any more than that
cause was served by the status quo in Jerusalem prior to
June 1967 which, I want to make clear, we did not like and
we do not advocate the reestablishing.

(0) Jerusalem should ‘be a unified City;
12 See Offkin! Records of the Security Council, iWnty4fth
Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1970, &xxmcnt S/9588.

356. In conclusion, I would. note that the resolution
before US today, as in the past, calls for a report on the
situation in Jerusalem. We have supported this resolution

:
I
1

not because we agree fully with every provision in it; some

elements in it in fact, as I mentioned to my colleague from
Somalia, gave us difficulty. But we have supported this
resolution out of the belief that it wastime to reiterate our
concern that nothing be done in Jerusalem that can
prejudice an ultimate and peaceful solution.
357. Mr. LUDWICZAK (Poland): I have asked to speak in
order to explain the vote of my delegation on the
resolution just adopted by the Council.
358. In view of the considerations that my delegation
presented in a statement earlier today we supported the
draft resolution submitted by the delegation of Somalia,
although we thought that stronger terms and measures
should have been included in it taking into account Israel’s
continuous disregard of the earlier resolutions of the
General Assembly and the unanimous decision of the
Security Council pertaining to the situation in occupied
Jerusalem, For that reason my delegation supported the
first amendment and was prepared to support the other
three amendments introduced by the delegation of the
Syrian Arab Republic which would have improved the text
of the resolution.
359. Concerning my delegation’s abstention on paragraph 5 of the resolution, it was motivated by our deep
conviction that this paragraph, as formulated in the
resolution, does not assert in the way it should the
competence of the Security Council in matters concerning
peace and security and thus detracts from the firmness of
the Council’s eventual action on the matter,
360. Mr. KOCIUSKO-MORIZET (France) (interpretation
Porn French): I should like first of all to thank Ambassador
Tomeh for his understanding, as well as to thank all those
who endorsed my appeal-m particular Ambassador Farah,
for after all this resolution wasthe fruit of his work. 1 had
sought unanimity on the vote and I felt I had to give an
example of that. It is for that reason that I voted in favour
of operative paragraph 5, despite its flaws, On this point I
share some of the reservations that were expressed by
Ambassador Malik and other delegations, although the text
Wasconsiderably improved by the substitution of the words
“in consultation” for the words “after consultation”.
361. Finally, I should like to say that I share the point of
view that wasexpressedby the representative of the United
Kingdom concerning the nature of Security Council resolutions and also with regard to the reservations that he made
concerning the Opinion of the Court.
362. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

I call on the representative of

363. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I should like, first of all, to
express my ‘delegation’s profound regret that the debate
initiated by Jordan’s complaint against Jerusalem’s present
state of integrity, peace and sanctity should end in a
meeting the convening of which constituted an act of
disrespect for the sanctity of the Jewish Sabbath of
Atonement,
364. The debate just concluded has confirmed that Jerusalem, restored to its unity and inviolability, lives today in

peace, prosperity and progress. The rights of its h&bita,,tr
are respected and mamtamed. The international spiritual
interests are safeguarded. Jerusalem’s Holy Placesremain
under the jurisdiction of their religious communities, ney
are fully protected and freedom of accessto them is
ensured to all.
365. However, as I indicated in my statement cl l6
September [ISSOth meeting],
whatever the rights sad
wrongs of the positions expounded in debate, Israelfacesia
the Council foregone conclusions, and in the present
caSe
even a resolution formulated in advance.
366. That resolution has now been declared adopted,
1tis
tantamount to a call to stifle Jerusalem, to smotherits
growth and development. Israel’s attitude towardsit willbe
the same as the attitude Security Council membersWeald
adopt to a resolution containing a call to stifle Wasbiagton,
Moscow, London, Paris or any other capital of a State
Member of the United Nations.

367. The resolution calls upon Israel to refrain from steps
that may purport to change the status of Jerusalem,‘lhere
is only one status of Jerusalem which is legitimate, moral
and just. It is Jerusalem’s natural status, a city united aad
peaceful; its life and development normal and unscatherJ;its
sanctity vindicated; the rights of its inhabitants secure,
Aad
that status could not be changed by nineteen yearsof
mutilation, destruction and sacrilege, resulting from Jot.
dan’s aggression against Israel and Jerusalem in 1948,‘But
status cannot be modified by politically motivated resolu.
tions. It is that status that Israel will uphold and preserve
in
its capital, for the good of all its inhabitants, for theglory
of all faiths.
368. The Security Council’s resolution reflects, among
others, the views of such States as Somalia, its sponsor,and
the Syrian Arab Republic, which tried to make it evenmore
impalatable-States which openly deny Israel’s right to
independence and sovereignty. There are viewsdeserving
of
greater esteem than those. There are views more in
conformity with international law and morality than those.
The Bible states, in verses3 and 6 of psalm 122:
“Jerusalem
together.”

is builded

as a city that is compact

“Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper
that love thee.”
It is this view that shall prevail.
369. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): I tmnkthatlhe
fact that my very brief explanation of vote by chance
comes after the statement-traditional
by now-of the
Israeli representative gives more meaning to what I am
going to say.
370. My delegation abstained from the vote for the
reasons we explained in our statement today before*e
Council, We believe that the Security Council shouldhave
started from paragraphs 6 and 7 of its resokrtion
267 (1969), adopted unanimously by it. On the otherhand,

Our abstention should not be construed to mean that we do
nQc support what our delegation believes to be constructive
irr this resolution, as we have stated unequivocally during
the course of the debate.
371. The PRESIDENT: Before I conclude this meeting, I
alQtld like to take note of the fact that the representative
Of Israel has expressed his regret that this meeting of the
cWncil should have taken place on a holy day of his
religion. At the same time I must remind the members of
*e Council that in extraordinary circumstances the Council

sometimes meets on Sunday, which most nations observe as
a holiday.
372. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): Mr. President,
with regard to your reference to the sabbath, I wish to
remind the Council that its last meeting was held on a
Friday, the holy day of Moslem States which are represented in the Council-Somalia and Syria-and of at least
five or six other Arab States which took part in the debate.
The meeting rose at Il.15 pm.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Genew.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

Ler publications
der
d&posit&es
du monde
Notions
Unies,
Section
KAK

COMO

ilOJY’-lHTb

CONSEGUIR

Nations
Unier
sont
entier.
Informez-vous
der ventes, New York
M3AAHGIR

PUBLICACIONES

from bookstores
to: United
Naiionr,

and

DES NATIONS

UNIES

en vente
duns
les libroirier
auprkr
de votre librairie
ou
ou Genbve.

OPTAHHSAUHH

in United

Nations,

New’York

Price:

06bEAHHEHHblX

DE LAS NAC’IONES

Los publicacioner
de las Nociones
Unidas
est6n
en todos
porter
del mundo.
Conrulte
o IU librero
Ventor,
Nuevo
York o Ginebre.

Litho

distributors
Sales Section,

throughout
New York

et ICI q gencer
q drersez-vow
6:

HALlHti

UNIDAS

en venta en librerior
y cosas distribuidorar
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas,
Seccibn

$U.S. 2.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

de

82085-August

1973-2,050
