VIII.

215

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

the purpose for which they are required in the preparatory process, but
which in any event should not be later than eight weeks before the opening
of the conference;
(d) All papers or reports received, as well as summaries or abstracts
thereof, should be listed by the Secretariat in an information document and
grouped in various ways, such as alphabetically by country, region or by
subject;
(e) National papers or reports should not be redistributed at the conference site, if the conference is held away from established headquarters;
instead, a library should be established at such a conference site which
shall contain in single copies all relevant material pertaining to the
conference;
(j) The Secretary-General should keep the total number of copies
printed for this type of documentation under constant review and adjust
it to a realistic level of demand.
4. Submissions by non-governmental organizations shall bear a uniform cover page with a document symbol and number provided by the
Secretariat. It shall be the responsibility of each submitting non-governmental organization to make sure that this cover page appears on each
copy of the report. The Secretariat shall then distribute such a report if it
is submitted in a sufficient number of copies. Reports by non-governmental
organizations will not be translated or reproduced by the Secretariat, nor
will they be transported to the conference site by the Secretariat if the
conference is held away from established headquarters. Furthermore, a
deadline shall be set for the presentation of such reports to the Secretariat.
A list of all documents presented by non-governmental organizations will
then be issued by the Secretariat.

for I 982 and supplementary expenses of $147,000 (net) for
1981 for the administration of the Fund.

93rd plenary meetinK
10 December /98/
B

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the actuarial situation of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund,
Welcoming the intention of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board to undertake a comprehensive analysis of all
possible measures to improve the actuarial balance of the
Fund,
I. Requests the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Board, in co-operation with the International Civil Service
Commission where necessary, to consider alternative courses
of action that might be taken:
2. Further requests that the analysis to be undertaken
take into account all the views expressed during the discussion in the Fifth Committee 30 and that it be submitted
to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.

93rd plenary meetinK
/0 December /98/
C

36/118.

Report of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board
A

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Board to the General Assembly and to the
member organizations of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund for 1981, 27 chapter III of the report of the
International Civil Service Commission 28 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, 29

The General Assembly,
Noting that no provision exists under the Regulations and
Rules of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund with
respect to the financial obligations of a pensioner to his or
her spouse or former spouse.
Concerned that this may give rise to serious injustice and
hardship,
Requests the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board
to study, at its thirtieth session, the desirability and feasibility of measures to deal with such situations and to make
recommendations thereon to the General Assembly at its
thirty-seventh session.

93rd plenary meetinK
10 December 198/
SUPPLEMENTARY MEASURES

Decides, with effect from 1 January 1982, to revise the
pension adjustment system contained in General Assembly
resolution 35/215 of 17 December 1980, in accordance with
the recommendations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board contained in section III.H of its report to the
Assembly for 1981;

EMERGENCY FUND

Authorizes the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board
to supplement the voluntary contributions to the Emergency
Fund for a further period of one year by an amount not
exceedini?; $100,000;

III
ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES

Approves expenses, chargeable directly to the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, totalling $5,456,900 (net)
27
2

"

29

Ibid., Supplement No. 9 (A/36/9 and Corr. I).
Ibid., ::iupplement No. 30 (A/36/JU and Corr. I).
A/36/624.

36/119.

Investments of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund
A

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 34/222 A of 20 December 1979
and 35/2 I 6 A of 17 December I 980.
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the investments of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund: 31
2. Endorses the policy of diversification of the investments
of the Fund in developing countries, wherever this serves
the interests of the participants and beneficiaries, in accordance with the four criteria of safety, profitability, liquidity and convertibility;
3. Reaffirms its confidence in the Secretary-General as
trustee of the assets of the Fund.

93rd plenary meetinK
10 December /98/
·'° See Official Records of th,, General Assemhlv. Thirtv-sixth Session.
Fifth Committee. 40th, 48th and 50th meetings; and· ihid .. f'ifth Committee.
Sessional Fascicle. corrigendum.
" A/C.5/36/12.
