172

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session
4

and Northern lreland, as the administering Powers,
relating to developments in the New Hebrides,
Conscious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to the New Hebrides,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved
as a consequence of previous visiting missions to colonial Territories and reiterating its conviction that
the dispatch of such a mission to the New Hebrides is
essential for securing adequate and first-hand information in regard to the conditions prevailing in the Territory and to the views, wishes and aspirations of the
people therein with respect to their future status,
Taking note of the joint commitment of the two
administering Powers to bring the Territory to independence by 1980, 5
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the New Hebrides; 6
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Territory to self-determination and independence
in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms the territorial integrity and national
unity of the New Hebrides;
4. Welcomes the joint commitment of the two administering Powers to independence for the New
Hebrides, as reiterated in their letter dated 11 April
1978 to the Secretary-General, 5 and urges them to
continue their efforts towards the early independence
of the Territory, in consultation with all the people
of the Territory;
5. Requests the administering Powers to take all
appropriate measures to strengthen the economy of
the New Hebrides, to continue taking steps to unify
the administration of the Territory and to work out
concrete programmes of assistance and economic development;
6. Urges the administering Powers to continue their
efforts, in co-operation with the people of the Territory, to promote a unitary system of education;
7. Requests the administering Powers to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national
life of the Territory;
8. Urges the administering Powers, in co-operation
with the Government of the New Hebrides, to safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of their natural resources by
taking effective measures which guarantee the rights
of the people to own and dispose of those natural
resources and to establish and maintain control of
their future development;
9. Requests the administering Powers, in particular, to take all necessary measures to safeguard the
full enjoyment by the people of the Territory of their
4 Ibid., 24th meeting, paras. 23-30, and 32nd meeting,
para. 57.
5 See A/33/80.
6 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/33/23/Rev.1), vol. III,
chap. XIII.

marine resources, through such measures as guarding
against over-exploitation and contamination, and to
ensure that the rights of the people with regard to
ownership of land are fully safeguarded and respected;
10. Requests the Governments of France and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to facilitate the early dispatch of a United Nations
visiting mission to the New Hebrides;
11. Requests the Special Committee to continue
to seek the best ways and means for the implementation of the Declaration with respect to the New
Hebrides, including the early dispatch of a visiting
mission to the Territory, and to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
81 st plenary meeting
13 December 1978

33/31.

Question of Western Sahara
A

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Western Sahara,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Having considered the relevant chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples,7
Having heard the statements on the subject of
Western Sahara, including the statements by the representative of the Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n
de Saguia cl-Hamra y de Rio de Oro, 8
Recalling the conclusions of the 1975 United Nations Visiting Mission to Western Sahara, 0
Recalling the advisory opinion delivered by the
International Court of Justice on 16 October 1975 10
on the question of Western Sahara, particularly in
relation to the principle of the right of the people
of Western Sahara to self-determination,
Bearing in mind the profound concern of the United
Nations, the Organization of African Unity and the
non-aligned countries regarding the decolonization of
Western Sahara and the right of the people of that
Territory to self-determination,
Recalling its resolution 32/ 19 of 11 November 1977
regarding co-operation between the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity,
Recalling the decision of the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its thirteenth ordinary session, held at
Port Louis from 2 to 6 July 1976, to hold an extra1 Ibid.,

vo.J. II, chap. IX.
Thirty-third Session, Fourth Committee, 22nd meeting, paras. 78-93. and 30th meeting, paras. 57-65. For the full
text, see A/C.4/33/L.22 and L.31.
9 Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/
Rev.1), vol. III, chap. XIII, para. 11.
10 Western Sahara, Advisory Opinion, I.CJ. Reports 1975,
p. 12. For the note of transmittal to the members of the
General Assembly, see A/10300.
B Jbid.,

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

ordinary session devoted to the question of Western
Sahara, 11
Taking note of the decision of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its fifteenth ordinary session, held at
Khartoum from 18 to 22 July 1978, to establish an
ad hoe committee of Heads of State to consider all
the data on the question of Western Sahara, including
the exercise of the right of the people of that Territory
to self-determination, 12
Reiterating its fervent hope that, by the time of the
thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly, the
Organization of African Unity will have found, pursuant to the resolutions and decisions which it adopted
at its thirteenth, 11 fourteenth 13 and fifteenth 12 ordinary
sessions on the question of Western Sahara, a solution
to this problem in accordance with the right of peoples
to self-determination set forth in resolution 1514
(XV),

Welcoming the unilateral cease-fire decision taken
on 12 July 1978 by the Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro, with a view
to promoting a drive towards peace in Western Sahara,
1. Reaffirms its commitment to the principle of
self-determination of peoples in accordance with the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people
of Western Sahara to self-determination and independence;
3. Reaffirms the responsibility of the United Nations with regard to the decolonization of Western
Sahara, in accordance with the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and of the Declaration;
4. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to continue to keep developments in this matter under active review with a view
to the full and speedy implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and to report thereon
to the Assembly at its thirty-fourth session;
5. Requests the Administrative Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity to keep the
Secretary-General of the United Nations informed of
the progress achieved with regard to the implementation of the decisions of the Organization of African
Unity concerning Western Sahara;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to submit a report on the question of Westem Sahara to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
8 I st plenary meeting
13 December 1978
B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960,
11 See A/31/136-S/12141, annex II, resolution AHG/Res.81
(XIII). For the printed text, see Official Records of the
Security Council, Thirty-first Year, Supplement for July,
August and September 1976.
12 A/33/235 and Corr.I, annex II, resolution AHG/Res.92

(XV).
13 A/32/310, annex II, AHG/Dec.110 (XIV).

173

Recalling its relevant resolutions and those of the
Organization of African Unity concerning the question
of Western Sahara,
Considering the decision of the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its thirteenth ordinary session, held at
Port Louis from 2 to 6 July 1976, to hold an extraordinary session devoted to the question of Western
Sahara,14
Considering also the decision of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its fifteenth ordinary session, held at
Khartoum from 18 to 22 July 1978, to establish an
ad hoe committee of Heads of State to consider all
the data on the question of Western Sahara,1 5
Recalling the part of the Political Declaration
adopted by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State
and Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976, relating to
Western Sahara, 16
Taking note of the appeal addressed to States Members of the United Nations by the current Chairman
of the Organization of African Unity, 17
Recalling its resolution 32/19 of 11 November
l 977, regarding co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity,
l. Takes note of the decision of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity at its fifteenth ordinary session to
establish an ad hoe committee of Heads of State;
2. Expresses its confidence that the ad hoe committee will consider all the data on the question of
Western Sahara with a view to convening an extraordinary summit meeting of the Organization of African
Unity;
3. Invites the Organization of African Unity to
take prompt action to find a just and equitable settlement of the question of Western Sahara;
4. Appeals to all States in the region to refrain
from any action that might impede the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity to arrive at a just and
peaceful solution of the problem;
5. Requests the Administrative Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity to inform the
Secretary-General of the United Nations of the results
achieved by the ad hoe committee and invites the
Secretary-General of the United Nations to report
thereon to the General Assembly.
81 st plenary meeting
13 December 1978
33/32.

Question of American Samoa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
14 See A/31/136-S/12141,
annex II, resolution AHO/
Res.81 (XIII). For the printed text, see Official Records of the
Security Council, Thirty-first Year, Supplement for July, August
and September 1976.
15 A/33/235 and Corr.1, annex II, resolution AHG/Res.92

(XV).
16 A/31/197, annex I, para. 35.
17 See the letter dated 7 November 1978 from the Permanent

Representative of the Sudan (A/33/364).
