United Nations

A/RES/61/272

General Assembly

Distr.: General
10 July 2007

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 63 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 29 June 2007
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/61/L.63)]

61/272. Commemorative high-level plenary meeting devoted to the
follow-up to the outcome of the special session on children
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Declaration and the Plan of Action contained in the final
document of the special session of the General Assembly on children, entitled “A
world fit for children”, 1 and recognizing that their implementation is a major
contribution to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and to
protecting the rights and promoting the well-being of children,
Recalling the provisions of the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 2 which reflect
the commitment of Member States to protect the rights and interests of children,
Acknowledging that the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 3 the most
universally embraced human rights treaty in history, and the Optional Protocols
thereto, 4 contain a comprehensive set of international legal standards for the
protection and well-being of children,
Recalling its resolution 58/282 of 9 February 2004 devoted to the follow-up to
the outcome of the special session on children,
Recalling also its resolution 57/270 B of 23 June 2003 on the integrated and
coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields,
Bearing in mind that, by 2007, several of the time-bound and quantified
commitments set out in the Declaration and the Plan of Action should have been met
and that other targets are to be met by 2010 and 2015,
Decides to convene a commemorative high-level plenary meeting to
1.
evaluate progress made in the implementation of the Declaration and the Plan of

_______________
1

Resolution S-27/2, annex.
See resolution 60/1.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
4
Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531; and ibid., vol. 2173, No. 27531.
2

06-51069

A/RES/61/272

Action contained in the document entitled “A world fit for children”1 on 11 and
12 December 2007;
2.
Encourages all Member States and observers to be represented and to
address the commemorative high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly at
the highest possible level;
Decides that the commemorative high-level plenary meeting will
3.
comprise plenary meetings and two thematic interactive round tables;
4.
Also decides that the President of the General Assembly, the President of
the Economic and Social Council, the Secretary-General and the Executive Director
of the United Nations Children’s Fund will address the commemorative high-level
plenary meeting at its opening plenary meeting;
Invites intergovernmental organizations and entities that have observer
5.
status in the General Assembly, relevant entities of the United Nations system and
non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council, as well as those accredited to or in a collaborative relationship or
partnership with the United Nations Children’s Fund, to participate in the
commemorative high-level plenary meeting;
Decides that a girl and a boy, selected through a process led by the
6.
President of the General Assembly and organized by the United Nations Children’s
Fund, and a representative of a non-governmental organization in consultative status
with the Economic and Social Council will address the commemorative high-level
plenary meeting at its closing plenary meeting;
Requests the President of the General Assembly, following consultations
7.
to be held with all Member States no later than 30 September 2007, with due regard
to gender balance and equitable geographical representation, to draw up and
circulate a list of three speakers for the closing plenary meeting in accordance with
paragraph 6 above and a list of twenty children and twenty representatives of nongovernmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council, as well as those accredited to or in a collaborative relationship or
partnership with the United Nations Children’s Fund, who will participate in the two
round tables on the understanding that ten children and ten representatives of nongovernmental organizations will participate in each of the round tables and that nongovernmental organizations in a collaborative relationship or partnership with the
United Nations Children’s Fund will be considered on a no-objection basis for a
final decision by the General Assembly;
Also requests the President of the General Assembly, following
8.
consultations with all Member States and with support from the United Nations
Children’s Fund, to finalize organizational arrangements for the commemorative
high-level plenary meeting, including the assignment of participants and the
identification of themes and chairpersons for the two interactive round tables;
Encourages Member States and observers to include children and young
9.
people in their delegations participating in the commemorative high-level plenary
meeting;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive analytical
report on progress achieved and challenges remaining in implementing the
commitments set out in the Declaration and the Plan of Action at least six weeks
prior to its consideration by the General Assembly at its sixty-second session;

2

A/RES/61/272

11. Decides that the chairpersons of the interactive round tables will present
summaries of the discussions at the closing plenary meeting;
12. Requests the President of the General Assembly to hold open
consultations with Member States, the Observer State and observers in order to
prepare, as an outcome document to be adopted at the commemorative high-level
plenary meeting, a brief declaration reaffirming the commitments to the full
implementation of the Declaration and the Plan of Action contained in the document
entitled “A world fit for children”;
13. Decides that the arrangements for the commemorative high-level plenary
meeting will in no way create a precedent for other similar events of the General
Assembly.
104th plenary meeting
29 June 2007

3
