S/PV.8547

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8547th meeting

Wednesday, 12 June 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Elé Ela
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Ugarelli
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2019/454)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-17256 (E)
*1917256*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.8547

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.

Council expressed its impatience and frustration with
the delay in the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.

The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2019/454)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Mali to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I warmly welcome His
Excellency Mr. Tiébilé Dramé, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/454, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Annadif.
Mr. Annadif (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on presiding over this meeting.
We assure you of our full support.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to take this opportunity to greet
and commend the Ambassador of Indonesia on his
country’s presidency of the Council during the month
of May.
(spoke in French)
If I may, I would further like to take this opportunity
to greet and welcome Mr. Tiébilé Dramé, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali.
It is an honour and pleasure for me to be before
the Security Council to introduce the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2019/454) on the situation in Mali,
at a time when that country is entering a critical time
in its peace process. The Council renewed the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in June last
year by adopting resolution 2423 (2018), in which the
2/25

12/06/2019

The Council will also recall that, in its presidential
statement S/PRST/2019/2 of 3 April, the Security
Council stressed the urgent need for significant progress
to be made, including with respect to institutional
reforms, the redeployment of the Malian defence and
security forces in the north and the establishment of the
northern economic development zone. The continued
willingness of the signatory parties to proceed with
the implementation of the agreement still offers real
opportunities to advance the cause of peace in Mali
in the coming months, despite the accumulated and
ongoing delays.
The significant good offices efforts to promote
Malian ownership of the agreement and build trust
between the parties should be continued and encouraged.
Those good offices laid the foundation of the signature of
the peace agreement, one of the achievements of which
was to extend the implementation of the agreement to
movements that now uphold it even though they may
have split from their original groups.
The same efforts have led to the establishment of
a group within Parliament to specifically monitor the
implementation of the agreement. One cause for regret
is the lack of results regarding the inclusion of women
in the implementation structures of the agreement,
while the greater involvement of civil society
organizations in the public sphere is to be welcomed.
The latter, under MINUSMA’s impetus, have agreed
to establish observatories to monitor the actions of the
institutions set up under the agreement, in particular
the regional assemblies.
The peace process in Mali entered a new phase with
the appointment of a new Prime Minister, Mr. Boubou
Cisse, on 22 April and the signature of the political
agreement on governance between the presidential
majority and the main democratic opposition party
on 2 May. That was followed by the formation on
5 May of an open Government, of which the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation,
Mr. Тiébilé Dramé, who is present here today, is a
perfect representative. That development, which
prioritizes the implementation of the agreement, also
paves the way for the creation of a broader political
consensus around political and institutional reforms.
The consensus reached on the extension of the National
19-17256

12/06/2019

The situation in Mali

Assembly’s mandate is an indication of that willingness
to move forward.
In the same vein, we note with satisfaction that the
bill to establish the northern economic development
zone has already been passed by the Council of
Ministers and sent to the National Assembly. The
political agreement on governance of May 2 also tasks
the Government with arranging an inclusive political
dialogue, the goal of which will be to enable discussion
among Malians with a view to forging a shared vision on
the major challenges facing the country. I am sure that
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, who is with us here
today, will give a more precise account of the evolution
of the process and its most noteworthy aspects.
In parallel with those important political
developments, the redeployment of the reconstituted
and reformed defence and security forces is making
encouraging headway. To date, nearly 1,400 troops
from the Platform coalition and Coordination
des mouvements de l’Azawad of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism will begin training for
their ultimate integration into the Malian defence
and security forces. If we add their 600 Operational
Coordination Mechanism colleagues from the Malian
armed forces, we will have nearly 2,000 troops, which
will represent the kernel of the reconstituted Malian
defence and security forces and will gradually be
redeployed to the north.
I note and commend the effective integration
into their original units of nearly 600 former Malian
armed forces combatants who had deserted following
the events of 2012. The fraternal welcome extended to
them by their brothers in arms upon their return proves
that reconciliation among Malians is possible.
The effective return of the Administration to the
north, a guarantee of the restoration of basic social
services, will enable the population to benefit from
the peace dividend, one of the key objectives of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
The glimmer of hope on the horizon cannot be
transformed into a real opportunity without accelerated
control of the security situation, particularly in the
centre. What happened on Sunday night into Monday
on 9 and 10 June, in the village of Sobamé-Da in the
Mopti region, reminds us of the gravity of the situation,
in particular following the massacres of Koulogon-Peul
and Ogossagou, respectively, on 1 January and
23 March, in the same region of Mopti, unfortunately.

S/PV. 8547

It was precisely after the Ogossagou tragedy that
MINUSMA, as part of its mandate to protect civilians,
mounted Operation Oryx, in coordination with
Operation Kapigdou of the Malian defence and security
forces, in the central part of the country.
That emergency operation is based on the protection
of civilians and is structured around five pillars:
first, increasing patrols to ensure people’s physical
protection through deterrence and threat anticipation;
secondly, deploying investigation teams and supporting
the judicial chain of the Malian authorities in order to
combat impunity; thirdly, increasing awareness through
ongoing communication with the institutions and local
communities in the central Mali; fourthly, coordinating
with humanitarian and development partners by
expanding secure spaces; and fifthly, engaging in
mediation activities to promote reconciliation and
social cohesion among the people.
The ongoing vicious cycle of violence must stop
lest everyone be tempted to take the law into their own
hands. It is worth emphasizing the importance of the
fight against impunity. In that connection, I congratulate
and encourage MINUSMA’s human rights division,
which is carrying out considerable investigative work to
establish the facts and make relevant recommendations
to the Government, without forgetting its multifaceted
support for Malian judicial institutions, particularly the
specialized judicial police.
In the same spirit, we welcome the assignment of a
public prosecutor to Mopti and the recent arrests made
by the Malian State. We hope that the arrests will bring
the perpetrators to justice soon. We also welcome the
establishment by the Government of a coordination
unit for all security initiatives in central Mali. The
Minister here in the Council today is responsible for
its establishment and will, I am sure, provide us with
details. To consolidate those efforts, we have adopted
an integrated United Nations strategy with the United
Nations country teams and MINUSMA, in line with the
integrated strategic framework. Since 28 May, there is
a military sector specifically dedicated to central Mali.
Those two new elements will have a multiplier effect on
our action in the days to come.
In terms of uniformed components, we are more
proactive than ever before. A few years ago, the majority
of our personnel were assigned to the protection of our
camps. Today, the situation has completely reversed
in that at least 70 per cent of them are now on the

19-172563/25

S/PV.8547

The situation in Mali

ground, mainly for protecting civilians or escorting
supply convoys through coordinated initiatives with
our partners, leaving only nearly 30 per cent to secure
our facilities.
Parallel to these efforts in the centre, we are
maintaining the presence of MINUSMA in the north,
particularly to accelerate the implementation of the
agreement. I take this opportunity to recognize the
outstanding work of Operation Barkhane at our side.
It is also critical to take into account the resumption
of the operations of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel earlier this year. We continue to develop
our logistical support in accordance with resolution
2391 (2017). A specific unit is being set up to that
end, but, as we have often pointed out, geographical
limitations hinder the effectiveness of our support.
In addition, coordination between MINUSMA and
representatives of the international community based
in Bamako — including Algeria as head of mediation,
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the European Union — remains our
main priority. That close coordination has proved its
worth at critical moments, as reflected in the results
achieved in the 2018 presidential elections. That is also
true of the Agreement Monitoring Committee, whose
decisions are now binding, and in efforts to encourage
full Malian ownership of the agreement.
In order to maintain this momentum, several of the
options highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
are aimed at adjusting the composition of MINUSMA’s
civilian and uniformed components so as to promote
greater mobility. That is the reason behind the proposals
for the reassignment of certain specialized units and
the possibility of transferring certain camps, starting
with Diabaly, to the Malian authorities, as mentioned in
the Secretary-General’s report.
In adopting resolution 2423 (2018) in June of last
year, the Council reinvigorated MINUSMA by setting
clear objectives and calling for a series of adjustments
to carry out its mandate. The results of that initiative
are now a reality. As the Secretary-General notes in his
report, the peace process in Mali is at a decisive turning
point thanks to that initiative and the commitment of
the signatory parties to the agreement, as well as that of
the other partners I mentioned earlier. Only the support
of the Council through the extension of MINUSMA’s
mandate will make it possible to consolidate those
achievements at both the political and security levels.
4/25

I once again
renewed support.

12/06/2019

thank

the

Council

The President (spoke
Mr. Annadif for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

for
I

its

thank

I now give the floor to Council members who wish
to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Annadif, for his very
enlightening presentation and for his exemplary work.
I also welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali, Mr. Tiébilé Dramé,
to the Council. It is an honour to be here with him and
we appreciate his presence as an important gesture.
I would like to begin my statement by expressing
our deepest condolences to the Government and the
people of Mali in the aftermath of a despicable attack
that once again struck the country’s central region.
France will stand resolutely by Mali’s side throughout
this new ordeal. I take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the memory of all the civilians, State officials and
members of the national and international armed forces
who lost their lives in the terrorist and intercommunal
violence that, unfortunately, affects Mali on almost a
daily basis.
The escalation of violence that central Mali is
experiencing today requires us to bestir ourselves and
take urgent action, especially to prevent new massacres
from occurring. The Malian authorities on the front
line in this regard and we encourage them to take all
necessary measures to prosecute the perpetrators
of these crimes, disarm the militia and engage in
meaningful intercommunity dialogue without delay. In
the longer term, only the re-establishment of the State’s
authority and presence, the restoration of basic social
services and genuine efforts to combat impunity will be
able to restore peace in the region. France will propose a
draft press statement containing these various elements
at the end of this meeting.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) has a
significant role to play in accompanying and supporting
the Malian authorities in the centre of the country. In
this regard, I wish to commend the important steps
undertaken by the Mission since the adoption of
resolution 2423 (2018) in June last year. We hope that
MINUSMA will continue to bolster its support in the
19-17256

12/06/2019

The situation in Mali

region, including in helping to redeploy the State and
protect civilians. We must also bear in mind that the
Mission’s work is not intended to act as a substitute for
the primary responsibility of the Malian authorities,
and that it can be effective only if it is based on the
redoubled commitment of the latter. We must also
ensure that MINUSMA has the adequate means at its
disposal to meet the needs that exist on the ground.
The implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali in the north remains a
prerequisite for the stabilization of Mali and the region.
Unprecedented progress has been made in recent
months, including with regard to the latest demands
made by the Council in its presidential statement
S/PRST/2019/2 of April. The inclusive national
dialogue to be held in the near future is also a good
sign regarding consensual progress in the conduct of
the Government’s political and institutional reforms,
some of which relate to the agreement.
The progress made to date, however, remains largely
insufficient and needs to be rapidly consolidated. That
is why we encourage the Malian parties to adopt an
updated road map, articulated around a limited number
of priorities accompanied by binding deadlines, as
soon as possible. I refer in particular to continuing
the constitutional review process, developing a plan
for the redeployment of the reconstituted Malian
armed forces in the north, making tangible progress
in decentralization and effectively operationalizing
the northern economic development zone. The Council
must continue to define precise expectations on these
key points for the implementation of the agreement
through benchmarks. It must also be made clear that
the non-implementation of these benchmarks comes at
a cost, including possible sanctions.
MINUSMA continues and will continue to play
a vital role in the stability of Mali, as recalled by the
Secretary-General in his recent report (S/2019/454) and
by the Special Representative in his briefing today. We
welcome in particular the Mission’s efforts in recent
months to reinforce its robust posture and to improve
coordination between its various pillars and interaction
with the country team, as well as to cooperate with other
security elements deployed on the ground. I believe that
these efforts have been widely recognized.
In the difficult context we are witnessing, we
believe that the renewal of the Mission’s mandate for
an additional 12 months, while maintaining unchanged

S/PV. 8547

parameters, is absolutely essential. We wish to take
advantage of this in order to maintain heightened
pressure in favour of implementing the peace
agreement, to strengthen the Mission’s actions in the
centre in support of the efforts of the Malian authorities
and to continue developing partnerships with the other
security elements cited in resolution 2423 (2018). We
also fully support the implementation of the options
for the Mission’s adaptation, as proposed by the
Secretary-General, which will continue to enhance the
effectiveness of the Mission’s work. We will, of course,
continue to encourage efforts to reduce security threats
to MINUSMA while preserving sufficient flexibility
and agility in its posture. Finally, we will seek to promote
the adoption of a clear, realistic and concise mandate,
in line with the recommendations made within the
framework of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
The Council’s responsibility is to continue
supporting Mali along the road to peace, in the
understanding that the international community cannot
serve as a replacement for the efforts of the Malian
authorities, which are indispensable in driving Mali
towards lasting peace and stability. That is the spirit
of the draft resolution France will be working on until
the end of this month, together with its partners in the
Council, in order to renew the MINUSMA mandate. You
may rest assured, Sir, of my country’s full commitment
to that end.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before I give
the floor to the next representative, I realize that this
may be the final statement that Ambassador Delattre
delivers to the Council before he leaves us in a couple
of days. I speak on behalf of all Council members when
I say that he should be proud of what he has achieved in
an outstanding professional manner. We congratulate
him on his new post and wish him every success in his
future endeavours.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): We thank
Special Representative Annadif for his briefing today
and we welcome Foreign Minister Dramé to the Council
today. We very much look forward to working with him
and with Mali’s new Government.
Every quarter, we sit in this Chamber and listen
to how the security situation in the centre of Mali
continues to deteriorate. We hear how violence against
civilians surpassed the previous quarter’s reports. We
hear how attacks against United Nations peacekeepers
and international forces remain the norm and we hear

19-172565/25

S/PV.8547

The situation in Mali

worries about how such volatility is spilling over and
destabilizing other Sahel countries.
In this reporting period alone, 333 civilians were
killed in intercommunal violence, with the latest
massacre being the deadliest incident in Mali since
2012. That is a sharp increase from the 43 civilians
killed in intercommunal violence during this reporting
period last year. Additionally, 148 peacekeepers have
been killed in hostile action since the establishment
of the peacekeeping mission. The United States pays
tribute to those who have paid the ultimate price and to
all the soldiers, civilians and their families who make
sacrifices daily in order to bring peace and stability
to the people of Mali. We offer our condolences to the
families of the most recent victims.
In addition to hearing how things continue to
grow worse, we hear how there is little progress
between the Government of Mali and the signatory
armed groups in implementing the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Four years after
signing the agreement, it seems as though the parties
and the Government are always on the verge of a new
understanding or a road map that will lead to progress on
the agreement’s signature political and security tasks.
As we have said before, the status quo is
not acceptable. At the Council’s March meeting
(see S/PV.8497) and in the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2019/2) that followed, the Council made
clear its dissatisfaction with the signatory parties’
performance on the benchmarks in resolution 2423
(2018). The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) is our opportunity to demonstrate
that frustration and make changes based on evidence
and analysis. It is also an opportunity to show the world
that the people of Mali deserve better. Considering the
stark realities of the political and security dynamics in
Mali, the new mandate must achieve four key objectives:
pressure, balance, transition and performance.
First, we must continue to apply pressure on
the signatory armed groups and the Government to
implement the peace agreement. One way to do that is
by strengthening the Council’s tools to respond when
signatory parties fail to meet the key benchmarks in a
mandate. Additional pressure can and should be applied
to ensure that inaction and obstruction have specific
and concrete consequences.
6/25

12/06/2019

Secondly, the mandate must augment MINUSMA’s
single strategic priority to support implementation of
the agreement with a second strategic priority that will
adequately address the worsening security situation in
the centre, focused on stabilization and the protection
of civilians. Nevertheless, we expect the Government
to do all it can, as soon as it can, in the centre to be the
enduring security and governance solution there and
for all of Mali.
Thirdly, it is essential to focus on the longterm transition, or else remain in a reactive posture.
MINUSMA’s collaboration with the country team on the
integrated strategic framework was an important step
in that regard, but this mandate should further empower
the civilian and military leadership of MINUSMA to
begin identifying a plan for the Mission’s transition
and departure and for other capable entities such as the
United Nations country team, the Government of Mali,
the Malian security forces and the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel to assume a greater role in
political, security and stability tasks.
Lastly, regarding performance, the political and
security realities demand that MINUSMA focus its
efforts on the peace agreement and on the centre.
This mandate must streamline its tasks to enable
MINUSMA to do that effectively. It must request that
the Secretariat increase its effectiveness in repatriating
and remediating poorly performing troops and work to
provide MINUSMA with capable, flexible forces with
minimal caveats. The mandate must set paradigms in
that regard so as to ensure that MINUSMA receives
adequately trained and equipped troops.
The Security Council must have the political will
and vision to adjust mission mandates as a result of
fact-based analysis. We cannot allow another year to
pass and be no closer to seeing progress on the core
political and security tasks of the agreement. The peace
agreement addresses important drivers of conflict, and
its implementation will have a positive impact on the
lives of Malians. We must expect political courage from
stakeholders on all sides to work together, break the
status quo and achieve real and lasting positive changes.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome Mr. Тiébilé Dramé, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mali, to today’s meeting, and we thank
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing.
19-17256

12/06/2019

The situation in Mali

At the outset, we would like to express our
condolences to the Government and the people of Mali
regarding the terrible tragedy in the village of SobaméDa, where approximately 100 innocent civilians were
killed as a result of an inter-ethnic clash on 10 June.
We hope that those responsible for it will be found
and duly punished. That tragic event, like the equally
tragic attack on the village of Ogossagou in March,
demonstrated once again the magnitude and gravity
of the threats facing the country and the region, as
well as their vulnerability to the destabilizing forces
represented by terrorists, organized criminals and
ideological extremists.
The developments in the situation in Mali in
general are very worrying. We have seen that the
number of terrorist attacks on both military personnel
and civilians has increased in the past few months.
Human rights violations are rampant. In central Mali,
inter-ethnic and intercommunal conflicts continue to
simmer and sometimes flare up. It appears that the
issue here is not merely the centuries-old differences
between the nomadic and settled populations. Militants
are intentionally trying to gain the support of local
residents by skilfully playing on existing disputes. It
will be crucial to restore the Government presence
there if those challenges are to be dealt with.
The worsening humanitarian situation is extremely
worrying, and the number of people in need of assistance
is increasing. We urge all external donors to fund the
humanitarian appeal as quickly as possible. We should
point out that when the situation seems hopeless, Mali’s
young people have no option but to join the ranks of
terrorist, extremist or criminal groups. In that regard, it
will be crucial to ensure that the efforts in the country’s
central and northern areas to stimulate economic and
investment activity and restore social services do not
let up.
We welcome the efforts of Bamako, Mali’s
political stakeholders and the Platform coalition and
Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad signatory
groups to implement the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. We hope they will strictly
respect the timeline for implementing its key provisions
with regard to the reconstitution of Mali’s security
forces, administrative and territorial reforms and the
preparations for a constitutional referendum. Any
delay in that regard will only exacerbate the existing
threats and the country’s vulnerability in the face of
the destabilizing forces represented by terrorists,

S/PV. 8547

organized criminals and ideological extremists. At the
same time, we call on our colleagues not to impose
additional restrictive measures. It is important to allow
the existing sanctions regime to prove its effectiveness.
We believe that Mali’s law-enforcement agencies will be
working more actively to suppress the illegal activities
of sanctioned individuals, as well as others sabotaging
the political process.
We support the activities of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, which is playing an important role in stabilizing
the country. We believe that it is important not to
undermine its effectiveness. We call on our colleagues
to take a balanced approach to deciding on its future.
The situation in Mali is an important factor in
African security as a whole. However, it is very unlikely
that peace can be achieved there without normalizing
the situation in the region. The issue of Libya continues
to play a negative role in this. The links between the
terrorists operating in Mali and in the region as a
whole are becoming increasingly clear. In that regard,
we support the concrete steps that the countries of the
Group of Five for the Sahel have been taking to form
a joint force to combat terrorism and organized crime,
and we hope that their role in ensuring regional security
will increase.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif for his very informative
briefing on the recent developments in Mali. I would
also like to warmly welcome His Excellency Tiébilé
Dramé, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali.
At the outset, I want to express our condolences to
the Government and the people of Mali for the tragedy
in the Sobamé-Da village. That horrific event in the
Mopti region is the most recent sign that the violence in
Mali is spiralling out of control.
I would like to focus my statement on three
issues — the political process, the security situation
and the upcoming renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
First, with regard to the political process, while
recognizing the progress made in the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
including through the follow-up committee, Poland
calls on the Malian Government to accelerate the full

19-172567/25

S/PV.8547

The situation in Mali

implementation of its provisions, in particular on the
effective reintegration of combatants, security-sector
reform, decentralization and the establishment of a
development zone in northern Mali. The constitutional
review process should also be as consultative and
inclusive as possible to ensure the participation of all
key stakeholders representing Mali’s diverse society. In
that regard the full inclusion of women, youth and civil
society is of the utmost importance.
Secondly, on the security situation, we remain
grievously concerned about the critical security situation
in the centre, where the levels of intercommunal violence
and the number of civilian casualties are unacceptable.
Therefore, we call on the Malian authorities to step up
their efforts to protect the population from violence,
to restore the State’s authority and to ensure access
to social services. The disarmament of ethnic-based
militia and self-defence groups and the fight against
impunity for the atrocities committed against the
population in recent months have to be one of the top
priorities for the Malian authorities.
Lastly, on the upcoming mandate renewal, Poland
believes that support for the implementation of the
agreement remains paramount and should remain the
most important priority of MINUSMA. The good
offices and presence of the Mission in northern Mali
remain essential to preserving the gains made since the
signing of the agreement.
In central Mali, MINUSMA should strengthen its
efforts to facilitate the return of State administration,
including by supporting the redeployment of the Malian
defence and security forces and protecting civilians.
That should be combined with proactive measures to
prevent potential attacks and help to create a secure
environment for the delivery of humanitarian access.
MINUSMA’s role in achieving stability and
reconciliation in Mali remains essential despite the
difficult and dangerous context. In the light of that,
we are looking forward to the upcoming important
discussion on the Mission’s mandate renewal.
Finally, let me express my gratitude to Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif for his leadership and dedication, as well
as to the personnel of MINUSMA, the United Nations
country team and the troop- and police-contributing
countries for their commitment in extreme and
challenging conditions.
8/25

12/06/2019

Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We wish to welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali to the Council today. We are
pleased that he could join us in today’s discussion and
are looking forward to a briefing later on.
I wish to thank Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Mali and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
for his comprehensive briefing and also to thank him
and his team for the excellent work they are doing
in Mali.
In the context of recent developments, I would like
to take this moment to convey our sympathy to the
Government and the people of Mali for the lives lost
due to the prevailing security situation in the country,
particularly the violence that broke out in the Mopti
region on 9 June, in which people perished. We urge
the Government of Mali to investigate those atrocious
acts and to bring the perpetrators to justice.
My intervention today will focus on three issues:
the security and humanitarian situation in Mali; the
role of the United Nations in Mali through MINUSMA;
and the very encouraging developments in the political
process in Mali.
First, we remain seriously concerned that the security
situation continues to deteriorate in both northern and
central Mali, as demonstrated by increased terrorist
attacks and intercommunal clashes and violence. It is
disturbing that incidents of intercommunal violence are
increasing. They have ravaged communities, displaced
people and worsened the humanitarian situation in Mali.
In that regard, we encourage the Malian authorities to
bring those communities together in pursuit of peaceful
intercommunal dialogue and reconciliation led by the
people of Mali, with the support of the region and
international community.
It is therefore important to address the root causes
and conditions that have given rise to this situation in
Mali including, inter alia, the absence of State authority
in some parts of the country, porous borders, extreme
poverty, exclusion, inequality and environmental
impacts. It is equally important to acknowledge the
impact of the situation in the Sahel, particularly in
Libya, which is also contributing to the destabilization
of Mali and the Sahel region as a whole. We wish to
emphasize that enhanced efforts on cross-border
19-17256

12/06/2019

The situation in Mali

cooperation among the countries of the region should
continue to be encouraged to address these challenges.
Complex conditions continue to pose challenges
for humanitarian work to be performed effectively
and deserve the serious attention of the international
community. We therefore wish to urge the international
community to provide the necessary support for the
effective implementation of the 2019 humanitarian
response plan for Mali.
Despite the fragility of the situation, we are
encouraged by the progress made thus far on the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes in Mali. We are pleased to learn from the
briefing by the Special Representative that the training
of the Malian forces will take place soon. Those
positive developments will allow for the redeployment
of the reconstituted Malian defence and security forces
in northern and central Mali, improving security in
those regions. We also welcome the operationalization
of the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission’s
national investigation team, which will expedite the
realization of justice, healing and peace.
Secondly, with regard to the role of the United
Nations in Mali, South Africa commends the continued
efforts of MINUSMA to discharge its political and
security mandate in Mali. We therefore support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General on the
renewal of the mandate of MINUSMA for another 12
months, until 30 June 2020.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s options for
the potential significant adaptation of MINUSMA and
recommendations to enhance its support in the centre
of Mali. However, it is our considered view that any
recalibration of MINUSMA must be predicated by
a review of the security situation in Mali as a whole,
including in the centre. This is important so as to avoid
a potential vacuum that will exacerbate instability and
insecurity in Mali and the entire Sahel region. We are
also of the view that should MINUSMA be expected
to play a role in central Mali that exceeds the support
recommended, it should be able to request additional
capacities and resources based on a thorough assessment
of conditions on the ground.
We appreciate the cooperation of MINUSMA
with other security forces in the country, including the
Malian Defence and Security forces, the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), French forces
and the European Union missions in Mali. The Council

S/PV. 8547

previously discussed the challenges faced by the G-5
Sahel Joint Force regarding existing arrangements with
MINUSMA to support its operationalization. South
Africa reiterates its support for the recommendations of
the Secretary-General regarding the support the United
Nations should provide to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
Thirdly, on the political process, our delegation
welcomes the signing of the political agreement
between the Government of Mali and opposition
parties, which has resulted in the appointment of a
new, inclusive Government of national unity and of the
Prime Minister. These political processes, anchored by
the recently established Government of national unity
and the emerging consensus among the Malian people,
reassure all of us and indicate that the walk towards a
new Mali has begun, and the Council should support
it. It is therefore trusted that these changes will lead
to stability, sustained peace and prosperity for all
Malians, as envisioned in the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali.
South Africa wishes to encourage Malian
stakeholders to continue to engage in dialogue to
ensure the implementation of the peace agreement. We
also encourage all Malian stakeholders to take up the
opportunities to participate in an inclusive national
conference to finalize the constitution, reflecting the
institutional reforms envisioned in the peace agreement.
We call in particular for the inclusion of women and
ordinary people in that dialogue process.
We welcome the processes that have recently
taken place to ensure the establishment of the northern
economic development zone, including the submission
of the related legislation to the National Assembly,
as well as the associated funding mechanism for this
undertaking. South Africa believes that a holistic
development approach, including the upliftment of the
living standards of the people of Mali and job creation,
particularly youth employment, will contribute
significantly to resolving the complex challenges in
Mali. The soon-to-be-launched all-Malian national
inclusive conference to dialogue and clarify and take
Algerian agreement to all the peoples and corners of
Mali is a sign of a new positive attitude among the
Malian people — political parties, civil society, women,
youth and communities. All Malians will win; no one
will be a loser.
In conclusion, it is clear that the situation in Mali
requires collective support to address the multiple and

19-172569/25

S/PV.8547

The situation in Mali

complex challenges facing the country. The Council
must continue to extend its support through MINUSMA
and the efforts of the Economic Community of West
African States and the African Union. That support will
assist the people of Mali to achieve peace and lead the
developmental plans as envisioned by their Government.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Annadif for his very clear and objective
briefing. I would also like to welcome Foreign Minister
Dramé to the Council. I look forward to hearing from
him in a few minutes’ time.
Let me begin by joining others in offering my
sincere condolences on behalf of the United Kingdom
for the tragic deaths of those killed as a result of the
massacre in the Mopti region just a few days ago. I very
much agree with the Russian Ambassador when he said
that the perpetrators must be brought to justice. That
horrific attack highlights just how important it is for
the international community and the Government of
Mali to step up our collective efforts to help achieve
long-term peace and stability in the country.
The mandate renewal of United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) offers an opportunity to make
progress towards that goal. I would like to highlight
three brief points in that regard.
First, this mandate renewal should be used to help
drive forward the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. That was very much
a focus of the Security Council’s visit to Mali just a few
months ago. While I very much welcome the fact that we
have seen some progress since that visit — the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General mentioned
in particular the draft law establishing the northern
economic development zone and he also talked about
the progress on the training and reintegration of
opposition fighters — we regret that overall the pace
of implementation has slowed down in recent months,
in part owing to political developments. We must not
lose sight of the fact that there is still a lot of work to
do. The United Kingdom supports the call made by the
representative of France just now that those who impede
the implementation of the peace agreement should be
subject to sanctions by the Council.
This mandate renewal offers the chance to inject
new momentum into the process through the use of
ambitious benchmarks to be met by the Government
10/25

12/06/2019

of Mali and signatory armed groups. From the United
Kingdom’s perspective, those benchmarks should
include advancement on constitutional reform and
decentralization, security sector reform, the economic
development of northern Mali and, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Ambassador of South Africa mentioned, the meaningful
participation of women in the peace process.
Secondly, I agree with all previous speakers that
we have an opportunity now, with the mandate renewal,
to tackle the instability in central Mali that has caused
so many tragic deaths in recent months. Specifically,
there is a need for both MINUSMA and the Malian
Government to do more in the centre to restore State
authority and protect civilians. MINUSMA has a
unique role to play in the centre in using its good
offices to reduce inter-community tensions — tensions
that this most recent attack shows are currently all too
high. On the part of the Government, there really is
a need for a truly comprehensive political strategy to
deal with the situation in the centre in order to ensure
that its efforts are effective. From our perspective, a
comprehensive solution should include the disarming
of all armed actors, the restoration of peaceful relations
between communities and the revision of the integrated
security plan for the regions of the centre.
Thirdly, we recognize very much the challenging
circumstances in which MINUSMA is operating, and
the United Kingdom unequivocally condemns the
recent attacks against MINUSMA personnel on the
ground. To perform its mandate effectively in such
circumstances, MINUSMA will need to further adapt
to become a more flexible, agile and robust force, as
recommended in the Secretary-General’s most recent
report (S/2019/454). The United Kingdom commends
the actions taken by the Mission leadership, including
the Force Commander, to do that already, and it
welcomes the increase in the tempo of operations in
recent months.
In conclusion, I think we should all recognize that
MINUSMA is cannot be a permanent solution in Mali,
but is rather a means to an end — a means to achieve
sustainable peace in Mali. We welcome the steps that
have been taken so far by the Government, other Malian
parties and MINUSMA to foster stability in Mali, but
we can see from the fact that large parts of the peace
agreement remain unimplemented and that security in
the centre is quickly deteriorating that more needs to
19-17256

12/06/2019

The situation in Mali

be done. This mandate renewal can catalyse progress
towards a more sustainable peace across Mali.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Kuwaiti presidency and the Security
Council for organizing this briefing on the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). I would also like to
welcome the presence among us of His Excellency
Mr. Tiébilé Dramé, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Mali. I commend
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative
of the United Nations Secretary-General, for his very
informative briefing and his personal, determined
commitment to resolving the crisis in Mali.
My country joins other speakers in condemning
unequivocally and in the strongest terms the cowardly
massacre carried out by armed men in the village
of Sobamé-Da, in the Mopti region. Côte d’Ivoire
addresses its deepest condolences to the Government
and brotherly people of Mali and reiterates its
solidarity with them in their legitimate search for
peace and stability. To that end, my country welcomes
the decision of the Government of Mali to launch
investigations to shed light on those heinous crimes and
bring their perpetrators to trial before the competent
national courts.
Côte d’Ivoire also welcomes the consensual
formation of a new Malian Government and reaffirms
its conviction that it will be able to meet the expectations
of the Malian people.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of MINUSMA (S/2019/454) provides us with
information about the progress made since the United
Nations Mission was deployed in Mali. It sheds special
light on the persistent challenges against the backdrop
of which it is important to assess the needed adjustments
and MINUSMA’s support for peace efforts in Mali.
My delegation therefore welcomes MINUSMA’s
continued support for the implementation of the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation and encourages
the new Government team led by Prime Minister
Boubou Cissé to contribute to it without fail. Indeed,
Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its conviction that strong
national ownership and inclusive implementation of the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation remains the
only way forward for a rapid and sustainable return of
peace, security and stability to Mali, particularly in the
northern and central regions.

S/PV. 8547

To this end, it wishes to express its full support for
the Government of Mali in its stated desire to organize
an inclusive national dialogue so that it can be used
to explore the adoption of consensus solutions to the
many challenges facing the country. Women and young
people should find and have their rightful place in such
a dialogue.
On the security front, my country shares the concerns
related to the situation in the northern and central
regions of Mali. Indeed, episodes of communitarian
violence, as recurrent as they are bloody, undermine
social balances and hamper efforts to restore calm
and peaceful coexistence among communities. That is
why the exacerbation and instrumentalization of this
violence by armed groups should encourage the Council
to support, through MINUSMA, the redeployment of
police and judicial institutions, in order to enable the
Malian State to fully perform its sovereign functions.
The need to continue the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process and security
sector reform is more important than ever today. The
success of this process will undoubtedly contribute to
a substantial reduction in the level of violence and the
construction of an army of the Republic of Mali in the
service of peace and stability.
With regard to the humanitarian situation — another
cause for concern — my country would like to commend
the multifaceted assistance provided by specialized
agencies to meet the basic needs of the affected
populations. Côte d’Ivoire strongly hopes that
humanitarian responses will be strengthened by
economic and social-development initiatives that focus,
inter alia, on combating poverty and unemployment,
which are the underlying causes of insecurity and
instability in Africa in general.
MINUSMA remains an essential link in all the
current forms of the security presence in Mali and the
subregion. It should therefore benefit from the constant
support of the Security Council. Its complementarity
with the forces on the ground, namely, the Malian armed
forces, the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), Operation Barkhane and the European
missions, constitutes a considerable asset in the fight
against terrorism and organized crime throughout the
subregion. It therefore seems imperative to ensure that
its capacity is strengthened, in order to enable it to react
and effectively anticipate attacks against its civilian

19-1725611/25

S/PV.8547

The situation in Mali

and military personnel and to continue to carry out all
the missions assigned to it.
Admittedly, MINUSMA is not intended to replace
the Malian armed forces, but its contribution and the
strengthening of their capacity and support for their
redeployment, particularly in the northern and central
parts of the country, are crucial. The same applies to
its support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, in accordance
with resolution 2391 (2017). This support is of vital
importance for effectively combating terrorism and
restoring peace and stability in the Sahel region.
However, Côte d’Ivoire believes that, in the light
of the constraints observed in the provision of support
to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, a review of the technical
agreement should be considered in order to improve
the quality and effectiveness of MINUSMA’s logistical
support. My country also believes that any decision
to reconsider the scope and means at the disposal
of MINUSMA must necessarily take into account
the potential consequences on an already fragile
security situation. Côte d’Ivoire therefore urges the
Security Council to maintain its level of engagement
around MINUSMA and to continue its multifaceted
support to the Government of Mali in its efforts to
restore peace and stability and promote economic and
social development.
I would like to conclude my statement by
reaffirming my country’s support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and by urging
all bilateral and institutional partners to continue their
support for MINUSMA.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First, I would like to
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali, His
Excellency Mr. Tiébilé Dramé, to the Security Council
Chamber. I would also like to convey my deepest
condolences to the Government and the people of Mali
on the attack on the village of Sobamé-Da that resulted
in the loss of 95 civilian lives and injured many others.
Like other speakers before me, I would also
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for
his comprehensive briefing.
Indonesia greatly appreciates the work of the
Special Representative and of MINUSMA in ensuring
peace and stability in Mali. We would also like to pay
12/25

12/06/2019

tribute to the fallen personnel of MINUSMA and convey
our sincere appreciation to all personnel who continue
to risk their lives working in a difficult situation.
Indonesia welcomes and commends the recent
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the mandate of MINUSMA (S/2019/454). The
comprehensive assessment of the situation on the
ground and the recommendations contained in the report
clearly serve as valuable input for our deliberations on
the future of MINUSMA when its mandate expires at
the end of this month. Our recent Security Council visit
to Mali in March also provided us with a much clearer
picture of what is happening on the ground, as we also
had the opportunity to meet with many representatives
of the United Nations system there.
Based on that and based on recent developments,
we have several points we would like to share with the
Council. First, we welcome the positive developments
in Mali, including the establishment of a consensus
Government and the signing of a political agreement
between key political stakeholders in the country.
We also welcome the limited but continued progress
achieved in the implementation of the Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation. We hope that the recent
political momentum will speed up progress in priority
areas. We urge all Malian stakeholders to work together
towards the completion of constitutional reform through
an inclusive and consultative process.
In addition, we cannot overstate the importance
of ownership and engagement of all parties in this
process, including the Government, signatory armed
groups, political opposition groups and civil society.
We commend the continued efforts to support the
redeployment of Malian defence and security forces
through an accelerated disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process. We hope that any outstanding
issues will be resolved in a timely manner. We also
view that the establishment of a northern economic
development zone needs to be pursued swiftly, so that
the living conditions of the Malian populations in the
north could be improved.
Secondly, we note with concern the security
situation in Mali, particularly in the north and central
regions. In this regard, we believe that the effective
redeployment of the reconstituted and reformed Malian
defence and security forces and the restoration of State
authority are of paramount importance. It is high time
for the Malians to take the reins of their destiny, so
19-17256

12/06/2019

The situation in Mali

that the State can deliver on its promises to the people
who have entrusted it with their future, including by
ensuring security and the provision of basic services.
With regard to MINUSMA, Indonesia believes
that its presence in Mali remains crucial to enabling
further progress and to preventing further deterioration
of the situation. We support the mandate renewal so
that the Mission can provide certainty in its support of
peace efforts in Mali. We appreciate the increasingly
agile posture adopted by the Mission. We concur that
given the volatility of situation in Mali, a significant
reduction or withdrawal of the Mission is not the wisest
way forward. It should be the other way around, namely,
providing MINUSMA with greater resources.
We take note also of the statement made earlier
by the Special Representative, highlighting that 70 per
cent of the uniformed personnel of MINUSMA, is
currently in the field giving protection to civilians. That
is an important aspect. We need to continue to support
MINUSMA. We also feel that the Mission could benefit
from a clearer mandate, division of labour with the
United Nations country team, enhanced coordination
with other security presences in Mali and, of course,
closer collaboration with the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We took note of
that during our visit to Mali and in our coordination
and collaboration with the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. I
think that that is an important aspect, which must be
clearly stated.
We also remain concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Mali. We deplore the hindrance of
humanitarian access and call on all parties to ensure
that humanitarian assistance reaches those who need it
the most.
Thirdly and lastly, we would like to reiterate our
belief that it is only by addressing the root causes
of conflict that stability and progress in Mali can
truly materialize. We therefore call on regional
and international partners to support sustainable
development in Mali, in line with the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. Earlier today, we
also discussed the issue of conflict. Conflict cannot be
resolved without development assistance in addressing
its root causes.
The country is now at a critical juncture. It is
important for all of us to enhance cooperation to
ensure lasting peace and development for the benefit
of the entire Malian population. I believe that from the

S/PV. 8547

statements we have heard thus far today, there is unity
in the Council. I sincerely hope that this unity can be
translated concretely into a robust draft resolution when
we discuss the Mission’s mandate renewal.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome Mr. Dramé, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali, to the meeting and
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Annadif for his briefing.
As mentioned by colleagues, a few days ago
intercommunal conflict occurred in the Mopti region of
central Mali, causing many casualties. China is deeply
appalled by such developments and extends condolences
to the Malian Government and to the families of the
victims. We hope that the parties concerned will resolve
their differences through dialogue in order to restore
stabilty on the ground.
At present, the peace process in Mali is at a critical
juncture. The Government and the people of Mali have
made tireless efforts to promote the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
China appreciates their efforts in that regard. At the
same time, Mali continues to face severe challenges
as terrorist forces continue to expand their activities,
thereby affecting progress in the implementation of the
peace agreement.
The international community should continue to
provide support for peace and development in Mali.
First, it should actively promote the peace and
reconciliation process in Mali. All parties to the peace
agreement should prioritize the interests of the country
and its people, fulfil their commitments and work
together for national development and reconstruction.
China appreciates the efforts of the Malian Government
to promote dialogue and reconciliation and the progress
made in reintegrating former combatants. We call
on all parties to commit to resolving disputes by
peaceful means, through dialogue and negotiations.
The international community should respect the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Mali and help it improve its capacity for autonomous
development and governance. The work of the Security
Council’s sanctions regime on Mali should aim to
support the political process and strictly follow its
mandate, as given by the Council.
Secondly, the international community should
help Mali strengthen its security capacity-building

19-1725613/25

S/PV.8547

The situation in Mali

by assisting its Government in improving its security
and counter-terrorism capacity so that it can gradually
assume responsibility for security. Peace and security in
Mali are closely linked to the overall security situation
in the surrounding areas. As such, it is necessary to
adopt integrated measures and conduct regional
cooperation in order to respond to terrorist activities
in and around Mali. China welcomes the formation
of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
to independently respond to security threats, such as
regional terrorism. We commend the United Nations
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for their
work in support of the Joint Force.
Thirdly, the international community should
promote economic and social development in Mali. It
should continue to help Mali to build on the foundation
of its economy in order to achieve self-reliance and
sustainable development as soon as possible. That would
help to address problems in Mali at their source. China
calls on all parties concerned to continue to deliver
on their aid commitments and help the Government to
invest more resources in the development of northern
and central Mali. We look forward to the early
establishment of the northern economic development
zone so that local people can live and work in peace as
soon as possible.
Fourthly, the international community should
support MINUSMA in fulfilling its mandate.
MINUSMA and Special Representative Annadif have
played an important role in maintaining stability,
boosting security capacity-building and assisting the
peace process in Mali. The continued fulfilment by
MINUSMA of its mandate is extremely important to
the security and stability of Mali and the Sahel. China
supports a smooth MINUSMA mandate renewal and
will actively participate in the relevant deliberations.
China pays tribute to MINUSMA peacekeepers and
expresses condolences for those who laid down their
lives in the line of duty. The Secretariat and MINUSMA
have been actively improving the safety and security
of peacekeepers. It is our hope that MINUSMA will
continue to strengthen its work to ensure that supplies
and equipment are in place for mandate implementation
and security protection.
China is an important contributor of troops to
MINUSMA. More than 400 Chinese peacekeepers are
currently deployed in the Mission, performing medical
14/25

12/06/2019

support, engineering and security-related tasks, among
others. Their ability to perform their duties has been
widely acclaimed. China will continue to work with
the international community to steadfastly support the
people of Mali in their pursuit of peace and development
and contribute to peace, stability and development
in Mali.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): First of all, allow me to thank Mr. Annadif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing and his unwavering commitment to peace
and reconciliation in Mali, of which we are all aware.
I would also like to welcome Mr. Тiébilé Dramé,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali, and thank him for coming all the
way to New York to participate in today’s debate.
Since our last debate on the situation in Mali in
March (see S/PV.8497), regrettably, more Blue Helmets
and Malian soldiers have fallen in the line of duty and
more acts of violence against civilians, which have been
particularly shocking, have occurred in the country. I
would like to honour the memory of all of those victims.
The implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali has not progressed as quickly as
we had all hoped. Belgium is deeply concerned about
the delays in its implementation. Such delays serve
only to bolster the enemies of peace, who are quick
to denounce the path of dialogue and compromise
as a dead-end and, instead, promote violence as an
alternative. Such violence has now spread to central
Mali and even beyond the country’s borders. However,
Belgium naturally welcomes the recent progress in the
implementation of the agreement.
With regard to the constitutional reform process,
we understand how crucial yet delicate it is. My
country knows that to reach a compromise that satisfies
everyone and ensure proper ownership, including on
the part of women and young people, it is sometimes
better to invest a little time in the process in order to
achieve a solid outcome, rather than impose arbitrary
deadlines. Inclusive political dialogue is crucial
for Mali. However, it obviously cannot be allowed to
slow the implementation of the agreement.
Those efforts and political courage are critical to
carrying out State reform, but must be extended to the
other major provisions of the agreement. I stress that
this responsibility is incumbent upon three signatory
19-17256

12/06/2019

The situation in Mali

S/PV. 8547

parties and I urge them to make it a top priority. In
addition, those measures will be meaningful only if
they are long-term and enjoy the resources necessary
to sustain them.

Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me first thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif for
his briefing. Let me also welcome His Excellency
Foreign Minister Dramé for joining us at our meeting.

Finally, the Council has specific tools to counter
those who obstruct peace. Targeted sanctions have
already been imposed and the Council must be ready to
impose additional sanctions, as needed.

At the outset, I would like to make a few remarks on
the political process and the peace process. We welcome
the swift formation of the new Cabinet and we hope for
a very energetic approach to the most pressing issues.
It is important that the new Government maintain
the dynamic momentum in the peace process that
has developed over the past year. As it is the primary
responsibility of the Government of Mali to make
progress in key reforms, as agreed in the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, with tangible results
for the population, we very much count on progress in
that regard.

We note that the situation in central Mali
is continuously deteriorating. Terrorist acts and
intercommunal violence are leading to an alarming
downwards spiral. Atrocities at this scale are unheard
of in a country like Mali, a country of peaceful
intercommunal mixing and coexistence. Terrorists
and aggressive militias cannot be allowed to take root.
I therefore encourage the Government to exercise its
sovereign power to ensure the security of its population
by immediately disarming the armed militias and
putting an end to impunity for all criminals. It must
launch investigations and, when it does so, bring
criminals to justice as soon as possible.
More generally, as the Council constantly
emphasizes, the solution cannot be based on security
alone, although that is an essential precondition. The
aspirations expressed with regard to governance, the
fight against corruption, justice and basic services must
be heard. Coexistence and refusal to stigmatize any
particular ethnic group, local mediation and the fight
against impunity are essential elements for restoring
State authority and legitimacy throughout the territory.
In that connection, Belgium welcomes the
implementation of the political framework for crisis
management in central Mali. A solution to the crisis
can be found only through a genuine, Malia-owned
political process, which must be as inclusive as possible
and take all of the dimensions of the conflict into
account. In that regard, my country believes that the
future mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
should promote intra-Malian dialogue in the centre of
the country and focus particularly on the protection of
civilians, in support of the primary responsibility of the
State authority.
In conclusion, only the people of Mali hold the
key, and the United Nations must support them in
their efforts.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/454) presents a mixed picture. It acknowledges
some progress, and rightly so, but at the same time
it also makes clear that much more visible progress
is urgently needed on a wide range of issues:
decentralization, constitutional reform, security sector
reform and strengthening State capacity and presence
in all regions of Mali. It is a heavy agenda, but a leap
forward is needed to regain the trust of the population
in State institutions.
On the situation in central Mali, we very much
deplore — as many other colleagues have done — the
loss of lives and the ongoing violence, particularly
the latest massacre in the region of Mopti a few days
ago, which led to the death of a very high number of
civilians. We offer our condolences to the people and
Government of Mali. It shows and reminds us once
again that quick de-escalation is urgently needed.
Short-term measures, on the one hand, and the longterm commitment of the Malian State to responding
to the grievances of the people in central Mali are
required. Moreover, the root causes of the conflict in
central Mali need to be addressed.
In our view, it is essential that any response not
exacerbate the ethnic dimensions of the crisis by
pitting one group’s self-defence forces against others.
Accountability and investigations into human rights
violations are key to advancing the rule of law and, with
it, to preventing the further alienation of the population
from the State. Again, it is obvious that this is primarily
the Malian Government’s responsibility.

19-1725615/25

S/PV.8547

The situation in Mali

On the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the way
forward, Germany has been a very significant troop
contributor to that United Nations operation for many
years. In our assessment, MINUSMA continues to be
the key security provider enabling the implementation
of humanitarian development and stabilization efforts.
It is clear to us that support for the implementation of
the peace agreement must remain the clear priority
when discussing the renewal of the mandate. The
Council should look at all the tools at its disposal not
only to measure and acknowledge progress, but also to
act decisively, including with targeted sanctions if there
is no or insufficient progress. As many others have said
before, the active participation of women in all stages
of the peace process remains a key pillar for success.
In our assessment, northern Mali should remain
the main focus. We need a realistic and achievable
streamlined mandate. That is essential to securing the
achievements in the north. But obviously, we also need
to look into what MINUSMA can do to support the
Government in responding to the deteriorating crisis
in central Mali, which has the potential to destabilize
the whole of Mali and beyond. As I stated before, it is
essential that the Government address the root causes
of the degrading security situation and investigate
human rights violations.
However, we should be careful not to set unrealistic
goals for the centre. In keeping with the Action for
Peacekeeping commitments, we should strive to set
achievable goals, which seems to be a key element for
us. In order to better identify such goals, we need to
continue our discussions with Special Representative
Annadif and his team to clarify some key questions.
For example, what are our expectations regarding
MINUSMA’s role in central Mali? And what can it
actually achieve there with its limited resources? How
can it make a difference? What is the Council’s view on
strengthening MINUSMA’s civilian pillar in the centre?
Since MINUSMA has a limited number of troops
and resources to operate in an increasingly complex
environment, we are clearly in favour of maintaining
the current troop ceiling and would not support any
reduction. The Mission needs to have the means to
allow it to fulfil its core tasks. We would also need
to consider the political signal we would send if we
were to reduce the number of troops. That is especially
important when we consider focusing more on the crisis
in central Mali.
16/25

12/06/2019

Before I conclude, let me also stress that cooperation
with other security actors, such as the European Union
Military Training Mission in Mali, the European Union
capacity-building mission Sahel Mali and Operation
Barkhane, should be intensified. Closer cooperation
with the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) should also be looked into in a pragmatic
way and within the remit of the current authorizations
given by the Council. That could include, for instance,
the provision of logistical resources for G-5 Sahel Joint
Force troops by third-party transport.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this meeting and the detailed
briefing we heard from the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif.
We also welcome the presence of Mr. Tiébilé Dramé,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali, in the Security Council.
We regret the loss of human life that occurred on
Sunday in Sobamé-Da, in central Mali, as a result of
inter-ethnic violence. We wish to convey our sincere
condolences to all those affected. This is yet another
demonstration of a conflict scenario compounded
by the actions of terrorist groups, clashes between
armed groups, intercommunal violence and attacks
targeting United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) personnel.
We believe that the full implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali should
remain a top priority for the Government and the people
of Mali. It is crucial that all stakeholders work together
to stabilize the country with a view to expanding the
vital presence of the State throughout the nation. We
therefore welcome the recent political progress seen in
Mali, which has paved the way for the establishment
of an inclusive Government. This should serve as an
incentive to tackle the difficult security situation and
the persistent humanitarian crisis, particularly in the
centre and north of the country. In that context, I would
like to address three key areas on the matter.
First, with regard to the political process, it is
critical to work without delay on the political and
institutional reforms required to improve governance,
security and socioeconomic development, as provided
for in resolution 2423 (2018). We believe that reforms
pertaining to decentralization, future elections and
constitutional review are crucial in this context,
19-17256

12/06/2019

The situation in Mali

S/PV. 8547

as is increasing the participation of women in the
peace process.

support this country along the shared path towards
peace and reconciliation.

Secondly, in the security field, we highlight
the efforts of the Malian Government to implement
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme for ex-combatants, as well as the longoverdue security sector reform, aimed at enabling the
deployment of new forces.

Mr. Elé Ela (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me at the outset to thank you and your
delegation, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
We welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Mali, His Excellency Mr. Tiébilé Dramé, to
whom we wish every success in the new role entrusted
to him by His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita.

We consider it necessary to pay special attention
to the actions of violent extremist groups, who take
advantage of the limited presence of the State to expand
their influence and establish their own administration
and relations with the communities. We also recognize
the role of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel in strengthening the regional response to
terrorism and transnational organized crime. In that
regard, and as we stated this morning (see S/PV.8546),
there is a pressing need to establish measures aimed at
local-level conflict prevention and resolution, as well
as the protection of civilians, through dialogue and the
strengthening of police functions.
My third point concerns development. In a country
where more than 1 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance, achieving long-term stability
prosperity will be possible only if steps are taken to
address the root causes of the conflict, focusing also
on promoting development and respect for human
rights. We underscore the need to provide humanitarian
assistance, in line with the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel and its support plan, as a
comprehensive framework for promoting coherent
and integrated international support, in line with
national priorities.
Furthermore, taking the current political and
security context in Mali into account, we agree that
the role of MINUSMA needs to be strengthened,
in coordination with other international actors and
the United Nations country team, in order to protect
civilians and fulfil the implementation of the peace
agreement and the necessary political reforms.
Peru recognizes the work of MINUSMA and
Special Representative Mahamat Saleh Annadif in a
particularly adverse environment and very challenging
operational conditions. The presence of MINUSMA on
the ground constitutes a fundamental contribution to
stability in Mali. We agree with the Secretary-General
that it would be pertinent to renew the Mission’s
mandate for another year so that it can continue to

We would also like to express our thanks to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for his very detailed
and useful briefing. The Republic of Equatorial
Guinea highly values his leadership and praises his
hard work and that of his entire team in constantly
challenging conditions.
The security situation in Mali and the Sahel region
is nothing short of a tragedy. Abductions, attacks
on barracks and camps, improvised — yet skilfully
programmed — explosive devices, ambushes and
murders form the basis of a constant, heightened danger
that puts all actors, whether national and international,
on the defensive. Many of them are confined to their
quarters with little else to do but fight to stay alive, in
the best-case scenario. It may be politically incorrect
to be so explicit, but we are facing a paradoxical
situation. The state of affairs in Mali is deteriorating
at the same pace the international community’s interest
is increasing, as is its involvement in the restoration
of the stability and authority of the State throughout
the country.
Indeed, despite the military and financial resources
deployed, as well as the ongoing international
mobilization and support for the full implementation
of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
the current strategy is demonstrating its weaknesses
in its ability to curb the jihadist threat. Worse still,
these past few weeks have witnessed an outbreak in
intercommunity conflicts — between Dogons, Fulanis,
Mossis, Arabs, Baoulés and Malinkes — which have
been skilfully exploited by Islamist strategists, masters
in the art of inciting, exacerbating and executing attacks
in a plethora of ways.
Equatorial Guinea strongly condemns such
violence, including the most recent incident just a few
days ago in the centre of the country, which left almost

19-1725617/25

S/PV.8547

The situation in Mali

100 civilians dead. The severity of this inter-ethnic
conflagration suggests that the situation is getting out
of hand. It is therefore essential, against this backdrop,
that a national awakening lead the Malians to take
ownership of the situation, to echo the point made
earlier by Mr. Annadif.
Faced with such an explosive situation, which
threatens Mali’s very existence, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea urges national and international
actors and partners to continue fostering broad
consultations and exchanges in order to provide the
tools required to prevent and combat violence in all its
forms and manifestations, both at the national level and
in the Sahelo-Saharan region.
My country welcomes the establishment of a
new inclusive Government in Mali on 5 May and we
note the commitment of the new Prime Minister to
providing MINUSMA, within the next three months,
with a road map to accelerate the implementation of
the agreement. We underscore the need for this road
map to establish a timeline for the organization and
holding of a constitutional referendum and security and
defence sector reform, as well as to create the northern
development zone.
Moreover, we reiterate our categorical condemnation
of the ongoing attacks perpetrated against the civilian
population, Blue Helmets, United Nations personnel
and the Malian armed forces. The Government of
Equatorial Guinea expresses its gratitude and pays a
heartfelt tribute to all the national and international
defence forces participating in these courageous efforts
to combat cross-border violence and organized crime
in Mali and across the Sahel region. We also urge the
Malian authorities to investigate all these barbaric acts
and bring those responsible to justice. They cannot
go unpunished.
Faced with the cycle of deadly violence in the
centre of Mali and given the infeasibility of any
military solution, it might be advisable for the Malian
Government and all political and civil stakeholders to
establish a dialogue with all opponents in the country.
This new strategy would represent a notable change
of course, combining military pressure, dialogue and
disarmament to prompt local leaders to approach the
negotiating table.
Aware of the continuing deterioration of the
security situation in Mali, and in view of the upcoming
renewal of the mandate of MINUSMA, Equatorial
18/25

12/06/2019

Guinea will support any proposal or initiative aimed at
further strengthening the Mission’s mandate so that it
is capable not only of defending itself properly, but also
of maintaining the pressure on terrorists and jihadists
until their final withdrawal from the country.
Equatorial Guinea recalls that all stakeholders — the
national Governments of the countries of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), the Economic Community
of West African States and neighbouring States, the
African Union and the United Nations — have the
responsibility to mobilize their resources as part of a
coherent and comprehensive stabilization approach that
enables the restoration of security and development.
We welcome the work of the Governments of the
Sahel countries and of national and international
stakeholders and the coordinating role of the United
Nations. We underline the essential role of MINUSMA
in bringing about stability, peace and reconciliation in
Mali, including its role in the north and centre of the
country. We particularly highlight its efforts to assist
the extension of State authority, the protection of all
civilians, without discrimination, the restoration of
basic services and the use of good offices in support of
the political process, which must be completed, as well
as its capacity to interact with other security forces,
including the essential support that it provides to the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
I conclude my statement by recalling that the
situation in Mali is a clear threat to international peace
and security. The Security Council must therefore
remain united on this matter and consider it a core issue
on its agenda, providing and encouraging the greatest
possible support to the Government of Mali.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I, too, would like to take this
opportunity to wish the very best to our friend François
Delattre, an exemplary diplomat who has left his mark
here in the Security Council. We wish him success in
his next role in Paris.
At the outset, we thank Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif
for briefing us on the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Mali (S/2019/454). We welcome the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Тiébilé Drаmé, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Mali.
The Dominican Republic commends the peaceful
way in which the Government, the opposition and
other stakeholders reconciled their differences to reach
a political agreement towards holding an inclusive
19-17256

12/06/2019

The situation in Mali

dialogue to discuss the constitutional review within a
national consultative framework, form a representative
Government and implement the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali and, in turn, seek joint
solutions to the various factors of instability affecting
the country.
We urge all stakeholders in Mali’s political life
to put their differences aside and to see this time of
transition as an opportunity for all to integrate and
together overcome the prevailing challenges facing
the country. We emphasize the crucial and urgent need
for all Malians to desire and adopt a cohesive vision
for change towards a Mali of peaceful and stable
coexistence.
We deplore the security situation in northern
Mali and the ongoing deterioration in the centre of the
country and in the subregion. Attacks on the Malian
defence and security forces, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and civilians and the large-scale
intercommunal violence taking place in parallel to
other factors, such as a lack of State control, poverty,
religious violence and the situation in the Sahel, present
us with a very worrying situation.
The Dominican Republic, like the SecretaryGeneral, understands that in order to prevent an
increase in violence, it is necessary to take the causes
of the crisis into account. At the same time, properly
equipping and training the security forces and the Blue
Helmets, enhancing coordinated work among partners,
together with an effective presence of the reconstituted
and reformed Malian security forces, and curbing the
resources of groups and the trafficking in small arms
and light weapons are areas that must be strengthened.
It is also necessary to work alongside the Government
of Mali and its institutions to establish channels of
information and cooperation with local communities
in order to expand early warning mechanisms to assist
in the joint planning of conflict prevention strategies,
in line with MINUSMA’s multidimensional approach,
while responding to the overriding priority of stability
in Mali.
The Dominican Republic condemns the grave
human rights violations and transgressions perpetrated
by community self-defence groups and terrorist groups
in a context of increasing humanitarian needs, in
particular for protection. We urge the international
community to redouble its efforts to establish the

S/PV. 8547

necessary mechanisms for the protection of the most
vulnerable, particularly internally displaced persons,
especially women and children, who are exposed to
high levels of insecurity and violence.
In that regard, we express our regret at the sad news
of the attack on civilians in the village of Sobamé-Da,
in the Mopti region, on 9 June, in which 95 people
lost their lives. In that dire situation, we appreciate
the efforts of MINUSMA to provide humanitarian
assistance in support of those affected by the tragedy.
We hope that the perpetrators will be brought to justice
as soon as possible.
We would also like to express our concern about
the humanitarian situation in the country, where,
according to the March harmonization framework,
3.8 million people will suffer from food insecurity
and 106,000 people have been internally displaced
due to the lack of access to water resources, among
other things. Those consequences are to a great extent
the result of changing climatic conditions, which are
difficult for populations already vulnerable due to
conflict to mitigate. Tackling the effects of climate
change has been an unprecedented challenge both for
those populations and for humanitarian actors on the
ground, who deal first-hand with the humanitarian
consequences of the interplay between adverse climate
conditions and security on a daily basis. It is therefore
necessary to find ways to deliver a humanitarian
response commensurate with that growing reality and
to have the necessary funding for that task.
A fundamental part of that approach is to better
understand climate-related risks that directly affect
the security situation in the country and their role as
a multiplier of threats and vulnerabilities for already
greatly affected populations. We believe that that is
a key task for the Security Council, and in particular
MINUSMA and all humanitarian actors on the ground.
We regret that, in the reconfiguration of the new
Government, the number of women in ministerial
positions has decreased and that there has been no
progress in women’s participation in the peace process.
However, we welcome the adoption of the third national
action plan for the period 2019-2023 on women and
peace and security to promote women’s participation in
the peace process and governance.
We firmly believe that the inclusion of women has
great potential to transform societies and contribute
to peace and security. We also believe that the

19-1725619/25

S/PV.8547

The situation in Mali

participation of young people in stabilization efforts
in Mali is necessary. The resolve of young people and
their innovative ideas, as well as their peacebuilding
projects, create a multiplier effect and hope for a
generation that deserves and needs a more promising
future for its communities.
The future for which young Malians yearn
today is increasingly obscured by a lack of jobs,
underdevelopment and the more than 953 closed schools
in the northern and central regions of the country. No
country can achieve development without educational
and training opportunities. We therefore urge national,
regional and international stakeholders to redouble
their efforts to control the activities of armed groups
in order to restore peace and stability to the people
of Mali, which in turn would facilitate the reopening
of schools, thereby contributing to the development
of young people and in turn the future of the entire
country.
In conclusion, we deeply regret the deaths of four
Blue Helmets and a number of Malian armed forces
personnel. We commend Mr. Annadif and MINUSMA
for all their efforts in such a difficult environment. We
look forward to the effective implementation of the
action plan to improve the security of peacekeepers. We
also thank the Group of Five for the Sahel, Operation
Barkhane and the entire international community. To
echo the words of the Secretary-General, we want to
reiterate that impunity fuels violence and we therefore
hope to see all the perpetrators prosecuted.
Improving the current violent and unstable situation
in Mali demands the full participation and support of all
Malians, especially all the signatory parties, in fulfilling
their commitments under the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. A fully implemented agreement,
along with dialogue and firm, clear and proactive
measures, will help to create a safer environment for
confronting the pressing challenges facing Mali and the
Sahel region and guiding Malian society towards more
solid and sustainable socioeconomic development.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Kuwait.
At the outset, I would like to join previous speakers
in offering my condolences to the people and the
Government of Mali for the heinous attack that took
place in the village of Sobamé-Da in central Mali,
killing some 95 people. We are seriously concerned
20/25

12/06/2019

about the recent increase in such attacks, including the
attack in March during the Council’s visit to Mali in
which 157 people died.
We would like to sincerely thank Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Mali, for his valuable briefing on the latest
developments in the country. I commend his efforts
and those of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
to facilitate the peace process and engage with all
stakeholders with a view to making progress on the
political track. We also welcome the presence and
participation in the Security Council for the first time
of Mr. Tiébilé Dramé, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali. I congratulate him
on his new post and wish him every success. We would
like to convey our congratulations to the new Prime
Minister, Mr. Boubou Cisse, through him.
I will focus on three main issues. The first
is security, and our serious concern about the
deteriorating security situation in central Mali. The
number of attacks there is on the rise, and we have seen
a significant increase in intercommunal violence. We
stress the importance of containing the situation, which
has deteriorated severely since last year. We welcome
the recommendations of the Secretary-General for
supporting MINUSMA in central Mali and call on
the Government of Mali to undertake the necessary
investigations and hold the perpetrators accountable,
which will help to build confidence between it and the
people. We also urge the Government to intensify its
efforts to implement its plan for securing this region,
where the situation has deteriorated alarmingly.
As we heard in last month’s meeting on the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (S/PV.8526),
terrorism is affecting the countries of the Sahel. There
are many regional and international military forces in
the region, and MINUSMA has an important role to
play in coordinating their efforts. We would like to
take this opportunity to once again express our support
and appreciation to the efforts of MINUSMA, which is
operating in a high-risk environment, as well as the role
that the Mission’s personnel are playing in ensuring
stability in Mali.
My second point is about the peace process.
Four years have passed since the signing of the 2015
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, and
while the progress made during that time has not been
19-17256

12/06/2019

The situation in Mali

optimal, in the past six months we have seen things
improve faster than before. We urge all parties to build
on the small gains that have been achieved by completing
the constitutional reform process in consultation with
all stakeholders, and to take the necessary action to
advance the establishment of a northern economic
development zone, following the steps outlined in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/454), which will
help to build confidence between the Government and
the people in northern Mali.
One of the major steps for ensuring stability and
security in Mali is the redeployment of the reconstituted
army. We welcome the recent progress in that regard and
encourage all the parties to resolve any disagreements
in order to forge ahead, thereby supporting the peace
process and improving security in northern Mali. I also
want to welcome the positive steps that have been taken
in the past month, particularly the formation of a new
Government that includes all political parties, as well
as the signing of an agreement on holding a national
political dialogue.
With regard to the third issue, the renewal
of the Mission’s mandate, Kuwait welcomes the
options laid out in the Secretary-General’s report for
adapting MINUSMA in response to the requirements
expressed in the April presidential statement on Mali
(S/PRST/2019/2). The Security Council must examine
all the options and recommendations before it and
take them into consideration in the discussions on the
mandate renewal. We look forward to those discussions
and are ready to cooperate constructively with all
Council members to ensure that MINUSMA receives
an appropriate mandate that enables it to carry out
its responsibilities and support the peace process in
Mali, in addition to providing it with the necessary
resources, especially in the light of its high-risk
operating environment.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Mali.
Mr. Dramé (Mali) (spoke in French): I would first
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Kuwait’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June, and to express the delegation
of Mali’s great appreciation for the outstanding work
of the Indonesian presidency last month. I also want
to reiterate the deep gratitude of the people and the

S/PV. 8547

Government of Mali to the Security Council, the
Secretary-General, the countries that contribute troops
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and to all of
Mali’s bilateral and multilateral partner countries and
organizations for their invaluable and tireless efforts to
bring about peace and stability in Mali and the Sahel.
The Government of Mali takes note of the report
of the Secretary-General under review (S/2019/454),
and I thank Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali and
Head of MINUSMA, for his accurate briefing and his
update on the latest developments in Mali.
I have taken note of the remarks and high
expectations of the members of the Council with respect
to the situation in Mali. I would now like to share with the
Council the comments of the Government of Mali on the
report. As the Council is aware, the significant events in
the period under review, politically and institutionally,
included the appointment of a new Prime Minister and
the formation of an inclusive Government, established
on 5 May, and the signing of a political agreement on
governance on 2 May between the Prime Minister and
numerous majority and opposition political parties,
in the presence of the representatives of the signatory
groups to the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali, which was a demonstration of their support for
the emerging political consensus. The goal is to create
the conditions for a national gathering to promote the
search for consensus solutions to the multidimensional
crisis in our country.
I would like to take this opportunity to testify to the
role that the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Mali has played in easing the political
climate and in the process that led to the political
agreement on governance. The agreement includes a
road map that will give fresh impetus to the country’s
stabilization process. On 8 May, at the first meeting of
the Council of Ministers, the President of Mali therefore
laid out the main priorities for Government action in
accordance with the political agreement. The first is
organizing an inclusive political dialogue with all of
Mali’s political and social forces as soon as possible.
The second is ensuring further implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
that resulted from the Algiers process, within the
framework of national ownership of the peace process.
The third is carrying out the consensus-based political,
institutional, economic and social reforms that are

19-1725621/25

S/PV.8547

The situation in Mali

essential to our country’s stabilization and economic
progress. The fourth is stabilizing the country’s central
region and combating terrorism, and the fifth is holding
referendum consultations and legislative, local and
regional elections within the time frames agreed on
during the inclusive political dialogue.
In accordance with those guidelines, the Head of
State appointed the following national figures to lead
the process of inclusive political dialogue following
broad consultations with all segments of society:
Mr. Baba Akhib Haïdara, Mediator of the Republic,
Mr. Ousmane Issoufi Maïga, former Prime Minister,
and Mrs. Aminata Dramane Traoré, former Minister.
To facilitate these eminent figures’ work, a consensusbased organizational committee will be established to
ensure the preparation of the material and information
needed for the inclusive political dialogue that the
Malian people have waited for so long, to guarantee
mass support for the planned political and institutional
reforms. The committee will be presided over by a
former colleague of Council members, Ambassador
Cheick Sidi Diarra, who was the Permanent
Representative of Mali to the United Nations and High
Representative for the Least Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island
Developing States, as well as United Nations Special
Adviser on Africa for Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
Together with that measure, the Council of Ministers
recently adopted a draft law extending deputies’ term
of office. This second extension of the mandate is
intended to enable the National Assembly to enact the
political and institutional reforms that will be decided
on during the national dialogue, and thereby providing
a legal framework for reforms that are crucial for our
country’s future. I want to take this opportunity to
affirm the resolute determination of the Government of
Mali to carry out political and institutional reforms by
consensus in order to strengthen national reconciliation
and democracy.
With regard to the redeployment of the reconstituted
national army, whose role is to support the gradual
restoration of State authority throughout the country,
we should once again note the determining role played
by Mr. Annadif, which has been instrumental, to
use an Anglicism. We have achieved the definitive
reintegration into the military of 529 former defence
force troops who had deserted during the conflict. To
that, in the framework of the accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, we can add
22/25

12/06/2019

the registration of 1,840 ex-combatant members of the
Operational Coordination Mechanism, of whom more
than 1,300 have been declared fit for service and as of
yesterday had already begun training in training centres.
Large numbers of them are trying to leave the north to
return to Bamako in order to go to training centres and
join the reconstituted national army. The Government
and the signatories to the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali are continuing consultations
to finalize a draft decree defining the assignment of
ranks and responsibilities to commanding officers
and ex-combatants integrating into the reconstituted
army. This is a process involving consensus with the
peace agreement signatory movements on setting up a
framework to determine how to assign ranks.
With regard to the question of development in the
north, I am pleased to be able to inform the Security
Council that at its meeting on 29 May the Government
adopted and transmitted to the National Assembly draft
laws establishing the fundamental principles for the
establishment, organization and control of development
zones in the Republic of Mali. Those laws establish
a development zone in northern Mali, as provided
for in the agreement. They include laws on the basic
principles for the development zones’ establishment
and their creation and organization, as well as on
the organization and operating procedures of the
interregional consultative framework for the northern
development zone. We have therefore made significant
progress on the process of establishing development
zones in northern Mali, which we know has been a
concern of the Security Council for some months.
The Government has also created the Sustainable
Development Fund, the financial instrument for
implementing the development strategy for the northern
regions. We have already set aside $20 million for urgent
priority expenditures in Kidal, Ménaka, Timbuktu
and Gao regions and have provided $72 million to
the Sustainable Development Fund, showing that
the implementation of the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali remains a top priority for the
Government. That is also reflected in our multi-year
budgetary and economic document, which outlines
budget expenditures for the period from 2019 to 2023.
The Government has already allocated 30 per cent of
the national budget to implementing the agreement and
is working to further decentralize the budget with a
view to reaching the agreed amount of revenue to be
transferred to the territorial collectivities. I am pleased
19-17256

12/06/2019

The situation in Mali

that the Secretary-General has noted in his report the
efforts made by the State of Mali to that end.
I should not conclude the part of my statement on
the implementation of the agreement without stressing
that the Government is working diligently with all the
signatory parties to adopt a new updated road map with
a realistic timeline. At the beginning of next week, on
17 June, we are hosting the Foreign Minister of Algeria,
who will preside over the Agreement Monitoring
Committee, during which the signatories will come to
an agreement on the new revised road map.
The situation in the central regions of Mali is
a matter of deep concern for all the Malian people,
who have once again been plunged into mourning
following the tragic events that occurred on the night
of 9 to 10 June in the village of Sobamé-Da, near
Sangha, in the heart of the Dogon plateau, which before
the crisis was a centre of tourism. The Government
strongly condemns those criminal acts and reiterates
its condolences to the families of the victims, who
number 35, not 95 as was previously announced in
the media. In its recent history our country has never
seen so many victims and material damage as a result
of intercommunal violence, fuelled by the pressure of
terrorist groups and combined with forces competing
for access to natural resources and control over them,
often against a backdrop of resurgent former conflicts.
The Government has adopted a series of strong
measures in response to those barbaric acts in the wake
of the Prime Minister’s visit to the martyred village
of Sobamé-Da yesterday, accompanied by a number
of ministers, including the Ministers of Defence and
the Interior. It was decided to open a preliminary
investigation by the Prosecutor of the Specialized
Judicial Unit to Combat Terrorism and Transnational
Organized Crime, investigate and arrest six persons
in connection with these tragic events, two of whom
were apprehended by MINUSMA troops, and deploy
ground patrols in various villages to deter attacks and
reprisals, detain suspects, search for stolen livestock
and encourage people to return to their villages under
the protection of the Malian security forces. Malian
army helicopters are providing aerial support to the
patrols on the ground. Food assistance and medical care
are being provided for the injured in the village.
The Government is determined not to tolerate such
egregious acts and our defence forces are continuing
to carry out these measures, while our Minister of

S/PV. 8547

Defence is in the Mopti region to coordinate the action
of our forces on the ground and the helicopters that are
supporting the ground patrols.
The arrests and questioning of suspects continue to
this day. New people were arrested this very morning
in several villages in the region. Aerial reconnaissance
patrols are being conducted in the main towns of the
Dogon plateau to deter militias and groups of hunters
from retaliating against Fulani villages.
Furthermore, with regard to the fight against
impunity, I am able to inform the Security Council that
the number of persons detained at the Mopti detention
centre in connection with the intercommunity conflicts
in the Koro and Bankass districts is over 70. These
people are now in detention and are being questioned
by the prosecutor in Mopti.
Similarly, the judicial unit specializing in the fight
against terrorism has opened an investigation into the
Ogossagou matter, the results of which are as follows: a
judicial investigation was commenced and, as of 10 June
2019, 10 persons have been arrested in connection with
the events that took place in Ogossagou in March. They
are charged with terrorist acts, murder, assault, arson,
robbery, and damage to the movable property of others.
Several objects were seized and placed under seal.
In addition, aware of the limits of the overall
security situation and taking full account of the
complexity of the situation, the Government resulting
from the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation has
created a political framework for crisis management in
the central region, bringing together some 10 Ministers
and the main leaders of the armed forces and security
services, with the objective of combining the political
and military/security approaches, in order to calm
the situation in the centre and resolve the crisis on a
sustainable basis.
Dialogue within and between communities in crisis
will be a key focus. The same will apply to the action
resulting from knowledge of the field, the intelligence
available on violent groups and the raising of awareness
of the main actors with a view to their return to the
peace camp. It is a multifaceted action that is being
taken because this political framework for crisis
management has already begun its work, having already
held meetings. It meets on a weekly basis — every
week — around the Prime Minister. The main Ministers
concerned and the heads of the main services will meet
to discuss the situation in the north. The Council of

19-1725623/25

S/PV.8547

The situation in Mali

Ministers, which ended just as the Security Council was
beginning its work, decided to dismiss the Governor of
Mopti and to take other measures to show that impunity
will no longer be the rule there. The Governor of Mopti
is a general officer — a Major General — and the
Government just dismissed him. The message came to
me while the Council was already in session.
It is worth recalling that the crisis in central Mali
is an extension of the northern crisis and a direct
consequence of the occupation of part of this region
in 2012-2013 by terrorist groups. The first adherents
to violent-extremist ideology were recruited by the
Mouvement pour l’unicité et le jihad en Afrique
de l’Ouest (MUJAO), which is a non-Malian-led
international terrorist organization. The main leaders
of this terrorist group are now the Heads of the Islamic
State in the Greater Sahara. The Governor of Gao
during the occupation has now withdrawn south of the
Niger River into the Malian Gourma and officiates on
behalf of the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara. They
are causing bloodshed in the Malian Gourma and the
north-east of our country. The spokesman of MUJAO
during the occupation, who is now Head of the Islamic
State in the Greater Sahara, is staining the north-east of
Mali on the border with the Niger with blood. The main
figure of jihadism in central Mali is affiliated with the
Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims.
The logistics used against our forces come from
the north. During major attacks on our garrisons in the
centre, the columns and commanders come from the
north, as they did a few weeks ago in Dioura, Guiré and
last year in Soumpi and the year before in Nampala.
This shows the close link between the northern crisis
and the crisis in the centre and that it is therefore
difficult to separate them or to build a Chinese wall
between these two geographical regions and between
these two crises.
This is an opportunity to reiterate the commitment
of the Government of the Republic of Mali to
accountability and justice and to recall our total
rejection of impunity, as demonstrated by the measures
that have been taken in recent weeks on the ground,
including most recently — today — the Government’s
dismissal of the Governor of Mopti, the main city in
central Mali, and the arrests that took place on the
Dogon plateau today following patrols by the national
gendarmerie with military support from the army.
24/25

12/06/2019

The Government is committed to conducting
military operations in strict compliance with all
international instruments that Mali has sovereignly
signed and incorporated into its domestic legislation,
in particular with regard to respect for fundamental
human rights. In accordance with this commitment,
I would like to inform the Council that eight cases
involving military personnel are under investigation
at the Mopti military court. The interrogations begin
tomorrow, 13 June 2019.
I can assure Council members that the objective of
the military institution is zero cases of human rights
violations, and the Minister of Defence has visited the
military several times since his appointment in order
to send a message about respecting right to life and the
physical integrity of persons, even suspects who have
been arrested. To achieve this objective of zero cases
of human rights violations, Mali needs to strengthen
fruitful partnerships in the areas of adequate training
in expertise on finding and preserving evidence and in
conducting investigations.
The cases of human rights violations perpetrated
by MINUSMA officers identified in the report before
us testify, if there was any need, to the complexity of
the security environment. Moreover, the Government
reaffirms its willingness to do justice to peacekeepers
who are regularly attacked by hostile armed groups,
through the prosecution and trial of the perpetrators
and accomplices of such attacks, which may constitute
war crimes under international law.
I know that in a few days’ time the Security
Council will renew the mandate of MINUSMA. This
Mission, whose strategic priority remains to support
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the Algiers
process, is striving to properly fulfil its mandate in a
particularly difficult and complex environment in more
than one respect.
The members of the Security Council and the
representatives of the troop- and police-contributing
countries can be proud of the brave men and women
who make up MINUSMA and who work daily to
implement the Mission’s mandate on the ground, often
at the risk of their lives. MINUSMA’s support both
for the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation and for the overall stabilization of
Mali is invaluable. Today, in addition to ensuring a
security network in the northern regions pending the
19-17256

12/06/2019

The situation in Mali

redeployment of the reformed and reconstituted Malian
defence and security forces, the presence of MINUSMA
reassures our populations, promotes humanitarian
access and strengthens confidence among the Malian
parties to the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation.
I do not forget the support in the area of quick-impact
projects and the provision of basic social services to the
most vulnerable populations. Nor do I forget the support
we are looking forward to receiving in the upcoming
elections; the organization of the referendum; the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
through the Mission’s programmatic activities; the
strengthening of political dialogue and assistance in the
protection of human rights; and, as I mentioned earlier,
the important role played by the representative of the
Secretary General in the defusing of political tensions,
leading to the political agreement on governance.
Likewise, MINUSMA contributes to the stabilization
of the Sahel region through its important role in
supporting the forces directly involved in the fight
against terrorism, including the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel and the Barkhane force.
It is for all these reasons and in order to consolidate
the gains already made that the Government of the
Republic of Mali asks the Council, following the
recommendations of the Secretary-General in his
report, to extend the mandate of MINUSMA for an
additional year. It is also for all these reasons that the
Government of Mali requests the Security Council to
provide MINUSMA with adequate human, financial,
technological and equipment resources, enabling it to
properly carry out its mandate of protecting civilians
and to better protect its staff and facilities.
It is also for all these reasons that the Government
of Mali is asking for an increased presence of
MINUSMA in the regions of central Mali, alongside
the Malian defence and security forces, in order to
help protect civilian populations and their property, to
end the cycle of violence and to allow the restoration
of administrative and basic social services. Such an
increased presence is the key condition for the success
of the political process and the political approach we

S/PV. 8547

intend to launch in the coming days. I emphasize that
this strengthening of MINUSMA’s presence in central
Mali should not be undertaken to the detriment of the
northern regions of Mali, because we do not want to
create a security vacuum in that part of our country,
which could be reoccupied by forces hostile to the
peace process.
In conclusion, I wish above all to assure the
Council of our Government’s resolve to relentlessly
pursue the diligent and inclusive implementation of
the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
emanating from the Algiers process. In that regard,
we attach particular importance to the renewal of the
mandate of the MINUSMA and its equipment in a form
adapted to the situation.
I would like to conclude as I began, by reiterating
the gratitude of our people to the United Nations and
to all our bilateral and multilateral partners for their
multiform and unwavering support since the beginning
of the crisis in 2012. I thank them yet again for all
their support over the years to Mali in exercising its
sovereignty over its entire territory; for their respect for
Mali’s territorial integrity and national unity and the
republican and secular nature of the State; and, finally,
for all the support provided throughout the Algiers
process and the implementation of the Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation.
I reiterate the tribute of the entire Malian people
to the memory of all the victims of the Malian crisis,
civil and military, foreign as well as Malian, fallen on
the field of honour in Mali since the beginning of the
crisis. I extend our ardent wishes to the wounded for a
speedy recovery .
Finally, I would like to address special words of
thanks, as others have done before me, to Ambassador
François Delattre, Permanent Representative of France
to the United Nations, for his leadership on the Mali
issue. At the moment when he is preparing to take up new
duties in his country, the Government of the Republic
of Mali, through me, expresses its infinite gratitude.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

19-1725625/25
