26

General Auembly -

the report on South West Africa submitted to the Committee by the Union of South Africa ( or a report on
conditions in the Territory of South West Africa
prepared by the Committee in accordance with paragraph 12 (c) of General Assembly resolution 749 A
(VII1)) together with the observations of the Committee on the report as well as the comments of the
duly authorized representative of the Union of South
Africa, should that Government decide to follow the
General Assembly's recommendation and appoint such
a representative.
Special rule B: The General Assembly shall, as a
rule, be guided by the observations· of the Committee
on South West Africa and shall base its conclusions,
as far as possible, on the Committee's observations.
PROCEDURE WITH REGARD TO PETITIONS

Special rule C: The General Assembly shall receive
annually from the Committee on South West Africa a
report with regard to petitions submitted to it. The
summary records of the meetings at which the petitions
were discussed shall be attached.
Special rule D : The General Assembly shall, as a
rule, be guided by the conclusions of the Committee
on South West Africa and shall base its own conclusions, as far as possible, on the conclusions of the
Committee.
PRIVATE MEETINGS

Special rule E: Having regard to rule 62 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly, meetings at
which decisions concerning persons are considered shall
be held in private.
VOTING PROCEDURE

Special rule F: Decisions of the General Assembly
on questions relating to reports and petitions concerning the Territory of South West Africa shall be regarded as important questions within the meaning of
Article 18, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United
Nations.
494th plenary meeting,
11 October 1954.
845 (IX). Educational advancement in Non-Self.
Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Noting resolution 743 (VIII) of 27 November 1953,
by which the Administering Members were recommended to make the greatest possible use of offers that
might be made to them by other Member States
through the Secretary-General or through the specialized agencies concerned or in other appropriate
ways, for the purpose of facilitating the educational
advancement of the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories by s:tch means as making available fellowships, scholarship!> and internships to qualified students
from these Territori~s,
Noting the view 3 exprt:<;ed by the Committee on Information from N on-Self-G,werning Territories in
1953 that the attainment of seli-government by Non8 Sec Official Records of the General Assemb.!y, Eighth Session, Supplement No. 15, part two, para. 10.

Ninth Sellsion

Self-Governing Territories is, inter alia, hindered by
inadequacies in the education of their peoples,
Considering that facilities for study and training at
all levels of education, despite all the efforts made by
the Administering Members in the direction of their
improvement, are not yet adequate in most of the
Non-Self-Governing Territories,
1. Invites Member States to extend generously their
offers of facilities not only for study and training of
university standard but, in the first place, for study at
the post-primary level as well as technical and vocational training of immediate practical value;
2. Invites Member States offering facilities, in cases
where the languages of instruction differ from the
languages of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, to
consider the possibility of extending the duration of
the facilities offered by a preliminary period of language training and other adjustment to the country
of study ot training ;
3. Invites Member States to transmit the details of
such offers to the Administering Members, to the
Secretary-General and to the appropriate specialized
agencies;
4. Recommends that the Administering Members
make the greatest possible use of facilities at all levels
of education and training, including the field of fundamental education, that may be offered by States Members of the United Nations;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Administering Members and the specialized
agencies concerned, to establish a simple procedure
which would enable offers and applications made
through the United Nations or the specialized agencies
to be brought to the attention of the Administering
Members, and thereafter, in the case of applications, to
the attention of the offering States concerned together
with any observations the Administering Members may
have submitted;
6. Invites the Administering Members to give appropriate publicity in Territories under their administration to offers of study and training facilities and to
take such other measures as will ensure that the
greatest possible advantage is taken of the offers ;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to include in the
United Nations information material details of all such
offers and of the procedures to be followed in submitting applications, and further requests him to transmit such details to the specialized agencies with a
view to securing similar publicity in their appropriate
publications;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, after consultation
with the Administering Members, to prepare a report
for the information of the General Assembly giving
details of the offers made and the extent to which they
have been taken up.
498th plenary meeting,
22 November 1954.
846 (IX). Work of the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the report' of the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories on
the work of its 1954 session;
' Ibid., Ninth Session, Supplement No. 18.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

2. Approves the special report 5 on economic conditions in the Non-Self-Governing Territories as a supplement to the report 6 approved in 1951;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to communicate the
special report to the Members of the United Nations
responsible for the administration of N on-Self-Governing Territories, to the Economic and Social Council,
to the Trusteeship Council and to the specialized agencies concerned for their consideration ;
4. Expresses its agreement with the suggestion in the
report that the Secretary-General should convene the
sixth session of the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Te;ritories for the spring of
1955;
5. Invites the Committee to submit a report to the
General Assembly at its tenth session, paying particular
regard to social conditions in Non-Self-Governing
Territories as indicated, in particular, in the information transmitted to the Secretary-General in 1954;
6. Decides that, notwithstanding the provisions of
paragraph 4 (a) of General Assembly resolution 218
(III) of 3 November 1948, the full summaries and
analyses of the information transmitted during 1955
should be submitted to the General Assembly in 1956.
498th plenary meeting,
22 November 1954.

k47 (IX). Information on problems common to
regional groups of Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Having since 1950 approved annually special reports
on economic, social and educational conditions in NonSelf-Governing Territories,
Considering that these reports express general views
and recommendations applicable to Non-Self-Governing Territories as a whole,
Recognizing that conditions in the various regions
and in particular Territories may present special problems,
Believing that the consideration of these special
problems by the General Assembly should provide an
opportunity for the expression of views and recommendations of concrete value to certain regional groups
of Territories,
1. Requests the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories at its 1955 session to
study the manner in which the future reports prepared
for the General Assembly may most appropriately be
directed to the consideration of information or recommendations concerning the particular problems common
to certain regional groups of Territories;
2. Further requests the Committee to examine
whether any amplification or amendment of the Standard Form is necessary so as to assist the Administering
Members in providing concrete information on the
particular problems common to certain regional groups
of Territories;
3. Suggests that the Committee give full consideration to the views expressed on these subjects during
5
6

Ibid., part two.
Ibid., Sixth Session, Supplement No. 14, part three.

17

the discussions in the Fourth Committee at the ninth
session of the General Assembly.
498th plenary meeting,
22 November 1954.
848 (IX). Voluntary transmiHion of information on political development in Non-Self.
Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the functions it bears over peoples of
Non-Self-Governing Territories under the principles
and objectives set forth in Article 73 of the Charter
of the United Nations,
Considering that these principles and objectives relate
to the political as well as the economic, social and educational advancement of the peoples concerned,
Recalling that by resolutions 144 (II), 327 (IV) and
637 B (VII) it has sought to secure the transmission
by Members administering Non-Self-Governing Territories of voluntary information on the manner and
extent to which the peoples of Territories under their
administration are being developed for self-government,
Noting with satisfac.tion that some Members responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing
Territories already have voluntarily transmitted some
information on the development of self-governing institutions in the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
But noting further that other Members have not yet
transmittecl such information,
1. Reiterates the view that voluntary submission of
information on the political development of peoples in
Non-Self-Governing Territories is fully in accord with
the spirit of Article 73 of the Charter;
2. Invites the Administering Members concerned to
give the United Nations their utmost co-operation in
this regard.
498th plenary meeting,
22 November 1954.
849 (IX). Cessation of the transmission of information under Article 73 e of the Charter in respect of Greenland

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by resolution 222 (III) of 3 November 1948, the General Assembly, while welcoming any
development of self-government in Non-Self-Governing Territories, considers it essential that the United
Nations be informed of any change in the constitutional
status of any such Territory as a result of which the
responsible Government concerned thinks it unnecessary to transmit further information in respect of
that Territory under Article i3 e of the Charter,
Having received from the Government of Denmark
a communication 7 dated 3 September 1953 informing
the Secretary-General that, as a result of the constitutional amendment adopted on 5 June 1953, Greenland
has become an integral part of the Danish Realm with
a constitutional status equal to that of other parts of
Denmark and that, as a consequence of this constitutional change, the Danish Government regarded its
responsibilities under Chapter XI of the Charter in
7

See documents A/ AC.35/L.155 and Corr.l
