A/65/PV.96

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

96

th plenary meeting
Monday, 13 June 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 62 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa
Draft resolution (A/65/L.62/Rev.1)
The President (spoke in French): I wish to
remind members that the General Assembly held a
debate on agenda item 62 and its sub-items (a) and (b)
jointly with agenda item 12 at its 30th and 31st plenary
meetings, on 14 October 2010.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Argentina
to
introduce
draft
resolution
A/65/L.62/Rev.1.
Mr. Limeres (Argentina): On behalf of the Group
of 77 (G-77) and China and under sub-item (b) of
agenda item 62, I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/65/L.62/Rev.1, entitled “Implementation
of the recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa”.
The Group would like to thank the following
countries that have joined the list of sponsors:
Australia, Finland, Germany, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Poland, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain and Sweden. The

G-77 and China would also like to express its warm
thanks to the delegation of Sweden for its skill and
competence in conducting the deliberations on the draft
resolution.
We are of the view that development, peace,
security and human rights are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing. In that regard, we stress that the
responsibility for peace and security in Africa,
including the capacity to address the root causes of
conflict and to resolve conflicts in a peaceful manner,
lies primarily with African countries. However, we also
recognize the need for support from the international
community and the United Nations, taking into account
the responsibilities of the United Nations in this regard
according to the Charter.
We would like to note that, despite the positive
trends and advances in obtaining durable peace in
Africa, the conditions required for sustainable
development have yet to be consolidated throughout
the continent and that there is therefore an urgent need
to continue developing African human and institutional
capacities, particularly in countries emerging from
conflict.
We welcome the progress made, in particular by
the African Union and subregional organizations, in the
prevention, management and resolution of conflict and
in post-conflict peacebuilding in a number of African
countries. Moreover, we call on the United Nations and
the donor community to intensify and increase efforts
in a coordinated manner to support ongoing regional
efforts to wield African mediation and negotiation

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-37197 (E)

*1137197*

A/65/PV.96

capacity with a view to achieving further progress
towards the goal of a conflict-free Africa.
The G-77 and China hopes that this draft
resolution will be adopted by acclamation at this
meeting.
The President (spoke in French): Before we
proceed to take action on the draft resolution, I give the
floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like
to announce that, since the submission of draft
resolution A/65/L.62/Rev.1, the following countries
have also become sponsors: Australia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Montenegro, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now take action on draft resolution
A/65/L.62/Rev.1, entitled “Implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/65/L.62/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/65/L.62/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 65/278).
The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 62?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of agenda and
allocation of items
The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September
2010, the General Assembly decided to allocate agenda
item 66 and its sub-items to the Third Committee.
In order for the General Assembly to take action
expeditiously on the draft resolution before it today,

2

may I take it that the Assembly wishes to consider subitem (b) of agenda item 66 directly in plenary meeting
and proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 66 (continued)
Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and followup to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action
Draft resolution (A/65/L.76)
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now consider draft resolution A/65/L.76, entitled
“Scope, modalities, format and organization of the
high-level meeting of the General Assembly to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): In connection
with draft resolution A/65/L.76, entitled “Scope,
modalities, format and organization of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly to commemorate the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action”, I wish to put
on record the following statement of financial
implications on behalf of the Secretary-General, in
accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 7 of
draft resolution A/65/L.76, the General Assembly
would decide that the high-level meeting would be held
on Thursday, 22 September 2011. It would consist of
an opening plenary meeting, from 9 a.m. to 11 a.m.;
two consecutive round tables, from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m.
and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m.; and a closing plenary
meeting, from 6 p.m. to 7 p.m. The morning meeting of
the general debate on that day will be held from
11 a.m. to 1 p.m. That arrangement does not constitute
a precedent.
The Assembly would also decide that the
speakers at the opening plenary would be the President
of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the head of

11-37197

A/65/PV.96

State of South Africa and one speaker from each
regional group, as well as selected representatives of a
non-governmental organization active in the field of
combating racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance; decide on the organizational
arrangements for the round tables; and decide that the
closing plenary meeting would consist of the
presentation of summaries of the discussions by the
co-chairs of the round tables and the adoption of a
short and concise political declaration aimed at
mobilizing political will.
It is recalled that in his statement on the
programme budget implications (A/C.5/65/12) of
resolution 65/240, which was draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.60, the Secretary-General informed the
General Assembly about the activities by which the
proposals called for in paragraphs 50, 51, 53 and 57
would be implemented and the additional requirements
by programme budget section that would arise. The
General Assembly, by its resolution 65/259, approved
total additional requirements of $206,400 for the
biennium 2010-2011 in response to the terms of
resolution 65/240: $115,700 under section 2 (General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs
and conference management) and $90,700 under
section 27 (Public information).
The Secretariat has reviewed the terms of draft
resolution A/65/L.76 and wishes to inform the General
Assembly that the scope, modalities, format and
organization of the high-level meeting contained in the
draft resolution introduce only slight changes from the
modality understood by it under the terms of resolution
65/240. The change relates only to timing. The General
Assembly is hereby informed that, should it adopt draft
resolution A/65/L.76, additional resources are not

expected to arise over and above those approved at the
main part of the sixty-fifth session under section 2
(General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
affairs and conference management) and section 27
(Public information).
The Secretariat continues to maintain its position
as reflected in paragraph 17 of document A/C.5/65/12
with regard to the resources that would be absorbed for
the holding of the high-level meeting under section 2
(General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
affairs and conference management), section 23
(Human rights), section 27 (Public information) and
section 28D (Office of Central Support Services).
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will proceed to take action on draft resolution
A/65/L.76.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/65/L.76?
Draft resolution A/65/L.76 was adopted (resolution
65/279).
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
express my sincere thanks to His Excellency
Mr. Michel Tommo Monthe, Permanent Representative
of Cameroon, and to Her Excellency Ms. Isabelle
Picco, Permanent Representative of Monaco, who so
effectively and patiently conducted the discussions and
complex negotiations in the informal consultations in
order to bring them to a successful conclusion. I am
sure, too, that the members of the Assembly join me in
extending to them our sincere appreciation.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 66.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

11-37197

3
