_..-.--

UNITED

NATIONS

THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

............... ...,...........

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia:
fu) Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to paragraph 7 of
Security Council resolution 435 (1978) (S/12903);
fb) Letter dated 24 October 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Burundi
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12906)
.,........................,...,.............

1
I

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2098)

SjPV.2098

‘--q

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2098th
Held in New York on

Monday,

President: Mr. L&on N’DONG (Gabon)Present: The representatives of the following
States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait,
Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States
of America, Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2098)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Report of the Secretary-General submitted
pursuant to paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution
435 (1978) (S/12903);
(b) Letter dated 24 October 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Burundi to the United
Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council
(S/ 12906)
The meeting was called to order at 11.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
(a) Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant
to
paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution 435 (19~3)
(S/l 2903);
(b) Letter dated 24 October 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Burundi to the United
Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council
(S/l 2906)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
In
accordance with the Council’s earlier decisions, f invite the
representatives of Algeria, Bangladesh, Benin,
Burundi,
Cuba, Egypt, Ghana, Guyana, Mozambique, Saudi
Arabia,
Somalia, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places
reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bouayad-Agha
(Algeria), Mr. Huq (Bangladesh), Mr. Houngavou
(Benin),
Mr. Simbananiye (Burundi),
Mr. Roa Kuuri
(Cuba),
Mr. Abdel
Meguid
(Egypt),
Mr. Boaten
(Ghana),
Mr. Sinclair
(Guyana),
Mr. Lobo
fm0zambique),
Mr. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia), Mr. Hussen
(Somalia),
Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) and Miss Konie (Zambia)
took

MEETING
13 November

1978, at 10.30 a.m.

the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2092nd meeting,
I invite the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia and the delegation of the Council to take places at
the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Miss Konie (President

of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2092nd meeting,
I invite Mr, Gurirab to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the Resident, Mr. Gurirab (Permanent Observer of the South West Africa People’s
Organization) took a place at the Council table.
4. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (CUerpretation j?orn Chinese):
Mr. President, first of all, please allow me to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council.
5. The development of the current situation in Namibia
has evoked widespread concern. In particular, as a result of
the South African racist rkgime’s obdurate persistence in its
reactionary stand, the Security Council has met to consider
the question of Namibia for the third time in the past three
months.
6. The Namibian people’s just struggle for national independence and liberation has won the universal support of
the African countries and people as well as ever-wider
sympathy and support all over the world. The South
African colonial authorities have been strongly condemned
by world opinion for their illegal occupation of Namibia.
Their military repression of the Namibian people has been
repeatedly frustrated, and their political tricks have gone
bankrupt one after another. Under the leadership of the
South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), the
Namibian people have carried on armed struggle success.
fully and persistently. The development of the situation is
growing more and more favourable to the Namibian people
and the entire African people.
7. However, the South African racist authorities will never
be reconciled to the loss of their paradise. With imperialist
support, they are still desperately putting up a last-ditch
struggle, changing their tactics now and then, in an attempt

to perpetuate their illegal domination of Namibia. Last
April, during the ninth special session of the General
Assembly, devoted to the question of Namibia, the South
African racist regime was for a time compelled to commit
itself to a gradual withdrawal of its troops from Namibia
and a termination of its illegal occupation of the Territory.
However, in the twinkling of an eye, it launched massive
armed incursions against the neighbouring African States
and wantonly slaughtered the Namibian people. Subsequently, using absurd and groundless pretexts, it brazenly
reneged on its previous commitment and asserted its
readiness to go ahead with unilateral and illegal “elections”
in December in pursuance of its long premeditated plan of a
so-called internal settlement. Judging from the result of the
talks held recently at Pretoria between the five Western
Powers and the South African racist authorities, the Botha
regime has no intention at all of repenting. The development over the past six months fully shows that no matter
how the South African racist authorities may change their
tactics, their purpose remains none other than to rig up and
foster a puppet regime through the political fraud of an
“internal settlement”, so as to turn Namibia into another
Transkei and thus to attain their criminal aim of perpetuating the occupation of Namibia. All this has further revealed
the extreme intransigence and reactionary nature of the
South African racists, showing that the revolutionary
people can win final victory only by carrying out tit-for-tat
struggles, particularly persistent and intensified armed
struggle, against the South African racists.

tempered will certainly heighten their vigilance, strengthen
their unity, persevere in struggle, ceaselessly frustrate the
schemes of the South African racist authorities, resolutely
do away with the interference and sabotage of the
super-Powers and win final victory in their struggle for
national independence.
11. On the basis of the above position, the Chinese
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution
contained in document S/12922, sponsored by Gabon,
India, Kuwait and Nigeria. At the same time, I should like
to make it clear that, in view of the fact that resolution
435 (19783 mainly concerns the dispatch of a United
Nations force, the Chinese delegation did not participate in
the vote on that resolution when it was adopted by the
Council on 29 September last. Consequently, the Chinese
delegation wishes to record its reservation on the references
to that resolution contained in the draft resolution before us.
12. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Rerzch): It is
my understanding that the Council is ready to vote on the
draft resolution sponsored by Gabon, India, Kuwait and
Nigeria, which is contained in document S/12922.
If I hear no objection I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

8. The Chinese Government and people have always
resolutely supported the Namibian people in their just
struggle against colonialism and racism and for national
independence and liberation, and we strongly condemn the
South African racist regime for its illegal occupation and
colonial domination of Namibia. We have consistently held
that the Namibian people should attain their genuine
national independence free from any outside interference
and on the basis of unification and territorial integrity. The
South
African racist regime must immediately, totally and
unconditionally withdraw all its military and police forces,
as well as its administration, from Namibia and terminate
forthwith
its illegal domination there. Walvis Bay is an
integral part of Namibian territory which should be
returned to Namibia immediately.

In favour: Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, Gabon, India,
Kuwait, Mauritius, Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, Venezuela.
Against: None.
Abstaining: Canada, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
The draft resolution was adopted by 10 votes to none,
with 5 abstentions. 1
13. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from l+ench): I shall
now call on those representatives who have asked to speak
after the vote.

9. We maintain that the United Nations must follow the
historical trend and perform its bounden duty of putting an
end to the South African racist regime’s illegal occupation
and colonial rule of Namibia in accordance with the urgent
desire and just demand of the African people, In our view,
the Security Council should not only condemn sternly the
reactionary deeds of the South African racist authorities,
but also take practical and effective measures, including
sanctions, against the South African racist regime, in
accordance with the just demand of the African countries
and the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations.

14. Mr. BARTON (Canada): First of all, I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the high office of
President of the Council during the month of November
and also to acknowledge the important work of your
predecessor, the representative of France.
15. In making this statement. I am speaking not only on
behalf of my -Government but also in the name of the
representatives of the Federal Republic of Germany,
France, the United Kingdom and the United States.
16. Our five delegations understand the bewilderment and
share the frustration at the uncertainty of the present
situation and also feel the deep sense of disappointment
which underlies the resolution which has just been adopted.

10. The Namibian people are a heroic people who cannot
be defeated. No matter how many obstacles or even zigzags
and reversals they may encounter on their road of advance
towards national independence, we are convinced that the
Namibian people who have been repeatedly tested and

1 Seeresolution 439 (1978).
2

17. We have worked for 19 months in an endeavour to
devise arrangements which would enable Namibia t0 attain
an independence which is internationally acceptable. The
adoption of resolution 435 (1978), approving the Secretary
General’s report on the implementation of the proposal of
0ur five Governments, Was a very significant step in this
process.
We believed then, and believe now, that the best
procedure would be to go forward on the basis 0f the
Secretary-General’s report. However, even as we adopted
that resolution we were all aware of the difficulties t0 be
overcome.

22, We abstained in the voting on the draft resolution just
adopted because we believe that our efforts should be
directed to obtaining and supporting the efforts of the
Secretary-General to secure South African co-operation
rather than to prejudging the possible outcome, as does
paragraph 6 of the resolution. However, it would be a
mistake to interpret our abstention as a lack of sympathy
for the resolution or the direction in which it points the
Council in the event of South Africa’s failing t0 co-operate
in the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). We will
make our judgements on the facts at the appropriate time
and act accordingly.

lg. In recognition of that, our five delegations were asked
not to consider our work done but to continue our efforts
t0 bring about the attainment of the objer,tive that is
common to all members of the Council: the independence
0f Namibia through free and fair elections under United
Nations supervision and control.

23. We reaffirm our commitment to resolution
435 (1978). We will continue our efforts and give all our
support to the Secretary-General in his endeavours to
obtain the co-operation of South Africa in the little time
remaining.
24. Mr. CARP10 CASTILLO (Venezuela) (interpretntion
firm ?@nishl: My delegation voted in favour of the draft
resolution in document S/12922 because we consider that
it is a logical consequence of resolution 435 (1978), in
which the Council approved the plan presented to it by the
five Western countries members of the Council, which plan
has been disregarded by South Africa with its usual
obstinacy and with a total lack of consideration and respect
for the international community.

19. And we have continued our efforts. Faced with the
South Africans’ refusal to accept the Secretary-General’s
report and their intention to hold unilateral elections that
could in no way be reconciled with our proposal or
resolution 435 (1978), Ministers of the Five travelled to
Pretoria. The Ministers were able, we believe, to gain the
acceptance by the South African Government of those
aspects of the Secretary-General’s report which that
Government had questioned. The South Africans agreed to
resume discussions concerning United Nations-supervised
elections within the framework of resolution 435 (1978).

25. My delegation considers that the time has come to
begin to apply sanctions against South Africa regardless of
the political and economic interests that oppose such
sanctions, but we decided to vote in favour of a less drastic
draft resolution in order to act in the spirit of co-operation
and compromise that characterizes the international posie
tion adopted by Venezuela.

20. To our Governments’ disappointment and regret, the
South African Government maintained its intention to
proceed with unilateral elections. However, our Ministers
made our position plain: that we did not accept the validity
of those elections and would consider them null and void.
We do not consider them as having any significance. We will
not accord any recognition to the outcome. Those elections
cannot be considered free and fair and are irrelevant to the
progress of Namibia to an internationally acceptable independence. We share the apprehensions expressed in this
debate, most notably by our African colleagues, that this
unilateral process might be used to frustrate the implementation of resolution 435 (1978).

26. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Saudi Arabia. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
27. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I do not want t0 be
misunderstood. I salute Gabon, India, Kuwait and Nigeria
for having done their utmost in submitting the draft
resolution which has just been adopted. But, although it
received the support of a majority let us see what will be
the outcome of such a resolution.

21. Nevertheless, South Africa still has no opportunity t0
demonstrate that it will co-operate with the United
Nations, and to allay the concerns which underlie that
resolution, In Pretoria the South African Government, in
agreeing that discussions should be resumed, accepted that
the aim of those discussions would be to carry forward the
planning of the proposed United Nations-supervised elections within the framework of resolution 435 (1978) and to
fuc a date for those elections. Moreover, the South Africans
stated their view that it was appropriate to recommend t0
the Secretary-General that he should begin consultations 0n
the composition of the military component of the United
Nations Transition Assistance Group. It is those processes
to which South Africa has agreed that in our view Offer the
way forward
towards
implementation of resolution
435 (1978). Time is short. South Africa should be under n0
illusions as to our determination.

28. I have been familiar with this question for at least 20
to 25 years, We have adopted similar resolutions in the past
but with no result. Therefore, why am I speaking? It is just
to make my voice heard? I have been speaking here for
almost 33 years, but I believe it is my humble duty to draw
the attention of the Council to the fact that time is not on
the side of peace in southern Africa. There will be trouble.
Innocent people
will be sacrificed. Emotions will run high.
And what will be the result-another SeCUrity
~~U~Ci~
meeting?
And, if we meet, what will happen afterwards?
Will South Africa become flexible? I believe that as long as
South Africa is economically viable and has financhl
Credit
almost everywhere-including in some African countries,
and black countries for that matter-it can go on and 011
and we shall still find ourselves in this same impasse. What
3

shall we do? Shall we just have another Council meeting
two or three months, or whatever the period may be, from
now, to see how we should handle the problem? Shall we
be in a position to tell-them that we will apply Chapter VII
of the Charter? How many times do I have to tell Members
of the United Nations that Chapter VII will not be
enforced? Let us be frank as to why it will not be
enforced.

Territory. That would not necessarily be so, but in order to
meet those fears I suggest that the United Nations Council
for Namibia should co-operate with Mr. .4htisaari. Nobody
can question the sincerity of the Council for Namibia.
Mr. Ahtisaari and the Council for Namibia would see to it
that orderly elections took place.
34. But South Africa will not accept that, as I mentioned
in my last statement, simply because of the geographical
proximity of the mandated Territory to South Africa. The
South African Government, in its note to the SecretaryGeneral and the representatives of the five Western States,
mentioned clearly that it was afraid that Namibia would
become a hotbed of communism, and that its State would
be subverted by communism That may be a legitimate fear,
inasmuch as sometimes Western Powers intervene in other
territories to see to it that their own ideology is adopted. I
am not condoning such action. Unfortunately we are still
living in times when, instead of having a new approach, the
balance of power, power politics and spheres of influence
are still the approaches to international affairs, I have
always said that we should have a new approach, but
unfortunately we do not have one. That is why, whether
under the Trusteeship Council as such or under a
combination of the office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ahtisaari, and the Council for
Namibia, what I have called an instrument for the neutralization of the Territory, which would have to be accepted
by SWAPO, should be worked out.

29. The sincerity of those countries whose point of view
was expressed by my good friend the representative of
Canada cannot be questioned. But why are they sincere?
They are sincere because they would like to do something
and are not in a position to do it. The only thing that they
cannot say I will say for them.
30. Let us analyse those countries. They call themselves
democratic countries. Every country calls itself a democratic country. The Soviet Union calls itself a democratic
country. So does China. They must have elections and that
sort of thing, the machinery of democracy. They are under
the influence of pressure groups. What are the pressure
groups? Are they only business groups? No, sometimes
they are trade unions, to be frank and fair. If the
application of Chapter VII is accepted by the Governments
they may not last very long, because the pressure groups
sometimes finance an election in certain countries, and they
will lobby against the Government. Members know very
well that in Europe and in this country there is a stringent
situation in the economic field. We are warned that there
may be a depression or, if not a depression, a recession.
Does the Council think that those Governments are in a
position to apply any article of Chapter VII?

3.5. If Namibia were made neutral and did not allow any
arms to come in from abroad in order to fight its
neighbours-in this instance, South Africa-what
would be
South Africa’s objection? That things would still be
smuggled into Namibia? Smuggling takes place everywhere
in the world, but we would be aware of it and could take
issue then with SWAPO, which I believe would be the party
to rule in Namibia because of its popularity there and
because it seems to represent the majority of the people.
We in the United Nations could take issue with SWAPO, or
any Government, if it were to throw in its weight with any
of the big Powers.

31. Let US see what Chapter VII, Article 42, says:
“Should the Security Council consider that measures
provided for in Article 41 would be inadequate or have
proved to be inadequate, it may take such action by air,
sea, or land forces as may be nccessaly to maintain or
restore international peace and security.”
There are many articles in Chapter VII, but not one of them
will be applied, and even if one of them were applied
officially, there are ways and means of circumventing the
application.

36. Namibia should become neutral, like Switzerland,
Austria and Sweden; then, I am sure, SWAP0 would receive
a great deal of aid from the world. If there were peace, I
would try to talk my Government into contributing
something; I do not know whether I would succeed, but I
hope I would. Anybody could give to them, but the major
Powers for ulterior political motives. What is wrong with
that solution?

32. What should we do? Should we be prepared to fact
the same impasse, as I have said, two or three months from
now? No, I do not think we should. We should try to be a
little more creative and a little more innovative in the
United Nations and not maintain the fossilized attitudes we
have taken-not by choice, but sometimes of necessity, if
not by compulsion.

37. The resolution that has just been adopted is very
commendable, but it reminds me of Alice in Wonderland.
She ran and ran, and found herself in the same place. Here
is another resolution; but in a few weeks or a few months
from now we shall find ourselves in the same position.

33. When I spoke the other day /2094th meeti@], I
suggested that we should revive the Trusteeship Council.
There were objections to that proposal from some of my
African friends; others approved of it, and I said that we
would see that Mr. Ahtisaari was the High Commissioner
for a period of two or three months, until we had made
sure that the elections were carried out in an orderly
manner. The objection that was raised to that proposal was
that we were reverting to a mandated state for the

38. What is wrong with this plan? I have no patent for it;
I am not trying to monopolize it; perhaps it can be improved
upon. The fear of South Africa is that Namibia will become
a hotbed of an ideology that will ultimately endanger the
survival of South Africa, that will bring revolution, simply
because the white element there is in the minority and the
4

black majority in South Africa could be roused, which is
only natural, if it is not satisfied with its political, social
and economic rights.

41. I am not saying this in criticism; 1 am saying it as a
matter of fact; it happened. Therefore, 1 felt constrained to
tell the Council what 1 thought 1 should tell it, so that if we
find ourselves faced with the same difficulty a month, two
months or three months hence, 1 would, so to speak, have
provided the preface by submittting a project that may be
feasible. Let us remember that any one of you can perhaps
co-operate in adding to or subtracting from any project I
may have for the solution of this problem.

39. If South Africa refused to accept the situation after
the establishment of Namibia as a neutral Stateincidentally, the instrument should be deposited with the
Secretary-General, and all the major Powers and the
members of the Security Council should be the first to
append their signatures to it-then we would call South
Africa’s bluff. They might then bring up Walvis Bay as a
bone of contention. I took it upon myself to make six
points, which 1 submitted a few months ago to the
Secretary-General, about Walvis Bay, but I am not going to
talk about it until the South Africans do, if we call their
bluff. It may not be a bluff; it may be true that they are
genuinely afraid. But assuming they do bring up the subject
of Walvis Bay as a bone of contention, to put a spoke in the
wheel, so to speak, we have a solution. 1 believe that should
the subject of Walvis Bay be brought to our attention again
we should deal with it then; at present it is not.

42. Why should I arrogate to myself the responsibility of
doing this, while we are in Saudi Arabia and Namibia is
away on the Atlantic coast? 1 do so because every one of
us should try his best to do something which will bring
peace, and to forget our petty national interests. After all,
the world’s concerns have become global, not regional. We
cannot afford anything which falls short of bringing peace
to the continent of Africa. If we do not act that way, and
the major Powers follow the same approach, then let us say
“goodbye” to the United Nations
43. By some miscalculation we may have a widespread
conflict in Africa which would perhaps spread to other
parts of the world. 1 remember the difficult days of the
Congo; poor Hammarskjbld died during that crisis. We did
everything to bring peace; and finally the labour was not
lost when our Western friends-in that instance Belgium and
others-saw that the age of colonialism had gone. Others
tried to revive what they called neo-colonialism. 1 was not
much attracted by such terms. Everyone is colonized by
certain groups inside his own country. Let us not lose
ourselves by trying to use abstract terms. What we need
here is action, not words.

40. 1 toyed with the idea of submitting a draft resolution
on my project, but 1 thought that if 1 did it might not get
enough votes, or if it did receive a sufficient number of
votes that nothing would be done unless the five Western
Powers, to use an American expression, tried to sell the idea
of neutralization to South Africa. After all, they have a
rapport with South Africa, and 1 must thank them for
doing their best; do not get me wrong, I am not saying
anything in criticism of the five Western Powers. But
representatives should have a new approach. They cannot
go on like this. I remember ,years ago 1 submitted two draft
resolutions much simpler than the one we are dealing with
here in the Fourth Committee. And I once submitted, a
draft resolution to the Security Council, and many of my
friends came and begged me to withdraw it. Instead, a
resolution of six or seven pages, with eight chapters with
Roman numerals, was adopted, with no result.

44. 1 must again thank my colleagues who submitted the
draft resolution which we have just adopted and 1 also hope
that my statement will be taken seriously, especially by the
Western Powers, and a new approach adopted towards
South Africa.
The meetingrose at 12.15 p.m.

5
