32

General Auembly--8eventb Ses•ion

644 (VII). Racial discrimination in Non-Self.
Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Having regard to the principles oi the Charter and
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights emphasizing the necessity of promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms
for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or
religion,
Having regard to the princi?le recognized in Chapter
XI of the Charter that the interests of the inhabitants
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories are paramount,
Recogni::ing that there is a fundamental distinction
between discriminatory laws and practices, on the one
hand, and protective measures designed to safeguard
the rights oi the indigenous inhabitants, on the other
hand,
1. Rcrommcnds to the Mcmhers responsible for
the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories
the abolition in those Territories of discriminatorv laws
and practices contrary to the principles of the Charter
and of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
2. Recommends that the Administering Members
should examine all laws, statutes and ordinances in
force in the Non-Self-Governing Territories under
their administration, as well as their application in the
said Territories, with a view to the abolition of any
such discriminatory provisions or practices;
3. Recommends that, in any Non-Self-Governing
Territory where laws are in existence which distinguish
between citizens and non-citizens primarily on racial
or religious grounds, these laws should similarly be
examined;
4. Recommends that all public facilities should be
open to all inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, without distinction of race;
5. Recommends that where laws are in existence
providing particular measures of protection for sections
of the population, these laws should frequently be
examined in order to ascertain whether their protective
aspect is stil1 predominant, and whether provision
should be made for exemption from them in particular
circumstances ;
6. Recognizes that the establishment of improved
race relations largely depends on the development of
educational policies, and commends all measures designed to improve among all pupils in all schools understanding of the needs and problems of the community
as a whole;
7. Calls the attention of the Commission on Human
Rights to the present resolution.
402nd plenary meeting,
10 December 1952.

645 (VD). Educational, economic and aoeial
policiH in Non-Self-Governing Terrltorlee
The Gtmera! A..-.rem.bly,
(.,:HiJ,fr,,,:11q th:,i. the Comrnittee on Information

from Non-Self-Governing Territories is invited 2 to
submit to the General Assemb1y at its regular sessions
reports containing such substantive recommendations
as it may deem desirable, relating to functional fields
generally,
Considering that in 1950, 1951 and 1952 the General
Assembly approved 3 special reports prepared by the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories on educational, economic and social conditions, and invited the Secretary-General to communicate these reports to the Members of the United Nations
responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories for their consideration,
Recognizing that these reports express general views
and objectives to be taken into account in the formulation of policy,
1. Expresses the hope that the Members concerned,
when transmitting information under Article 73 e of
the Charter, will furnish annually as complete information as possible on any action taken to bring the
reports of the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories to the attention of the authorities responsible in the Territories for the implementation of educational, economic and social policy,
and on any problems which may arise in giving effect
to the general views expressed in these reports ;
2. invites the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories in its annual reports
to the General Assembly to consider the information
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter in the
light of the views expressed in the s~cial reports on
educational, economic and social conditions.
402nd plenary meeting,
10 December 1952.

646 (VU). Renewal of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territorlea

.

The General Assembly,
Having established, by resolution 332 (IV) adopted
on 2 December 1949, a Committee ori Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Recognizing the value of the work performed by
this Committee,
Recalling its decision set out in resolution 332 {IV)
to "examine in 1952 the question whether the Special
Committee should be renewed for a further period, together with the questions of the composition and terms
of reference of any such future Special Committee",
HO'lling re-examined the terms of reference of the
Committee and the provisions for its composition as
set forth in resolution 332 (IV), and the provisions
relating to the work of the Cor;nmittee set out in reso'
lution 333 I IV),
1. Decides to continue the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories on the same
basis for a further three-year period;
• See resolution 219 (Ill).
• Stt resolutions 445 (V), 565 (VI) and 643 (VII).

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Fourth Committee

2. Instructs the Fourth Committee, acting on behalf
of the General Assembly, to fill such vacancies as may
occur among the non-administering Members of the
Committee;
3. Decides that, at its regular session in 1955, the
General Assembly will examine the question whether
the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories should be renewed for a further
period, together with the questions of the composition
and terms of reference of any such future committee.
402nd plenary meeting,
10 December 1952.
bi accordance with the ter,ns of resolutions 332 (IV) and
646 (VII), the Fourth Committee, at its 306th meeting oti
15 De.-embtr 1952, elected, on behalf of the Ge11eral A.fsembly,
fo11r members lo the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Gtn,'trning Territories to fill the vacancies created by the
expiration of the terms of office of Bran/, Egypt, India and
the Unioti of Soi>iet Socialist RepHblics.
The States elected were: BRAZIL, CHINA, I NOIA and IRAQ.

647 (VII). Participation of Non.Self-Governing
Territories in the work of the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Terri•
tories

The Ge,aeral Assembly,
Recalling that, in resolution 566 (VI) adopted on
18 January 1952, the General Assembly invited the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories to examine the possibility of associating the
Non-Self-Gpverning Territories more closely in its
work and to report the results of its examination of
this problem to the General Assembly at its seventh
session in connexion with the Assembly's consideration
of the Committee's future,
Recalling that it has been found both possible and
useful to associate Non-Self-Governing Territories
with the work of technical organs of the United Nations. including the specialized agencies,
Recognizing that direct 'participation of the NonSelf-Governing Territories in the work of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories can be of further assistance in promoting the
progress of these Territories and their peoples towards
the goals set forth in Chapter XI of the Charter of
the United Nations,
.
Noting that the Members administering NonSelf-C10verning Territories have from time to time
attached qualified persons from these Territories to
their delegations to the Committee,
l. Considers it desirable that there be associated in
the work of the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories qualified indigenous representatives from Non-Self-Governing Territories, and
invites the Administering Members to make such participation possible ;
2. Invites the Administering Members to transmit
copies of the reports on economic, social and educational conditions of the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories, together with
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, to the
executive and legislative branches of these Territories;
1

33

3. Invites the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories to study further tht
question of the direct participation, in its discussiovi
on economic, social and educational conditions, of rep·
resentatives of those Territories the inhabitants ol
which have attained a wide measure. of responsibilit;;
for economic, social and educational policies, and to
include recommendations on this question in its re·
port to the General Assembly at its eighth session.
402nd plenary meeting,
10 December 1952.
648 (VII). Factors which should be taken Into
account in deciding whether a Territory is or
is not a Territory whose people have not yet
attained a full measure of self-government
The General Assembly,
Taking into account the obligation to transmit information, accepted in virtue of Article 73 e of the
Charter, by the Members which have or assume responsibilities for the administration of Territories
whose peoples have not yet attained a full measure of
sel £-government,
Talei,a9. into acco""' that this obligation remains in
force with regard to each Territory until such time
as the objectives of Chapter XI of the Charter are
.
fulfilled,
Taking into accoi:nt the statement contained in resolution 222 (III), adopted by the General Assembly on
3 November 1948, to the effect that it is essential for
the United Nations to be informed of any change that
may take place in the constitutional status of any NonSelf-Governing Territory, and that, not later than six
months after the· submission of the aforesaid information, such information as may be required in such cases
should be communicated, including information about
the constitution, legislative acts or executive orders
regarding the government of the Territory as well as
about the constitutional relationship of the Territory
to the government of the metropobtan country,
Having examined the report • of the Ad H oc Committee on Factors ( Non-Self-~erning Territories).
Recognizing that, in deciding whether a Territory
has or has not attained a full measure of self-government, an enumeration of factors would be a useful
guide both for the General Assembly and for the Administering Member concerned,
Having regard to its resolution 567 (VI) of 18 January 1952,
1. Approves provisionally the annexed list of factors which may serve as a guide, both for the General
Assembly and for the Members of the United Nations
which have or assume responsibilities for the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories, in deciding
whether a Territory has or hu not attained-a full measure of self-government;
2. Recognises that ,-each concrete caae should be
considered and decided in the light of the particular
' See document A/Zl 78.
