S/2021/4

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 January 2021
Original: English

United Nations operation in Cyprus
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report on the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP) covers developments from 19 June to 18 December 2020. It brings up to
date the record of activities carried out by UNFICYP pursuant to Security Council
resolution 186 (1964) and subsequent Council resolutions, most recently resolution
2537 (2020), since the issuance of my report on UNFICYP dated 10 July 2020
(S/2020/682) and on my mission of good offices dated 13 July 2020 ( S/2020/685).
2.
As at 18 December 2020, the strength of the military component stood at 796
(717 men and 79 women, or 9.9 per cent women for all ranks, compared with the
global peace operations target of 6.25 per cent women), while that of the police
component stood at 68 (41 men and 27 women, or 39.7 per cent women, compared
with the overall global target of 22 per cent women) (see annex).

II. Significant developments
3.
The reporting period continued to be marked by the impact of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic across the island. Improvements in the
epidemiological situation in both the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities
were recorded at the beginning of the summer, leading to an easing of restrictions on
both sides, including a gradual reopening of the crossing points. In practice, however,
crossing from one side to the other remained difficult, owing to requirements
introduced by the respective authorities, thus limiting drastically contacts between
the communities during that period. Both communities then witnessed a resurgence
of contagion, albeit at different times, with the north experiencing a high number of
cases towards the end of August, while cases in the south increased dramatically in
November, leading to a reintroduction of restrictive measures, including local
lockdowns. Despite encouragement from the international community, including the
Security Council in its most recent resolution (resolution 2537 (2020)), the response
to the continuing COVID-19 outbreak remained largely uncoordinated and separate,
as had been the case at the outset of the pandemic.
4.
After a six-month delay due to COVID-19, voting for the leadership of the Turkish
Cypriot community took place on 11 October, with a run-off on 18 October, and resulted
in the election of Ersin Tatar as the new leader. Subsequently, on 3 November, the Greek

20-17899 (E)

120121

*2017899*

S/2021/4

Cypriot leader, Nicos Anastasiades, met with Mr. Tatar in an informal meeting held
under the auspices of my Deputy Special Adviser on Cyprus, Elizabeth Spehar. After
the meeting, the United Nations issued a statement stating that the two leaders had
expressed their determination to positively respond to the Secretary-General’s
commitment to exploring the possibility to convene an informal five-plus-United
Nations meeting, in a conducive climate, at an appropriate stage. Further details are
provided in the report on my mission of good offices in Cyprus (S/2021/5).
5.
In the continued absence of a political solution and with regional tensions on
the rise, political tensions on Cyprus increased during the reporting period.
Challenges to the status quo on the ground, within and outside the buffer zone,
appeared linked to the broader political context. A particularly significant and
concerning development was changes to the status quo in Varosha, which were
announced by Turkish and Turkish Cypriot high-level officials and observed by the
mission on the ground. On 6 October, at a joint press conference held by the President
of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoǧan, and the then leadership candidate, Mr. Tatar,
Mr. Erdoǧan declared that he would support the new decision by Mr. Tatar to make
the coastline of Varosha accessible to the public. On 8 October, a section of the beach
was opened and made accessible by foot through the fenced-off part of the city. Those
actions were denounced in the strongest terms in the south, but also by various
political actors and civil society activists within the Turkish Cypriot community. On
9 October, the President of the Security Council issued a statement expressing the
Council’s deep concern regarding the aforementioned announcement and called for a
reversal of this course of action. Following the election of Mr. Tatar as the new
Turkish Cypriot leader, Mr. Erdoǧan visited the north, including Varosha, with
Mr. Tatar on 15 November, which was the thirty-seventh anniversary of the unilateral
declaration of independence. The visit, which divided public opinion in the north,
prompted strong reactions from Mr. Anastasiades and resulted in demonstrations on
both sides of the island.
6.
Tensions around the island and in the eastern Mediterranean more broadly over
such issues as maritime boundary delimitations and hydrocarbons exploration
escalated during the reporting period, severely straining relations between the parties,
including Greece and Turkey, two guarantor Powers in the Cyprus context.

III. Activities of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
7.
The absence of negotiations continued to stoke political tensions that had been
steadily growing since the closing of the Conference on Cyprus in 2017.
Developments in Varosha and, to some extent, in Strovilia (see para. 12 below),
contributed significantly to fuelling those tensions, although they did not lead to an
overall increase in military violations. The decision in the south not to allow third country nationals to cross to the other side in the COVID-19 context also triggered
demonstrations in the north, especially in the tourism-dependent part of north Nicosia.
8.
Despite the heightened tension, data collected through the Comprehensive
Performance Assessment System indicated that tension in most of the usual areas of
friction in the buffer zone, while not resolved, remained largely muted, with the
exception of Avlona. The deterrence role and preventive efforts of the mission through
liaison and engagement contributed to defusing tensions that arose in and around the
buffer zone between civilians, between civilians and opposing forces or directly
between the opposing forces.
9.
The impact of the pandemic on the interaction between the communities
continued to be of particular concern for UNFICYP, especially as a result of
movement restrictions at the crossing points. Meeting with members of the other
2/15

20-17899

S/2021/4

community required extra effort, including financially, owing to the cost of the
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests required to move across the buffer zone. The
mission tried to mitigate the situation by promoting the use of online platforms by
civil society actors, with some limited success. Similarly, the meetings and activities
of the bicommunal technical committees were significantly reduced. The pandemic
also directly affected the mission, with 27 cases recorded among its personnel
(19 military, six police and two civilian personnel) during the reporting period,
despite additional internal measures introduced with respect to the length of
quarantine and testing requirements and a strong recommendati on to limit physical
interactions with the local population.

A.

Prevention of tensions in and around the buffer zone
10. Although the situation in and around the buffer zone continued on the whole to
be calm and military-level tensions were generally low, political tensions increased
significantly, linked to the broader political and regional context. The gradual
hardening of positions along the ceasefire lines previously reported continued to be
observed. Challenges to the military status quo continued to occur, in parallel to
limited respect for the authority of the mission as mandated by the Security Council.
11. The partial opening by the Turkish Cypriot authorities of the fenced -off part of
Varosha on 8 October was a significant change to the status quo in that area. This
partial opening mostly took the form of limited infrastructure works to prepare access
by civilians, road rehabilitation and closed-circuit television installation. The
temporary but considerable increase in Turkish forces prese nce and activity within
and near Varosha on the occasion of the visit of the President of Turkey on
15 November did not result in a reciprocal deployment of the National Guard. The
developments substantially raised tensions, both politically and on the gro und,
including by triggering protests by former Varosha residents, political parties from
both communities and other concerned actors from both sides. The freedom of
movement of UNFICYP in Varosha continued to be significantly hampered. The
United Nations continues to hold the Government of Turkey responsible for the
situation in Varosha.
12. Strovilia also remained a source of political tension as changes to the status quo
continued to be observed in the form of overstaffing by the Turkish Cypriot security
forces and some civilian constructions, prompting more systematic written démarches
by the Greek Cypriot authorities. The presence and operations of UNFICYP in
Strovilia continued to be regularly challenged by the Turkish Cypriot security forces.

B.

Prevention of a recurrence of fighting and maintenance of the
military status quo
13. The reporting period saw a decrease in the overall number of military violations
(288, compared with 376 during the first part 2020). The National Guard, however,
continued to deploy prefabricated concrete firing positions along the southern
ceasefire line (70 during the past six months), bringing the total since December 2019
to 223, including 35 inside the buffer zone, constituting a significant violation of the
military status quo. The mission registered an increase in military construction
violations, with 81 violations by the National Guard (compared with 64 during the
previous reporting period), and 42 by the Turkish forces and Turkish Cypriot security
forces (compared with 9 during the previous reporting period). The violations
registered on the northern ceasefire line included two prefabricated concrete firing
positions and the installation of fixed thermal imaging devices at existing positions,

20-17899

3/15

S/2021/4

and are assessed to be a response to the deployment of prefabricated concrete firing
positions by the National Guard. The persistent efforts of the mission to secure a
reversal of those respective installations were not successful.
14. Despite restrictions related to COVID-19, engagement with the National Guard
leadership was mostly sustained during the reporting period, while high -level
engagement with the Turkish mainland army and the Turkish Cypriot security forces
resumed only in September, after an eight-month hiatus. The second half of the period
also saw significant improvement in lower-level liaison and engagement with the
Turkish Cypriot security forces. Looking ahead, regular engagement and dialogue
with the opposing forces are assessed as critical to fulfil the mand ate of the mission
and maintain calm in and around the buffer zone.
15. Despite the tabling by UNFICYP on 1 May 2020 of a proposal for a direct
military-level contact mechanism, no significant progress could be achieved, owing
to the persistence of divergent views by the two sides, in particular on the issue of the
nature of the participation in the mechanism. The mission nevertheless continued to
engage with both sides on the issue.
16. There was no progress during the reporting period regarding the cleari ng of the
29 suspected hazardous areas on the island. The United Nations Mine Action Service
continued to research options for the next phase of clearance activities to be presented
to the two sides, with a special focus on the buffer zone and its four min ed areas.

C.

Management of civilian activity and maintenance of law and order
17. UNFICYP recorded 989 civilian incidents during the reporting period, a slight
increase compared with the same period in 2019 (853). Incursions into the buffer zone
continued to account for the largest number of incidents, followed by unauthorized
construction and farming. Partly as a result of the sustained engagement efforts of the
mission, the number of civilian issues related to the buffer zone that escalated to the
political level remained low during the reporting period, as did civilian activities that
generated tension either with other civilians or with the opposing forces, with the
notable exception of Avlona.
18. Unauthorized farming on Greek Cypriot land in Avlona remained a significant
source of friction. In early November, UNFICYP prevented physical altercations
between Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot civilians, the latter having refused to
comply with the request by the mission to leave the area. Although, unlike in previous
reporting periods, incursions by the Turkish forces into the buffer zone in support of
civilian activities were not observed, tension with the opposing forces linked to
disputed sections of the ceasefire lines and competition over land use increase the risk
of military violations and civilian confrontations in Avlona and elsewhere. The
Turkish forces subsequently built a new observation tower in Avlona, close to where
the aforementioned altercations occurred, north of the buffer zone.
19. In Pyla, police services on both sides continued to collaborate effectively with
UNFICYP to respond to breaches of law and order and provide policing services in
the village. Nonetheless, 11 illegal establishments (casinos and nightclubs) continued
to operate, some of which are suspected of being linked to tax evasion activities, drug
and other types of trafficking and prostitution. Those establishments, involving both
Greek and Turkish Cypriots, continued to exploit the legal and political challenges
associated with the particularities of the bicommunal village and remained a
testimony to the continued need for an effective coordination mechanism for law
enforcement in Pyla. UNFICYP continued to engage with both mukhtars of Pyla, who
displayed a willingness to collaborate. Meanwhile, the university in Pyla continued
to operate without authorization from UNFICYP, and no progress was registered to

4/15

20-17899

S/2021/4

resolve the matter of the large unauthorized construction project associated with the
university, despite the continued efforts of the mission to engage with the Greek
Cypriot authorities and with the entrepreneur on the issue.
20. Outside of Pyla, criminal activities in the buffer zone increased during the
reporting period, mostly in the form of illegal dumping of wa ste and hunting. A
significant increase in hunting and related activities was registered in UNFICYP
sector 1, in the west of the island. Those activities are not allowed, primarily because
of the security risks associated with the presence of individuals w earing military
fatigues and carrying weapons close to military positions.
21. In line with the Action for Peacekeeping framework, UNFICYP police
continued to carry out targeted patrols, to deter illegal activities, and to facilitate the
work of law enforcement agencies as well as cooperation at the level of the “Joint
Contact Room” (also referred to as the “Joint Communications Room”), which allows
both sides to exchange information on crimes, or alleged criminal conduct, with
implications across the divide. Such cooperation increased during the past six months.
Since 19 June, the Joint Contact Room, with the support of UNFICYP, also facilitated
the handover of seven suspects between the two police services across the buffer zone,
following an established procedure that has become an effective practice. In addition,
UNFICYP police and military personnel responded to fire incidents in the buffer zone
and provided escort to the Famagusta fire brigade to various locations in the buffer
zone to extinguish the fires.
22. The partial opening of Varosha triggered a number of demonstrations in the
south, including some led by ultranationalist groups. On 17 October, such a large
demonstration was organized at the Deryneia/Derinya crossing point, triggering a
counterdemonstration on the north side of the crossing. UNFICYP worked closely
with the police services on both sides to prevent any breach of the buffer zone or
confrontation.

D.

Intercommunal relations, cooperation and trust-building
23. Limited contact occurred between the Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot
communities during the reporting period, mainly because of the movement restrictions
mandated by both sides as a result of COVID-19, including the ongoing closure of three
crossing points (see sect. E). As a result, there were very few face-to-face
intercommunal activities or even simple interactions, a situation that deepened the
estrangement between the two largest communities on the island. Established
mechanisms for cooperation, such as those between the two Nicosia municipalities (the
Nicosia Municipal Coordination Group and the Nicosia Master Plan) remained dormant
during the reporting period, owing to the difficulty of operating by online means. In
response, the mission strengthened its capacity to facilitate online connections and
sought creative ways to continue to support dialogue and cooperation across the divide.
UNFICYP maintained its engagement with women and youth representatives of civil
society, also reaching out to new constituencies, with modest success.
24. Despite the calls of the Security Council for cooperative approaches, the two
sides continued to pursue largely uncoordinated responses to the pandemic and other
issues affecting the whole island. On the positive side, special provisio ns related to
COVID-19 for certain categories of individuals (such as workers and students who
need to cross regularly, and the Greek Cypriot and Maronites who live in the north)
agreed by the leaders and implemented as of June 2020 remained in force to fa cilitate
the crossing of the Green Line by those individuals, up until a few days before the
end of the reporting period. In mid-December, however, the authorities in the north
extended new quarantine requirements to those categories. Several of the bicomm unal

20-17899

5/15

S/2021/4

technical committees, including those on health, cultural heritage, crime and criminal
matters, and education, continued to operate throughout the reporting period, for the
most part by online means, with some limited in-person activities. Most of the Turkish
Cypriot members of the Technical Committee on Culture and of the Technical
Committee on Gender Equality resigned following the Turkish Cypriot leadership
election. The Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage, with the support of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the European Commission and
UNFICYP, completed 18 key projects, including the renovation of parts of the
Venetian walls of Nicosia. Although the Technical Committee on Health continued to
share information and met a few times, it did not lead to an overall joint response to
the pandemic. Further details on the work of all committees are provided in the most
recent report on my mission of good offices in Cyprus.
25. In order to bolster interaction between the communities, UNFI CYP continued
to implement its UNFICYP Youth Champions – Environment and Peace initiative,
with the participation of 24 young activists from across the island. The Youth
Champions developed a number of advocacy campaigns on environmental issues and
created bicommunal groups aiming at lasting collaboration and at achieving a
multiplier effect in their respective communities. Despite the challenges to in -person
meetings, the Youth Champions identified multiple ways to keep being engaged,
including through their participation with UNFICYP in several buffer-zone clean-up
operations. The participation of the United Nations Environment Programme, the
Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth and other local and international
bodies in this programme enriched its value and outreach.
26. UNFICYP worked further to fully use the potential of online platforms by
reaching out to and engaging with civil society organizations that had not previously
participated in intercommunal events because of geographical limitations. UNFICYP
continued to support the Non-Governmental Organization Networking Group (a
platform of 200 local non-governmental organizations) by ensuring that activities and
coordination would continue by online means. During the repor ting period, the
mission also contributed to trust-building and confidence-building efforts between
the communities, reaching an ever-broader constituency, in particular through the use
of social media. The UN75 campaign, Peace Day and International Youth Day were
used extensively to amplify the voices of women and young people.
27. The leaders and representatives of Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot political
parties maintained their regular meetings, some of them online, under the auspices of
the Embassy of Slovakia. In July, they agreed on a joint statement calling upon the
leaders to prepare the ground for the resumption of the negotiations immediately after
the Turkish Cypriot leadership election of October. The Religious Track of the Cyprus
Peace Process, under the auspices of the Embassy of Sweden, continued to advocate
respect for the measures put in place by the authorities to prevent further spread of
COVID-19, including by translating them into Greek, Turkish and English. Further
information is provided in the report on my mission of good offices in Cyprus.

E.

Facilitation of access and humanitarian functions
28. As the two sides grappled with the pandemic, movement across the buffer zone
remained substantially constrained. While most of the crossing points were reopened,
the Lefka-Apliki/Lefke-Aplıç and Deryneia/Derinya crossing points were kept closed
by the north, and the Ledra Street crossing point was kept closed by the south.
UNFICYP was able to use the Lefka-Apliki/Lefke-Aplıç and Deryneia/Derinya
crossing points for its supplies and emergencies, but not for its regular operations.
The closure of the Deryneia/Derinya crossing point created substantial operational
issues for UNFICYP in sector 4.

6/15

20-17899

S/2021/4

29. Furthermore, strict PCR testing requirements introduced by the Greek Cypriot
side early in July were replicated by the Turkish Cypriot side three months later and
significantly restricted movement across the buffer zone. On 17 July, the Greek
Cypriot authorities introduced a ban on movement between south and north for
third-country nationals, including European Union citizens. Towards the end of
November, uncoordinated decisions between the two sides to impose additional
restrictive measures at the crossing points resulted in an increase in pol itical tension.
This was particularly the case with respect to the measures introduced by the Turkish
Cypriot side, which affected both the Turkish and the Greek Cypriot communities
and, in the latter case, especially the residents of Kato Pyrgos and Strov ilia. In
response, the Greek Cypriot authorities suspended on several occasions the crossing
of the Turkish forces to Kokkina. Such issues required frequent interventions by
UNFICYP, at the request of the two sides, both on the ground and through my Specia l
Representative. The pandemic also prevented religious pilgrimages to sites across the
green line and religious services at those sites, which had been hitherto an important
confidence-building measure.
30. Since most of the crossing points reopened during the reporting period, the
humanitarian functions of UNFICYP were only slightly affected compared with
earlier in 2020, whether for the delivery of medicine, the facilitation of access to
critical medical care across the lines or the transport of education material. At the
same time, as a result of the restrictions imposed on third -country nationals in July,
UNFICYP was requested to facilitate movement from the north of more than
450 people of 11 nationalities, so that they might have access to Larnaca A irport to
leave the island. At times, people were stranded in the buffer zone, sometimes for
weeks, as in the case of an Iranian asylum seeker in mid-September, who was
therefore left to the care of UNFICYP. In compliance with its mandate, the mission
continued to engage with the Maronite and Greek Cypriot minorities living in the
north, albeit in an altered rhythm and modality, and with Turkish Cypriots living in
the south.
31. The crossing of persons and goods between the two sides continued to be
facilitated through European Council regulation (EC) No. 866/2004 of 29 April 2004
(the Green Line Regulation). The reporting period registered 293,540 crossings,
compared with 3,119,120 in 2019. Trade across the Green Line remained at its usual
level after a brief suspension during the lockdown period of the first semester, a level
assessed nonetheless as very low by the European Commission compared with the
actual trade potential across the island.

F.

Refugees and asylum seekers
32. After a lull between February and May, arrivals of irregular migrants, refugees
and asylum seekers to the island resumed and increased steadily from June onwards,
linked, inter alia, to the degradation of the situation in Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic. A marked increase in irregular crossings of the buffer zone was reported,
with at least 565 persons, mostly Syrian national refugees, having crossed, compared
with 53 during the previous reporting period. Changes in the asylum and migration
policy of the Republic of Cyprus, in particular the barring of entry to its territory to
asylum seekers since April because of COVID-19, resulted in a significant increase
in unchecked crossings of the buffer zone, which likely accounted for most of the new
asylum applications from July to October (2,452, compared with 4,247 in 2019). As
mentioned above, the new policy resulted in several cases of asylum seekers being
stranded in the buffer zone, in one case for weeks. UNFICYP, out of commitment to
humanitarian principles, provided some support to the stranded individuals, albeit
without any dedicated means for such interventions.

20-17899

7/15

S/2021/4

33. At the same time, there was a notable increase in the number of boats carrying
asylum seekers arriving in Cyprus, from both Lebanon and Turkey. Nine such boat s
made their way to the south from Lebanon between August and September, carrying
a total of 202 persons. In addition, 243 persons aboard six boats who had also left
Lebanon were either pushed back on the high seas by the Republic of Cyprus or, for
those who had reached its shores, deported to Lebanon without having been granted
access to asylum procedures. There were a further 13 failed attempts of boats trying
to reach the island from Lebanon, including one instance of a boat rescued by the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) after having spent seven days at
sea. In that particular incident, despite the intervention of UNIFIL, three persons lost
their lives, including a young child, while 14 were lost at sea. As regards the boats
arriving from Turkey, 178 persons arriving on 13 boats and reportedly landing in the
north and the buffer zone crossed to the south and were granted access to the asylum
procedures of the Republic of Cyprus. In addition, 29 boats carrying 208 Syrians
landed in the north, where they were detained pending their return to Turkey. A total
of 198 persons have already been returned to Turkey, including 31 unaccompanied
and separated children, 27 of whom had their parents or other close family members
in the Republic of Cyprus.

G.

Gender, and women and peace and security
34. Owing to the COVID-19 outbreak, UNFICYP shifted its implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda to online platforms and adjusted its work to
include initiatives touching upon the gender dimensions of the pandemic, including
the surge in gender-based violence across the island. The mission continued to engage
with women’s civil society organizations from the north and south to maintain
momentum for dialogue and trust-building, irrespective of the limited opportunities
for in-person contact, and held a series of intercommunal meetings focusing mainly
on the gender elements of the peace process.
35. UNFICYP also held a series of events in the context of the twentieth anniversary
of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security, in
coordination with my mission of good offices and in cooperation with international
counterparts, such as the Embassy of Ireland for a series of workshops with
peacebuilders from Northern Ireland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, and the Embassies of Canada and the Netherlands for a virtual “Women walk
and talk” event to discuss ways forward for the participation of Cypriot women in the
peace process. Cyprus was included in an engagement held under my auspices,
involving remarks delivered by a Cypriot activist on the participat ion of women in
the Cyprus peace process. A communiqué highlighting challenges to and
opportunities for women and peace and security on the island was also delivered to
me on behalf of established bicommunal women’s groups. In parallel, within the
framework of the UN75 global dialogue, the mission produced media material to
highlight women’s perspectives on the future of the island.
36. Internally, the mission held virtual gatherings within the military and the police
components to enable dialogue on the experiences, concerns and perspectives of
uniformed female peacekeepers and to provide information on the approach of the
mission to gender mainstreaming and gender parity.
37. UNFICYP continued to lead by example with female leadership in key mission
positions, such as Head of Mission, Force Commander, Senior Police Adviser, Chief
of Civil Affairs and Chief, Joint Mission Analysis Cell.

8/15

20-17899

S/2021/4

IV. Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus
38. Since its establishment, the bicommunal teams of scientists of the Committee on
Missing Persons in Cyprus, supported by the United Nations and mandated to recover,
identify and return the remains of persons who went missing during the events of 1963/64
and 1974, has exhumed or received the remains of 1,212 persons on both sides of the
island. No recoveries were made during the reporting period. The overall exhumation
figure may include persons who are not on the official list of missing persons and is only
finalized after the completion of anthropological analysis and DNA identification, a
process commonly completed within one to two years. When the identified remains are
not related to the mandate of the Committee, they are then subtracted from the official
figures. Owing to the outbreak, the operations of the Committee were suspended for 73
working days and fully resumed on 2 July. Eight bicommunal teams carried out
excavating work across the island during the reporting period, except in Turkish military
areas, where access is not authorized as a result of COVID-19-related restrictions. To
date, of 2,002 missing persons, 994 have been identified and their remains returned to
their families, including 20 during the reporting period.
39. In an effort to locate additional burial sites of missing persons, the Committee
continued its efforts to gain access to the archives of countries and organizations that
had maintained a military, police or humanitarian presence in Cyprus in 1963/64 and
1974. During the reporting period, little archival information on possible burial sites
from the parties directly involved was received. The Committee continued its
extensive research in the archives of the United Nations in Nicosia.

V. Conduct and discipline and sexual exploitation and abuse
40. UNFICYP remains committed to encouraging strict adherence to the United
Nations policy of zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse. In coordination
with the Regional Conduct and Discipline Section of UNIFIL, responsible for
supporting UNFICYP, the mission implemented activities related to pr evention,
enforcement and remedial actions regarding misconduct, including sexual
exploitation and abuse, and to the enforcement of the policy of zero tolerance.
41. Owing to the pandemic, briefing sessions to all incoming military, police and
civilian personnel on the United Nations standards of conduct, including on the
prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse, were delivered online.
42. UNFICYP did not receive any allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
during the period under review.

VI. Financial and administrative aspects
43. The General Assembly, by its resolution 74/285 of 30 June 2020, appropriated
the amount of $51.7 million for the maintenance of UNFICYP for the period from
1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021.
44. As at 9 December 2020, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account
for UNFICYP amounted to $16.7 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $3,099.6 million.
45. Reimbursement of troop costs has been made for the period up to 30 June 2020,
while reimbursement of the costs of contingent-owned equipment has been made for
the period up to 31 March 2020, in accordance with the quarterly payment sc hedule.

20-17899

9/15

S/2021/4

VII. Observations
46. When I repeated my call for a global ceasefire on 2 October, the International
Day of Non-Violence, I highlighted that that celebration was taking place in the
shadow of the devastating human and socioeconomic impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic. In Cyprus, COVID-19 continued to have profound negative repercussions
for the two communities, both in terms of health and socioeconomically. The
unprecedented dimension of the threat posed by the pandemic has, notably, resulted
in a further separation of the communities, while efforts to identify acceptable ways
to jointly tackle the virus and its multiple effects on the lives of Cypriots have been
limited. As mentioned in my previous report, there are existing mechanisms, mostly
underused, that could precisely address those issues if they received sufficient
political support. The bicommunal technical committees were specifically designed
to address island-wide issues that affect the daily lives of Cypriots and to foster
cooperation that would serve to build the foundation for a sustainable settlement. I
therefore call upon the leaders to enhance their support for the technical committees
and, in the specific context of COVID-19, in particular those that focus on health,
economic and commercial matters, crisis management, gender equality and
humanitarian affairs, bearing in mind their potential role in contributing to the
alleviation of the effects of the pandemic across the island.
47. As stated by the Security Council in its resolution 2532 (2000), the pandemic is
likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security. Sustainable
peace does not lie in the separation of communities, but instead in contacts that
challenge prejudices and achieve reconciliation. I note that, as had already been the
case during the previous reporting period, decisions by both sides to restrict passage
at crossing points continued to be made without consultation with the other
community. While mindful of the need to put public health and safety first, I
encourage the leaders to discuss and harmonize the protocols governing crossings and
to come to a mutual agreement on the reopening of the remaining crossing points as
soon as feasible.
48. The absence of a viable peace process since July 2017 has resulted in more and
more substantial changes on the ground. This, in turn, has heightened tensions
between the two sides, moving the parties further apart and possibly affecting the
efforts towards an overall sustainable solution. As outlined in the principles of my
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, there is a clear complementarity between
peacekeeping and peacemaking, and the actions of both missions on the ground shall
therefore continue to be mutually reinforcing.
49. As I have already stated on several occasions, developments in Varosha are of
concern and representative of the unsustainability of the continuing hiatus in the
peace talks. During the reporting period, my representatives and I have stressed
repeatedly that the position of the United Nations on Varosha remains unchanged and
is guided by the relevant Security Council resolutions. I have emphasized the
importance of not taking unilateral actions that could raise tensions on the isl and and
compromise a return to the peace talks, while also calling upon all parties to engage
in dialogue in order to resolve their differences.
50. I continue to deplore the restrictions on the freedom of movement of UNFICYP
imposed in, inter alia, Varosha and Strovilia, and request that the ability of the mission
to patrol and implement its mandated activities be fully restored. I also deplore the
frequent disregard shown by the two sides towards the mandated authority of
UNFICYP, especially when dealing with security-related issues in and around the
buffer zone. In addition to the Agreement on Unmanning of Positions in Sensitive Areas
of Nicosia of 1989, the aide-memoire of the mission, as repeatedly highlighted by the

10/15

20-17899

S/2021/4

Council, is the document of reference that describes the arrangements put in place by
UNFICYP to supervise the ceasefire and contribute to the maintenance of law and order
and to a return to normal conditions. I would like to echo the clear stance of the Council
and urge all parties to abide by the aide-memoire, inter alia, by respecting the no-fly
zone status of the buffer zone and the UNFICYP delineation of the ceasefire lines, as
well as refraining from unauthorized constructions, including prefabricated concrete
firing positions, and other unauthorized military or civilian activities.
51. Tensions around Cyprus, in particular in relation to hydrocarbon exploration,
continued during the reporting period. As also recorded in the report of my mission
of good offices in Cyprus, I reiterate my call for serious efforts to avoid any further
escalation and to defuse tensions.
52. As I had expressed it on the margins of the seventy -fifth session of the General
Assembly, I reiterate the importance of confidence-building measures for Cyprus, in
particular in the current difficult climate. In that vein, I encourage the two sides to
put forward in good faith proposals and ideas for possible new measures, or to review
past proposals, so that discussions and progress may be further pursued. Given the
tense regional environment and its impact on Cyprus, I also call upon relevant actors
in the region to exercise restraint, explore confidence-building measures and take
constructive approaches to resolving their disputes and to the Cyprus problem. It is
important that the parties demonstrate their goodwill and make greater efforts to
create conditions conducive to a successful negotiation process.
53. In my report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace issued on 30 July 2020
(A/74/976-S/2020/773), I warned that the pandemic threatened hard-won peacebuilding
gains. More than ever, I call upon opinion leaders on the island, be they from the
political, commercial, religious, artistic or other spheres, to contribute to bringing the
communities closer together as an element necessary for building a constituency for
peace and laying the foundation for a sustainable solution to the Cyprus problem.
Regional dynamics notwithstanding, in the light of significant societal scept icism and
disengagement with regard to the peace process, coupled with an estrangement between
the communities that has now run over three generations, redoubled efforts are required
for Cypriots to re-engage in peace efforts and bridge the divide between them.
Conversely, acts that are aimed at provoking the other community or inciting hatred need
to be addressed and clearly denounced by political and other leaders.
54. The Security Council has repeatedly called upon the leaders to refrain from using
rhetoric that might deepen the mistrust between the communities, insisting on the
importance of improving the public atmosphere and preparing the communities for a
settlement, while also highlighting the importance of peace education. Forty -five years
after the ceasefire and de facto division of Cyprus, most of those pillars of reconciliation,
unfortunately, remain to be built. Consequently, I echo once more the calls of the Council
in this regard, as well as its support for greater civic engagement and trust-building
across the divide. I also urge the leaders to encourage more explicitly contact and
cooperation between the two communities and to provide direct support to people -topeople initiatives, as evidence of their genuine commitment to a solution.
55. UNFICYP records all observed violations and engages with the two sides to
resolve issues that arise in and around the buffer zone, with a view to maintaining
calm and preventing escalation. However, some incidents are used politically and
amplified through the media, further increasing tension and mistrust. I deplore any
attempts to instrumentalize the situation in the buffer zone and call upon the two sides
to work constructively with UNFICYP to address violations and incidents and to
refrain from increasing tensions further.
56. Even in these difficult times, and despite repeated calls on my part and on the
part of the Security Council, efforts in Cyprus to achieve greater economic and social
20-17899

11/15

S/2021/4

parity between the two sides and broaden and deepen economic, cult ural and other
forms of cooperation remain limited. The full implementation of European Council
regulation (EC) No. 866/2004 would significantly help to increase the volume of trade
and should be pursued with renewed vigour. Increased cross-island trade, together
with deeper economic, social, cultural, sporting and other ties and contacts, would
promote trust between the communities and help to address the concerns of the
Turkish Cypriots regarding isolation.
57. In their efforts to promote closer cooperation between the communities, local
and international actors continue to be confronted with challenges and obstacles
linked to the status of the north and concerns relating to “recognition”. While the
United Nations policy on Cyprus is maintained and decisio ns of the Security Council
on the matter are upheld, concerns about recognition should not in themselves
constitute an obstacle to increased cooperation. As the two sides explore further
opportunities for confidence-building and cooperation, I urge them to devise creative
ways of overcoming obstacles with a view to achieving meaningful progress and
delivering tangible benefits to their communities. The United Nations remains fully
committed to providing them with the necessary facilitation and support.
58. Regarding the request of the Security Council to see the establishment of a
mechanism for direct military contacts, I sincerely hope that, beyond general
statements, concrete action can now be taken following the tabling by my Special
Representative of a proposal on 1 May 2020 and the conclusion of the recent electoral
process in the north. I remain convinced that such a mechanism would allow the
parties to alleviate day-to-day tensions in and around the buffer zone effectively and
would constitute an important military confidence-building measure. I urge the
parties to work with my Special Representative to establish the mechanism, thereby
also meeting the expectations of the Council.
59. Having celebrated on 31 October the twentieth anniversary of the lan dmark
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), I applaud the tenacity and continuing efforts
of women’s groups and women activists in Cyprus to ensure the full participation of
women in the peace process and for a gender-responsive settlement. UNFICYP will
continue to play its part in leading by example on gender parity in peacekeeping and
will redouble its efforts to support gender and peace activists to take their rightful
place in the peace initiative on the island. In that respect, I urge the leaders to fully
support the work of the Technical Committee on Gender Equality and the critical role
of civil society and to ensure a linkage between the two in order to pursue a
sustainable solution to the Cyprus issue for all.
60. The situation of asylum seekers and refugees across the island continued to
deteriorate considerably during the reporting period and is of serious concern to the
United Nations. While appreciating the exceptional circumstances and p ressures
arising from COVID-19, as well as the high volume of arrivals in Cyprus in relation
to the size of the population, I must recall the critical importance of full adherence to
international legal norms in the handling of asylum seekers and refugees, wherever
they may be found. In the absence of a dedicated bicommunal mechanism to deal with
the issue across the divide, I would also suggest that the Joint Contact Room be used
to share information on migrations and asylum seekers.
61. In the light of the continued contribution of UNFICYP to peace and stability
and the creation of conditions conducive to a political settlement, I recommend that
the Security Council extend the mandate of the mission for six months, until 31 July
2021. Looking ahead, UNFICYP will continue to monitor the evolving situation and
adapt its operations to implement its mandate effectively.
62. I would like to thank the partners, in particular the European Commission, that
have continued to provide support for the work of both Un ited Nations missions in
12/15

20-17899

S/2021/4

Cyprus, UNDP and the Committee on Missing Persons and have contributed to the
implementation of various confidence-building measures. I also thank the
36 countries that have contributed troops, police or both to UNFICYP since 1964, and
I pay tribute to the 186 peacekeepers who have lost their lives in the service of peace
in Cyprus.
63. I express my gratitude to Ms. Spehar for her service as my Special
Representative in Cyprus, Head of UNFICYP and Deputy Special Adviser on Cyprus.
I also extend my thanks to all the men and women serving in UNFICYP for their
steadfast commitment to the implementation of the mandate of the mission and the
cause of peace on the island.

20-17899

13/15

S/2021/4

Annex
Countries providing military and police personnel to the
United Nations operation in Cyprus (as at 18 December 2020)
Country

Number of military personnel

Argentina

255

Australia

2

Austria

3

Brazil

2

Canada

1

Ghana

1

Hungary

11

India

1

Pakistan

3

Paraguay

12

Russian Federation

4

Serbia

3

Slovakia

240

Ukraine

1

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

257

Total a

Country

796

Number of police personnel

Bosnia and Herzegovina

6

Bulgaria

2

China

5

India

5

Ireland

12

Italy

4

Jordan

4

Lithuania

1

Montenegro

1

Pakistan

3

Romania

5

Russian Federation

5

Serbia

2

Slovakia

6

Sweden

2

Ukraine

5

Total a
a

14/15

68

Of the military personnel, 717 are men and 79 are women. Of the police personnel, 41 are
men and 27 are women.

20-17899

20-17899

S/2021/4

15/15
