S/2018/279

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 April 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution
2366 (2017), in which the Council established the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia and requested me to report on its activities every 90 days, as
well as resolution 2381 (2017), in which it authorized the Mission to monitor the
temporary, bilateral, national ceasefire between the Government of Colombia and the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional (National Liberation Army) (ELN). The report covers
the period from 27 December 2017 to 26 March 2018.

II. Major developments
Congressional elections
2.
The congressional elections held on 11 March 2018 illustrated the positive
impact of the end of the conflict with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of ColombiaPeople’s Army (FARC-EP) on the political process in Colombia. The campaign was
not without incident, but political participation rose by approximately 5.2 per cent,
with 3.6 million more voters compared with the elections of 2014. Voting increased
in every department, and, in the 10 departments historically most affected by the
conflict, 817,045 more people voted than in 2014. An additional 9,709 polling places
were established, and not one had to be relocated owing to security concerns. ELN
held to its commitment of a unilateral halt to offensive operations during the electoral
period, and the Government launched the national plan for electoral guarantees, which
included the deployment of 187,000 police and military pe rsonnel.
3.
These elections were the first in which the People’s Alternative Revolutionary
Force (FARC) political party participated, with 73 candidates, and former members
of FARC-EP voted without significant incident, representing a landmark in their
political reintegration. In keeping with the Peace Agreement, FARC will be
represented in the next Congress, with five seats in the 172 -member Chamber of
Representatives and five seats in the 108-member Senate. The main political parties
saw changes in their representation, but no single party achieved an absolute majority.
Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition
4.
On 15 March, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the justice component of the
transitional justice system, opened its doors to the public, marking another step

18-04581 (E)

090418

*1804581*

S/2018/279

forward. Magistrates of the Special Jurisdiction began consideration of the cases
presented by 6,094 members of the former FARC-EP, 1,792 members of the armed
forces, 44 civil servants and 6 private citizens. The expeditious approval by Congress
of the procedures of the Special Jurisdiction is an important pending step.
5.
In February, the President of Colombia, Juan Manuel Santos Calderón, issued
three decrees establishing the Special Unit for the Search for Persons deemed as
missing and appointed its Director, who announced that the Unit would begin its
investigations to locate more than 60,000 people reported missing as a result of the
conflict.
6.
The Commission on Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition, established in
December 2017, has focused on beginning operations and establishing regional
presence, coordinating with the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and the Special Unit
for the Search for Persons deemed as missing and opening dialogue with social and
other institutional actors, such as the National Centre for Historical Memory, the
Ministries of Justice and Defence, the armed forces, the private sector and victims ’,
women’s and indigenous organizations.
Legislation
7.
The current Government intends to put before Congress, which returned on 20
March from a three-month recess, key peace-related bills, with a request for their
consideration as a matter of urgency.
Other developments related to the implementation of the Peace Agreement
8.
After achieving consensus in the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and
Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, at the end of 2017, the Government issued
a 15-year framework plan for the implementation of the Final Agreement. It includes
the geographical targeting of benefits, estimated costs and government revenue
sources, and FARC commitments.
9.
On 1 March, the Constitutional Court upheld the constitutio nality of the amnesty
law passed in December 2016, but with some new conditions that have been criticized
by FARC. The corresponding communiqué, in keeping with prior court rulings, made
the benefits accruing to former FARC-EP members and State agents conditional upon
their full cooperation with the Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition.
10. On 19 February, the Office of the Attorney General announced an investigation
into businesses, allegedly linked to former FARC-EP members, that were accused of
illicit enrichment and laundering money through supermarkets amounting to some
$230 million. Some of the supermarkets were subsequently looted. FARC denied links
to those businesses and expressed concern that the assets that it had declared on
15 August 2017, as required by the Peace Agreement, which it estimated were worth
$323 million, were at risk of being lost as a result of the insufficient measures taken
to secure them.

III. Mission tasks: reintegration of former members of the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia-People’s Army:
security, legal and socioeconomic guarantees
11. In January, the Government identified a series of measures for overcoming,
during the following three months, outstanding issues relating to the security, legal

2/17

18-04581

S/2018/279

and socioeconomic guarantees for the reintegration of former FARC -EP members. In
relation to security, the goals included the deployment to all 26 territorial areas for
training and reintegration of close protection teams available to f ormer combatants
wishing to travel outside the security perimeter provided by police and military
forces. With regard to legal guarantees, the goals included the resolution of the
situation of former FARC-EP members who were still in prison and the registration
of hundreds of former combatants who were not yet accredited by the Office of the
High Commissioner for Peace and were therefore unable to receive the benefits of the
reintegration process. With regard to socioeconomic guarantees, the goals included
access to landownership, the effective establishment of FARC cooperatives and the
promotion of productive projects in all territorial areas. Much effort, often carried out
in a tripartite manner with the Government, FARC representatives and the Mission,
went into reaching those objectives.

A.

Security guarantees for former members of the Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia-People’s Army
Security of the territorial areas
12. Public security forces continued to implement checkpoints and security
perimeters around all territorial areas. Proactive efforts were undertaken by the
military, the police and the National Protection Unit to address growing tensions with
former combatants in Charras and Colinas (Guaviare Department). In Cauca, tensions
between deployed security personnel and indigenous communities remain an
important challenge. Additional tensions have emerged as a result of the expansion of
dissident and other illegal armed groups in the proximity of some territorial areas, in
particular in the departments of Meta, Guaviare and Cauca, where they have carried
out attacks against the national police. Since September 2017, five police officers
have been killed and others seriously injured in such attacks.
13. The inter-institutional “Blue Tent” initiative, led by the armed forces, aims to
coordinate State agencies responsible for security in the communities surrounding the
territorial areas. It has been implemented in all territorial areas, with varying degrees
of success. Throughout areas that have been battlegrounds for decades and where
illegal armed groups continue to operate, there is lingering apprehension among
communities about close association with military forces and the fear that cooperation
with public security forces could make them a target. The legitimacy and
effectiveness of stabilization efforts by the Government in former conflict zones
would be enhanced by pairing efforts to provide security with a stronger presence of
civilian authorities and agencies providing needed services to communities.
Close protection
14. During the reporting period, the Mission registered the killings of 13 former
FARC-EP members and 5 relatives, bringing the total number of such killings since
the signing of the Peace Agreement to 44 former FARC-EP members and 18 relatives.
This does not include the six former combatants who disappeared in October 2017.
All killings took place outside the territorial areas, hence the importance of
broadening security guarantees beyond perimeter security. The National Protection
Unit has set up collective protection teams in all territorial areas to provide close

18-04581

3/17

S/2018/279

protection to former FARC-EP members who leave the territorial areas temporarily,
especially for political activities or to promote the coca substitution programme. 1
15. To date, the National Protection Unit has trained and recruited 935 persons,
including 545 former FARC-EP members, of whom 84 are women. A third and final
training course is pending to reach the total of 1,200 persons trained and recruited
provided for in the Peace Agreement. The course will include a module on gender
issues in risk analysis and protection, supported by the FARC Gender Committee, the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) and the Mission.
Security of the political campaign of the People’s Alternative
Revolutionary Force
16. During the campaign period, which began on 28 January 2018, according to
official figures, the FARC political party carried out 101 activities and experienced
17 incidents, including 3 against regional party headquarters. Owing to limits on
available personnel and vehicles of the National Protection Unit, only 29 of the 73
FARC congressional candidates received individual close protection during the
campaign. In order to respond to the needs of the remaining 44 candidates, the
National Protection Unit implemented collective schemes in four cities. In addition,
on 20 February, the national police, the National Protection Unit (including former
FARC-EP members) and the Mission established a tripartite protection and security
mechanism to coordinate and monitor prevention and protection measures for FARC
political party members. The mechanism has established 1 national and 10 regional
and subregional headquarters in areas where FARC party activities have been
concentrated and has a road map to address specific risks for women involved in
political activities. It was the main coordination mechanism for the deployment of
protection and security measures on election day. No significant security incident
took place that day.
17. As mentioned in my previous report (S/2017/1117), a sizeable number of former
combatants have left the territorial areas and are increas ingly dispersed. Several new
collective settlements have been registered by the Agency for Reintegration and
Normalization, many in rural areas where FARC-EP was present prior to the
concentration of its forces, heightening the importance of the overall protection of
communities in conflict-affected regions as provided for in section 3.4 of the Peace
Agreement.

B.

Legal guarantees
18. Accreditation is a prerequisite for the application of the amnesty law and the
benefits of reintegration. By 15 August 2017, FARC-EP had submitted a list of more
than 14,000 former members. By December, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Peace had accredited about 11,900 former FARC-EP members on that list. With a
view to completing the process for the estimated remainder of more than 2,000 former
FARC-EP members, the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace, FARC and the
Mission implemented a tripartite plan from mid-January to mid-March 2018, leading
to the accreditation of about 1,000 former FARC-EP members in the territorial areas.
The corresponding notifications are being issued. The next steps include a joint visit
to the territorial area of La Variante, where as many as 400 former combatants may
be eligible for accreditation, the further review of pending cases in other territorial

__________________
1

4/17

The National Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops, which is provided
for in item 4 of the Peace Agreement, is supported and monitored by the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime.
18-04581

S/2018/279

areas and the review of about 400 former FARC-EP members who are still in prison
without accreditation.
19. At the time of the signing of the Peace Agreement, an estimated 3,500 former
FARC-EP members, approximately 8 per cent of whom are women, were in prison
for conflict-related crimes. To date, about 2,600 of them have been released, meaning
that, 15 months after the adoption of the amnesty law, one quarter of FARC -EP
prisoners are still pending judicial review, notwithstanding the joint efforts of the
Office of the High Commissioner for Peace and the Mission. With support from the
international community and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
a team of lawyers is working to accelerate the judicial review of cases involving
FARC members. Although the issue is complex, the failure to implement more fully
the amnesty law marks a low point in the reintegration process. Every effort should
be made to resolve outstanding cases.

C.

Socioeconomic reintegration
20. In the past three months, the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, the
Office of the High Commissioner for Peace and the Ministries of Education, Health,
Environment and Labour have made significant efforts to advance early rein sertion
objectives. At present, 11,507 (96.7 per cent) of accredited ex-combatants have access
to a bank account, 11,729 (99 per cent) have received one -time reintegration
allowances and 10,335 (87 per cent) receive monthly stipends.
21. At the same time, six months after the completion of the laying down of arms,
it is urgent for former FARC-EP members to see viable pathways for their mediumand long-term reintegration. Lack of progress in this respect is in good part
responsible for the movement of former FARC-EP members outside the territorial
areas, hence the growing importance of access to land, the design, funding and
implementation of viable productive projects linked to local development and the
creation of cooperatives to implement them.
22. Looking ahead to the medium-term challenges, I reiterate the need for the
National Reintegration Council to adopt, as provided for in the Peace Agreement, its
national reintegration plan linking reintegration to development. Staffing the
technical unit for reintegration in the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization
would improve the implementation of reintegration initiatives. Territorial councils for
reintegration with the participation of local authorities have been created in each
territorial area, but they have not yet been able to link effectively reintegration and
local development.
Conditions in the territorial areas
23. Living and working conditions in the territorial areas are a significant success
factor in the reintegration process. Most territorial areas are located in remote rural
municipalities with limited access to safe drinking water and sanitation. The
Government built temporary drinking water plants and septic wells in 25 of 26
territorial areas. These facilities have recurring mai ntenance issues that the Office of
the High Commissioner for Peace has been resolving, but there are outstanding
problems in the territorial areas of La Variante in Nariño, Llano Grande in Antioquia
and Yarí in Meta. At least four territorial areas have li mited electricity, and food
deliveries have also experienced some interruptions. The Office of the High
Commissioner for Peace, the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, the
Ministry of Health and the Mission established a working group that meets re gularly
to respond to infrastructure and services bottlenecks. In March, the Office of the High

18-04581

5/17

S/2018/279

Commissioner for Peace began work in six territorial areas, including the construction
of classrooms and upgrades to water supply, sewage and drainage.
24. In a welcome development, the Government announced that water, electricity,
sanitation and maintenance services would continue beyond March 2018, until August
2019. Health services would continue until 31 December 2018, with programmes
adjusted to specific needs. Lastly, and of particular importance, an agreement was
reached by the parties on 23 March to extend the provision of basic food supplies to
the territorial areas for another three months. The supply of food had been scheduled
to stop on 31 March. As access to land and long-term productive projects have not
yet materialized, access to food is an important incentive for former FARC -EP
members to remain in the territorial areas, thus making it possible for the Government
and FARC, with the support of the international community, to continue to carry out
an orderly reintegration process.
New settlements
25. As noted in paragraph 17, the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization has
identified several rural settlements where groups of former combatants a re currently
living and implementing collective projects. The Agency has deployed 106
facilitators in the surrounding municipalities to support those outside the territorial
areas. The Agency’s decision to support the new settlements of Uribe (Meta
Department) and Mutatá (Antioquia Department), where approximately 250 ex combatants have relocated, is welcome. The Agency estimates that more than 1,000
former FARC-EP combatants will require support for their individual reintegration.
26. The dispersion of former combatants is creating new challenges. While the focus
on territorial area-based reintegration remains essential and will hopefully trigger the
return of former combatants to the territorial areas, a broader community -based
approach at the municipal and departmental levels will become increasingly
important. The National Reintegration Council, government agencies and the
international community should take these evolving requirements into account.
Productive reintegration
27. More than 100 productive initiatives are currently at various stages of
implementation in the territorial areas. They are designed, implemented and funded
primarily by former FARC-EP members from their reintegration allowances and
monthly subsidies. Some operate with technical or financial assistance from
government agencies, universities, local authorities and international donors.
Unfortunately, the formal mechanism established by the Peace Agreement to
formulate and finance productive projects has been ineffective. The Peace Agreement
provides that, following the approval by the National Reintegration Council of
productive projects, an amount of 8 million pesos (about $2,800) is granted to each
participating former FARC-EP member. As at February, only one such project (in
Miravalle, Caquetá Department) had been approved.
28. The following three priorities were set during the past three months: the opening
of bank accounts for all 51 cooperatives established so far, the approval and funding
by the National Reintegration Council of productive projects in all territorial areas
and the issuance of norms enabling land acquisition by former FARC -EP members.
Cooperatives
29. Some progress has been made on the creation of the national cooperative, known
as Ecomun, and local cooperatives. A total of 51 cooperatives were created, with
3,070 members. The Ministry of Labour and the National Vocational Training Service
have trained and certified 5,433 former FARC-EP members in solidarity economics,
6/17

18-04581

S/2018/279

and international resources have been identified for the 1,400 more who expressed
interest in the course. Only a few cooperatives, however, have met all the legal and
operational requirements, in particular the opening of bank accounts. The
Superintendent of Banks is expected to issue shortly a decree that should pave the
way for the prompt opening of bank accounts for all cooperatives.
Access to land
30. In line with his decision in December 2017, the President is expected to
publicize soon for comment a draft decree enabling access to landownership for
former combatants in the process of reintegration. Once adopted, this landmark decree
will offer possibly the strongest incentive for former FARC -EP members with a
farming background, who are the majority, to continue with the reintegrati on process.
This could only be implemented after the presidential elections, however, owing to
restrictions on government contracting during the electoral campaign. The
Government is proposing an additional option, the purchase of land as part of the
funding of productive projects, which could be implemented immediately.
31. The National Land Agency has so far identified 76 plots of land (14 within the
territorial areas and 62 in close proximity) fit for purchase and agricultural
production. The assignment of land should advance without further delay.
Productive projects
32. As mentioned above, progress in the design of productive projects and their
approval and funding by the National Reintegration Council has been inadequate. The
work of the technicians designated by FARC in 2017 to formulate projects in the 26
territorial areas has been slow, and, as a result, only four projects have been presented
and one approved by the Council. Faced with this critical situation, in early March
2018, UNDP, with the support of the Council, FARC and the Mission, urgently
deployed specialists to complete the formulation process. The goal is to approve 13
projects in March and the remainder in April and May. In addition, after three months
of training, 350 former combatants have graduated as agricultural technicians.
33. Current reintegration efforts lack a gender perspective, and comprehensive
initiatives that are tailored to the needs of FARC-EP women and ensure their full
participation and leadership are required. Former FARC-EP women continue to
develop their own initiatives. For example, in the territorial area of Agua Bonita,
women have designed two projects, a tailoring shop and the production of pineapple related products. In the territorial area of Llano Grande, a group of 34 former FARCEP women opened a community restaurant. In the territorial area of Santa Lucia, a
group of 20 women launched a bakery with technical support from the National
Vocational Training Service. In the territorial area of Los Mo nos (Cauca), a group of
former FARC-EP indigenous women implemented a project to make artisanal
products and are planning to include women from nearby indigenous reserves. Similar
efforts are being made in other territorial areas but require technical and financial
support.
34. Productive reintegration is benefiting from the increasing mobilization by
Member States, United Nations entities, including UNDP, the International
Organization for Migration (IOM), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, UN-Women, the Mine Action Service and the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and international non-governmental organizations. The
Colombia donors group, coordinated by the European Union, has prioritized
reintegration. The Technical Board on International Cooperation, established by the
National Reintegration Council in February, should contribute to the further
promotion and harmonization of international cooperation. Efforts to establish the
18-04581

7/17

S/2018/279

demining organization, Humanicemos, which aims to employ up to 146 former
FARC-EP members, continue with support from the Mine Action Service.
Health and education
35. At present, 11,475 former FARC-EP members (96 per cent of those accredited;
8,980 men and 2,495 women) across 488 municipalities are registered with the healthcare system, an increase of 1,112 in the first quarter of 2018. The Ministry of Health
and the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace established new protocols to
overcome difficulties in registering former FARC-EP members with the health-care
system. The technical working group on health of the National Reintegration Council,
which met weekly, increased the attention given to 35 urgent cases and enhanced
service delivery in general.
36. Notwithstanding the extension of health services to the territorial areas, in some
territorial areas, no doctors were deployed in January and February. The issue has
now been resolved in all territorial areas with the exception of Vidrí in Chocó
Department. Other territorial areas reported a shortfall of medicines.
37. Despite these challenges, former FARC-EP members and neighbouring
communities that traditionally had limited access to health care are benefiting from
the temporary health facilities in the territorial areas. A robust contingency plan to
address health-care needs for territorial areas and communities in the mid - to longterm will be important as part of a rural health strategy for the most vulnerable
regions.
38. With a view to longer-term solutions, the Ministry of Health, in coordination
with IOM, the United Nations Population Fund and the Pan American Health
Organization, has sponsored the “Health for Peace” programme in the 26
municipalities with territorial areas, to strengthen the capacities of health -care
professionals and community leaders, including former combatants.
39. The health insurance provider for former FARC-EP members has scheduled
1,160 specialized medical appointments for 326 pregnant women in the territorial
areas. Unfortunately, in many rural hospitals near the territorial areas, obstetrical
services are deficient or non-existent and women continue to face serious difficulties
in obtaining those services or access to a maternity ward owing to high transportation
costs. The provision of and access to services that ensure the enjoyment of sexual and
reproductive rights remain a major challenge. Former FARC-EP members with
disabilities face similar challenges, as therapy centres and providers of specialized
attention are available mainly in distant departmental c apitals.
40. With regard to education, it is important to establish an integrated strategy in
line with the commitments outlined by the Ministry of Education in the framework of
the National Reintegration Council. Demand is growing for higher education as
primary and secondary education programmes enter their second year of
implementation. The Ministry of Education and FARC are collaborating on a joint
higher education plan, in collaboration with public and private universities. Under the
flexible model of primary and secondary education implemented by the Ministry of
Education and international partners, 3,418 former FARC-EP members were enrolled
in 2017 and approximately 1,831 registered in 2018.

8/17

18-04581

S/2018/279

D.

Political reintegration
41. The newly established FARC party has emerged from the congressional
elections in March with national responsibilities through the five members of the
Senate, two of whom are women, and the five members of the Chamber of
Representatives who will take office when the new Congress is inaugurated on
20 July 2018. The transition of FARC from conflict to politics has consolidated the
peace process but was not exempt from obstacles, some of which put FARC at a
disadvantage compared with other political parties.
42. In December 2017, during the registration of candidates, the Registrar
challenged whether the amnesty that covered crimes committed by FARC members
during the conflict also removed obstacles to their political participation. The review
by the Constitutional Court of the law establishing the Comprehensive System for
Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition helped to clarify the issue. In contrast,
the registration of FARC voters went relatively smoothly, even though the former
FARC-EP members who were not yet accredited were unable to vote. To date, the
National Registrar has registered all FARC-EP members accredited by the Office of
the High Commissioner for Peace.
43. The provision of public funding for the party’s operations and its electoral
campaigns was also problematic. Initially, the party was denied its request to open a
bank account because its legal representatives were included on international
sanctions lists. It was only on 23 January 2018 that the Agrarian Bank agreed to open
an account. In March, legal and bureaucratic procedures further delayed the
availability of funds transferred by the Agrarian Bank to the political party until
1 March, 10 days before the closing of the campaign. This clearly undermined the
ability of FARC to campaign. Delays in financial disbursement from the National
Electoral Council also affected other political parties.
44. While the inauguration of FARC regional headquarters and the launch of the
campaign in Bogotá and in several regions unfolded without incident, the start of the
campaign activities themselves was marked by several acts of vandalism against
FARC offices and harassment in public rallies. Some acts of violence also took place
against other parties, illustrating the polarized political environment.
45. The most serious incident took place on 16 January, when two former
combatants were killed as they campaigned in the municipality of Peque (Antioquia
Department). The Mission issued a public condemnation of the killings, the first such
event in the electoral campaign. The Special Investigation Unit of the Office of the
Attorney General issued arrest warrants for the suspected perpetrators.
46. Owing to the overall security environment and the lack of funds, the FARC party
suspended its campaign from 9 to 23 February. In the latter phase of the campaign,
the number of incidents dropped, and, as mentioned earlier, election day unfolded
without significant incident. On 8 March, owing to the health condition of its
presidential candidate, Rodrigo Londoño, FARC withdrew from t he presidential
campaign.

E.

Security of communities, organizations and leaders in the areas
most affected by the conflict
47. In my previous report, I pointed out that the increased insecurity in several areas
affected by the conflict was the most serious challenge of the post-agreement phase.

18-04581

9/17

S/2018/279

In 2017, a total of 121 human rights defenders and social and community leaders were
killed. 2
48. I am concerned that, by all accounts, the killing of community leaders and
human rights defenders has continued unabated in the past three months, despite
several measures to address the alarming number of killings registered in 2017. This
trend and the proliferation of illegal armed actors associated with it should be brought
under control as a matter of urgency, as has been acknowledged by the President and
top officials of his Government.
49. Of particular concern are the attacks against persons working to implement
government programmes related to coca substitution and land restitution. Members
of local community boards, the governance mechanism established in rural districts,
are among the main targets of violence. This underscores the importance of expanding
protection efforts from the individual protection of people at risk to the collective
security of groups and communities, as provided for in Decree 2078 of 2017.
Protection efforts should also be expanded to cover the specific protection challenges
of women in communities through measures for enhanced prevention of and response
to gender-based violence.
50. On 28 February 2018, the Ombudsman issued a nationwide early warning
identifying community and social leaders and human rights defenders as populations
at risk. He noted that 49 per cent of all cases from 2017 through February 2018 had
occurred in four regions: Cauca, Urabá, Antioquia and Norte de Santander. In his
alert, he identified seven factors common to many of the leaders killed, namely, their
involvement in defending land and natural resources, in implementing the Peace
Agreement, in particular the coca substitution programme and the formulation of rural
development plans, in land restitution and the return of displaced people, in defending
land against private interests, in denouncing drug dealing, the presence of illegal
armed actors and the use of children and adolescents in marginalized urban areas, in
protesting against specific investments of public resources and in political
participation in the current electoral period. The Ombudsman observed an expansion
of illegal armed groups and a growing number of clashes among them, resulting in an
increase in massive displacements. Such displacements were reported by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees during the first two months
of 2018.
51. The Office of the Ombudsman has issued an additional 27 regional early
warnings, signalling risks in 45 municipalities across 14 departments. Of those early
warnings, three highlighted risks of sexual violence and five highlighted risks of child
recruitment. The Office stressed that most risks are due to competition for control of
the territories where the production and trafficking of drugs and illegal mining are
taking place. Business interests surrounding infrastructure and agricultural
megaprojects were a secondary source of risk. Social leaders have been killed in 33
of those 45 municipalities.
52. Overall, the Ombudsman’s warnings show the extent to which attacks against
communities and leaders are directly linked to attempts to control resources, in
particular land and agriculture, through violence. Such findings point to the current
preponderance of economic motives in patterns of violence in rural areas and should
__________________
2

10/17

In its annual report covering 2017 (A/HRC/37/3/Add.3), the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights registered a total of 121 killings of human rights defenders,
including social and community leaders. Fatalities included 84 human rights defenders with
leadership roles, 23 members of social and political movements and 14 people killed during
social protests. A total of 14 of the fatalities were women, twice the number registered the
previous year.
18-04581

S/2018/279

help State institutions to refine their strategies against criminal organizations, in
support of the stabilization of the areas most affected by the conflict.
53. At the end of 2017, the Government approved various new instruments in an
effort to address the deterioration of the security situation and the pattern of killings
in former conflict zones, including a stronger early warning system, a more robust
institutional response to the warnings, the reinforcement of the Office of the Attorney
General through the establishment of a new Special Investigation Unit and the
adoption of plan “Horus” for the deployment of security forces in the rural areas at
risk. The Mission has been supporting these efforts wherever appropriate.
Response to the early warnings of the Ombudsman
54. In order to accelerate the institutional response to the Ombudsman ’s early
warning system and strengthen prevention in keeping with the Peace Agreement, the
Government of Colombia established, in December 2017, the Intersectoral
Commission for Rapid Response to Early Warnings, comprising the Ministers of
Interior and Defence, the Commander-in-Chief of the military forces, the Head of the
National Protection Unit, the Director of the national police and the Head of the
victims unit. The Ombudsman, the Attorney General, the Inspector General, the High
Counsellor for Post-Conflict, Human Rights and Security and the Presidential
Counsellor for Human Rights also participate as invitees. This is a welcome
development, as is the effort of State agencies to collaborate, with an increased
capacity to track situations through regional and local comm ittees. The Intersectoral
Commission meets at the national and local levels, and the Mission participated in 24
of its 32 sessions.
Plan “Horus”
55. The lack of a permanent presence of security and civilian institutions in the
territories most affected by the conflict contributes to the insecurity of communities.
In my previous report, I noted positively the announcement of a new stabilization
strategy, plan “Horus”, including the redeployment of public security forces in 595
rural districts in 13 high-priority and 54 medium-priority municipalities. Its
objectives are to regain control of areas where a number of indicators converge,
including the presence of illegal armed groups, the killing of community leaders,
illegal economies and early warnings by the Office of the Ombudsman, to establish a
long-term presence that builds confidence with communities and to facilitate the
provision of goods and services by civilian agencies.
56. The plan provides for regular assessments of its effectiveness in collabor ation
with the Mission. The implementation of the plan is still at an early stage and, despite
efforts, is facing a number of challenges, including the daunting logistical
requirements of establishing a permanent presence in a large number of very remote
districts, the problematic deployment of light military and police units in areas where
illegal armed groups are actively confronting security forces, the concern expressed
by the communities that observed an increase in the deployment of security personnel
that it might be temporary, making them reluctant to cooperate with the security forces
for fear of subsequent retaliation from criminal organizations, and the fact that, where
the communities’ livelihoods depend essentially on coca growing or illegal min ing,
their aspiration to be protected by security forces against the violence of illegal armed
groups clashes with their fear that the State presence will undermine their economic
survival. Throughout areas affected by both violence and extreme poverty, th e
implementation of the plan and the expansion of the State presence would be
considerably strengthened if the provision of security went hand in hand with the
delivery of goods and services by civilian agencies.

18-04581

11/17

S/2018/279

Special Investigation Unit of the Office of the Attorney General
57. The Special Investigation Unit, whose director was appointed in December
2017, has made progress in the characterization of illegal armed groups and criminal
structures operating in the areas vacated by FARC-EP. The Unit has prioritized the
deployment of multidisciplinary teams in Apartadó, Medellín, Popayán, Pasto and
Tumaco. The Mission has established a close dialogue with the Unit.
58. In its first phase, the Unit has rightly focused on the killings of former FARC EP members and their relatives, which were not adequately addressed in 2017. Its
investigations have led to 21 arrest warrants against individuals linked to three
structures involved in 20 murders and disappearances: Clan del Golfo, ELN and
FARC-EP dissident groups. The Police Elite Corps, established under the Peace
Agreement, has been supporting the Unit’s investigations.
59. Among State institutions, the Ombudsman and the Attorney General have taken
a welcome lead in the analysis of the context of violence in the conflict areas and
sharpened the focus on criminal groups involved in the killing of community and
social leaders.
National Commission on Security Guarantees
60. The National Commission on Security Guarantees, chaired by the President, has
overall responsibility for the design and supervision of a State -wide policy to respond
to the threat of illegal groups and dismantle organized crime in accordance with the
Peace Agreement. It includes the Vice-President, Óscar Naranjo, the principals of all
the agencies involved in security matters, the Presidential Counsellor for Human
Rights, the Attorney General, the Inspector General and the Ombudsman. Four
representatives of well-known civil society organizations are full members, and the
Organization of American States, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Verification Mission participate as
observers. The activities of the Commission have intensified, and the regular reports
of the Attorney General have led to a substantive discussion of the evolving patterns
of violence in the territories. The Subcommission on Security Guarantees is holding
meetings in prioritized areas, gathering the perspectives of community members and
local authorities. The recurring sources of insecurity highlighted in its sessions
include the proliferation of armed groups, the lack of economic opportunities and
high levels of corruption and impunity.
61. The Commission has also put in place four thematic committees focused on
regional, gender and ethnic perspectives, financing sources, normative changes and
the impact of the response of institutions. Women’s organizations have requested
effective representation in the Commission to ensure that their perspectives are
reflected in its work.

F.

Ceasefire between the Government of Colombia and the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional
62. The temporary bilateral ceasefire agreement between the Government of
Colombia and ELN expired on 9 January 2018. Despite numerous calls to preserve
the marked reduction in violence that prevailed during the temporary ceasefire, ELN
resumed military action on 10 January, which led the Government to suspend its
participation in the talks. Several days later, amid a lull in the level of violence on the
ground, the chief negotiators of both parties met again in Quito to discuss, among
others, the prospect of negotiating a new ceasefire. In that context, on 25 January, in
a joint letter to my Special Representative, they requested his assessment of the

12/17

18-04581

S/2018/279

temporary ceasefire and his recommendations for an improved agreement. In a letter
dated 8 February, my Special Representative underscored the positive impact of the
ceasefire for communities in conflict-affected areas and for the legitimacy of the
peace process. He outlined the main shortcomings of the temporary ceasefire
agreement, in particular the fundamental differences on the definition of offensive
action, the scope of the humanitarian commitments and the role of the monitoring and
verification mechanism. His recommendations included the need for a more robust
political dialogue, the implementation of concrete, achievable and verifiable
confidence-building measures, an immediate de-escalation of hostilities and the
negotiation of a longer-term ceasefire with the participation of the designated
verification entity so as to provide guarantees of effective implementation.
63. On 27 January, a bombing attack by ELN against a police station in the city of
Barranquilla left 7 police officers dead and more than 40 wounded, le ading the
Government to suspend again its participation in the talks. The armed forces, which
have been involved in actions against ELN since the end of the ceasefire, were
instructed to respond forcefully. On 30 January, the armed forces bombed an ELN
camp in Chocó Department and, in the following days, announced the capture of ELN
members.
64. Following the end of the temporary ceasefire, broad sectors of Colombian
society expressed in strong terms their rejection of violence and their demand for a
peaceful solution to the conflict. On 26 February, ELN announced a unilateral
cessation of offensive military actions from 9 to 13 March to allow the elections to
take place undisturbed. On 12 March, the President announced that he had instructed
his negotiating team to return to Quito, noting national and international
encouragement for the resumption of talks. On 15 March, the fifth round of the peace
talks began, and the delegations issued a joint statement outlining their agenda: the
participation of society in the building of peace, an assessment of the temporary
ceasefire and negotiations on a new ceasefire, the promotion of a humanitarian
agreement in Chocó, progress towards demining and public outreach to enhance the
understanding of the peace process. The fifth round is scheduled to end on 18 May.

G.

Cross-cutting issues
Gender mainstreaming and engagement with women’s groups
65. The implementation of the specific gender provisions regarding security
guarantees and reintegration has been limited. Their implementation must be
prioritized and adequately resourced to enable positive and differentiated actions for
the adequate reintegration of former FARC-EP women and the security of women in
the communities. The working group on gender of the National Reintegration
Council, with which the Mission coordinates closely, has promoted steps towards
gender-sensitive reintegration, including a situational analysis of women who are
former combatants and the design of a gender strategy for reintegratio n. The working
group, together with the Special High-level Forum for Women, plays a critical part in
ensuring that the needs of women are met and that a gender perspective is
mainstreamed.
66. The Mission, together with UN-Women, continues to strengthen its dialogue
with women’s organizations and to address their recommendations. At the regional
level, the Mission is fostering dialogue between former FARC -EP women and women
from nearby communities. On International Women’s Day, the Mission supported
more than 15 events in territorial areas and nearby communities to foster dialogue
and reconciliation.

18-04581

13/17

S/2018/279

67. The Mission currently has, across its field offices, a network of 41 gender focal
points, who have been promoting coordination among women’s organizations,
government counterparts, FARC gender focal points and United Nations agencies.
Child protection
68. The Mission continues to liaise with the Presidential Counsellor for Human
Rights on the implementation of the Government-led reintegration programme
entitled “A different path of life” for children associated with the former FARC-EP.
The Mission is following up on the cases of 21 children of the 135 who were formally
released from FARC-EP ranks. Challenges to their reintegration include barriers for
children under 18 years of age to obtaining financial support owing to the legal
requirement of having an adult guardian, adolescents facing delays in the transition
to the reintegration programme for adults and difficulties in providing attention to
those who decided to live within a territorial area. Some of those obstacles have been
overcome, and the Mission observed that eight of those children had made progress
in education, eight had received financial support and the majority had obtained
proper identification documents. In February, the National Reintegration Council
began to prepare detailed guidelines for the reintegration of children, including
indicators, a follow-up strategy and a psychological support strategy for the
reintegration programme. It is important to ensure the proper implementation of those
guidelines. A clear and widely disseminated guide on the transition to the adult
programme is needed. To date, 83 of the participants in the programme are over the
age of 18, and 114 will reach that age by the end of the year.
69. There is a lack of specialized attention and adequate facilities for children of
former FARC-EP members living in the territorial areas. For example, only two
territorial areas have fully functional day-care facilities for children. The Mission is
coordinating with the Colombian Family Welfare Institute and UNICEF to improve
their living conditions. In some territorial areas, the Institute has supported the access
of children to education, health and recreation. Modest progress has been made with
regard to their inclusion in social programmes planned for their parents. The
Government’s launch, in 166 municipalities, of a comprehensive programme to
prevent child recruitment by illegal groups is a welcome development.
Ethnic and indigenous issues
70. Modest progress has been made in the integration of ethnic and cultural
perspectives into the reintegration process and the provision of security guarantees.
The High-level Forum of Ethnic Peoples established under the Peace Agree ment lacks
resources. In a decision in December 2017, the Constitutional Court upheld the right
of Yukpa people to prior consultation on the location of the territorial area of San José
de Oriente and requested the Government to review the matter. Four pie ces of
legislation submitted to Congress under fast-track procedures were consulted with
indigenous and ethnic organizations.
71. A positive step under way is the preparation of a decree for the reintegration of
3,003 indigenous former combatants. It will be important for the National
Reintegration Council to ensure that indigenous former combatants are able to enjoy
comparable rights and opportunities to other former FARC -EP members and to
strengthen the security and self-protection systems of ethnic peoples, such as the
Indigenous Guard and the Cimarrona Guard, and ensure their effective coordination
with the security forces.
72. The Mission continues to maintain dialogue with ethnic organizations and to
support the inclusion of ethnic perspectives by the national implementing bodies. The
Mission has recruited an adviser on ethnic and indigenous affairs.
14/17

18-04581

S/2018/279

H.

Liaison and coordination, including the United Nations country team
73. The Mission continues its regular dialogue with a wide range of sectors,
including national, regional and local authorities, civil society organizations, the
private sector and the international community.
74. Through this engagement, the Mission has facilitated reconciliation efforts in
several regions. For example, in Valledupar, the Mission has facilitated encounters
between local landowners, victims and former combatants; in Medellin, it
accompanied dialogues between opposing political leaders; and in Villavicencio, it
has promoted encounters between the private sector and FARC.
75. In support of consolidating the peace process, the Mission has continued its
engagement with sectors that are sceptical of or opposed to the peace process. This
greatly contributes to the Mission’s understanding of the political context, in
particular on issues such as the transitional justice system, challenges to security and
the electoral context. It has impressed on interlocutors that, irrespective of partisan
differences, the full reintegration of former combatants into civilian life, the secu rity
of communities and the stabilization of areas affected by the conflict are as much a
matter of long-term national security as they are a question of peace implementation.
76. The Mission continues to work in close partnership with the United Nations
country team at the national and local levels, as well as the international community
in Colombia. In addition to continually exchanging information and analysis, the
Mission has worked with United Nations entities and donors to mobilize additional
support to reintegration efforts.

IV. Mission structures
Mission reconfiguration and operations
77. My Deputy Special Representative, Jessica Faieta (Ecuador), arrived in the
Mission on 19 March 2018, replacing Tania Patriota.
78. Currently, the Mission has 311 civilian staff, including 151 women, and 118
international observers from 18 countries, 31 of whom are women. During the
reporting period, the Mission vacancy rate was reduced from 35 to 29 per cent for
international staff and from 42 to 37 per cent for locally recruited staff.
79. Following the expiration of the ceasefire between the Government and ELN, the
30 Mission teams tasked with its verification ceased all operational activities and the
additional 70 international observers authorized for that task were progressively
repatriated from 15 January to 3 February.
Mission support
80. During the reporting period, the Mission focused on completing the deployment
of its personnel and equipment in Mission headquarters, 10 regional offices, 7
subregional offices and the territorial areas and the withdrawal of its assets that had
been provided to teams for monitoring the ceasefire between ELN and the
Government from existing resources.
81. For the 25 local sites, temporary camps have been constructed on 15 sites
formerly occupied by the tripartite Monitoring and Verification Mechanism. Seven of
them have office facilities, and eight have combined office and living
accommodation. These temporary camps permit the Mission to be deployed in
proximity to the territorial areas pending more robust and durable accommodation.
The temporary camps established in the sites formerly occupied by the Mechanism
18-04581

15/17

S/2018/279

have been equipped with suitable water and wastewater management services, in
keeping with guidance of the Department of Field Support on mitigating the Mission ’s
environmental impact. Several sites formerly occupied by the Mechanism have not
yet been occupied owing to legal issues with landowners and local communities. In
the remaining 10 locations, Mission personnel will commute to the territorial areas
from nearby towns, rather than from temporary camps. At the regional and
subregional locations, new offices have been identified following the termination of
the cost-sharing arrangements of the previous Mission.
Safety and security of United Nations personnel
82. The residual risk levels for the Mission have remained unchanged since the
previous report. Nevertheless, in the light of some changes in the threat context,
including the expiration of the ceasefire between ELN and the Government, specific
measures have been applied to local areas of Mission deployment, including gender
considerations. The residual risk levels in relation to the most relevant threats
identified, such as kidnapping, crossfire, violent demonstrations, sexual harassment
and sexual assault, vary between low and medium.
Conduct and discipline
83. During the reporting period, the Mission continued to strengthen prevention.
The Mission organized training sessions for staff at headquarters and in field offices,
as well as for civil society representatives. The annual Leadership Dialogue, which
was held among staff at Mission headquarters and field staff, provided an additional
opportunity to ensure an interactive dialogue on conduct issues, such as sexual
exploitation and abuse, harassment in the workplace, abuse of authority in the
workplace and conflict of interest.
84.

No misconduct cases were reported during the reporting period.

V. Observations
85. The congressional elections held on 11 March were yet another significant step
forward in the transition of FARC from weapons to politics and the transition of
Colombia from conflict to peace. Participation figures confirm that these elections
were the most inclusive in decades, thus enhancing the legitimacy of the electoral
results and illustrating one of the ways in which peace is benefiting Colombian
democracy. This also shows that the citizens of Colombia are ready and willing to
embrace the opportunities from the overall reduction of violence brought about by the
peace process. The presidential election is two months away. I call upon the political
parties involved in the electoral contest to ensure that violence is further marginalized
and a new milestone is reached in the consolidation of peaceful and inclusive politics.
86. The killing of former combatants outside the territorial areas remains a subject
of concern. At the same time, progress has been achieved in relation to the security
of former combatants living in the territorial areas and their movement outside areas
protected by security forces. Coordination and technical issues remain, but the
commitment of the National Protection Unit and the security forces is a firm basis
from which to expand security guarantees in the coming weeks and months.
87. Socioeconomic reintegration is lagging behind. The transition from early
reinsertion to sustainable reintegration has not yet been completed, and this
uncertainty continues to undermine the confidence of former members of FARC-EP
in their reintegration and in the peace process itself. Some of the fundamentals are
being put in place, in particular the legal framework for access to landownership, the

16/17

18-04581

S/2018/279

technical studies for the launch of productive projects a nd the financial regulations
enabling dozens of cooperatives established by former combatants to begin to operate.
In the next three months, it is essential that all these measures are translated into
concrete achievements in the territorial areas and in s ome of the new settlements
where many former combatants have relocated. I welcome the growing interest of the
international community in contributing to the success of this key dimension of the
peace process.
88. As noted in my previous report and reiterated in the present one, the resurgence
of violence in several of the areas most affected by the conflict and the persistent
pattern of killings of community and social leaders are the main subjects of concern
at present. I welcome that these issues have moved to the centre of the agenda of the
President and key institutions of the Colombian state: the Ombudsman, the Attorney
General and the Inspector General. A clear national consensus is emerging that unites
Colombian institutions and civil society around the protection of the life, work and
contributions of community and social leaders, in particular those who promote the
substitution of coca crops, the restitution of their land and the protection of their
resources and the environment.
89. This consensus is an opportunity for forceful concerted action in the coming
period, and the National Commission on Security Guarantees could play a leading
part. Some of the success factors can already be identified, including a more collective
approach to the protection of populations at risk, the delivery of goods and services
in conjunction with the deployment of the security forces to counter the influence of
illegal armed groups, and a more robust, better resourced and more coordinated
institutional response to the Ombudsman’s early warnings. The investigations of the
Office of the Attorney General, and in particular its Special Investigation Unit
dedicated to the cases of community and social leaders, are called upon to play a
decisive role. The successful prosecution of the material and intellectual perpetrators
behind the many assassinations in recent years might be the most effective way to
underscore the country’s determination to do away with violence.
90. The resumption of negotiations between the Government and ELN could
contribute to the overall effort to tackle violence and its roots. It will hopefully be
accompanied by a de-escalation of the conflict. The parties’ agenda, as announced
recently, is balanced with respect to its political, military and confidenc e-building
aspects. I look forward to its effective implementation.
91. During my visit to Colombia in January 2018, I stressed that mine was a mission
of solidarity with and commitment to the people of Colombia at a historic juncture
for the country, Latin America and the world. Ongoing developments in Colombia
illustrate both the success factors and the magnitude of the challenges involved in
moving from an almost flawless ceasefire and laying down of arms by FARC -EP to
the daunting tasks of overcoming a deeply rooted heritage of violence, of addressing
illicit economies that fuel violence and of building and sustaining peace through the
extension of responsive governance, security and development to the historically
marginalized areas of the country, whose citizens have borne the brunt of the conflict.
The Mission, the United Nations country team and the United Nations system at large
are committed to this effort. At this crucial stage in the Colombia peace process, the
international community remains an essential partner, and I encourage it to continue
to provide full support to this endeavour.

18-04581

17/17
