A/RES/75/245 B

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
19 April 2021

Seventy-fifth session
Agenda item 148
United Nations common system

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 16 April 2021
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/670/Add.1, para. 7)]

75/245.

United Nations common system
B1
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 74/255 B of 27 December 2019 and 75/245 A of
31 December 2020,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the initial review of
the jurisdictional set-up of the United Nations common system 2 and the related report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 3
Reaffirming its commitment to a single, unified United Nations common system
as the cornerstone for the regulation and coordination of the conditions of service of
the United Nations common system,
Emphasizing the importance of, and benefits derived from, maintaining a
coherent and unified United Nations common system,
Reiterating its call for all organizations of the United Nations common system
to cooperate with the International Civil Service Commission on matters relating to
salaries, allowances and conditions of service,
Expressing its concern over the continued inconsistencies in the application of
the 2016 post adjustment results across duty stations of the United Nations common
system,
Emphasizing the importance of the principle of judicial independence,

__________________

Resolution 75/245, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/75/49), vol. I, becomes resolution 75/245 A.
2
A/75/690.
3
A/75/797.
1

21-05132 (E)

210421

*2105132*

A/RES/75/245 B

United Nations common system

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
3.
Acknowledges the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General in engaging
with multiple stakeholders in the preparation of his report, and encourages con tinued
outreach and consultations with all the relevant stakeholders;
4.
Reiterates its request that the executive heads of organizations of the
common system consult with the International Civil Service Commission in any cases
involving recommendations and decisions of the Commission that may come before
the tribunals in the United Nations system, and once again urges the governing bodies
of the organizations to ensure that the executive heads comply with that request;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide in the context of his next report
detailed updated information on the divergence in the jurisprudence of the two
tribunals on matters relating to the International Civil Service Commission and an
assessment of its impact on the cohesion of the United Nations common system;
6.
Recalls paragraph 24 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and
encourages increased exchanges and sustained communication between the tribunals
of the United Nations common system;
7.
Stresses that upholding the consistency of the United Nations common
system is a matter of principle, irrespective of the actual frequency of challenges to
its cohesion;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a further report with detailed
proposals and thorough analysis on practical options, giving priority to measures
involving changes to the adjudication of cases involving International Civil Service
Commission matters, as set out under option D, and measures under option B, limited
to the review of tribunal judgments and issuance of guidance by the Commission, as
well as increased exchanges between the tribunals, as set out in section IV of the
report of the Secretary-General, and to present it for the consideration of the General
Assembly no later than the seventy-seventh session;
9.
Also requests the Secretary-General, when providing further analysis of
option D in section IV of the report, to take into consideration ways of leveraging
existing frameworks, infrastructure and judges of the tribunals to operationalize the
joint chamber only when required, thereby minimizing costs associated with this
option, and to identify measures that organizations may need to take in order to
recognize or be subject to the jurisdiction of the joint chamber;
10. Further requests the Secretary-General to provide, during the main part of
its seventy-sixth session, an informal briefing on the status of progress in the
preparation of the report on the jurisdictional set-up of the United Nations common
system.
59th plenary meeting
16 April 2021

2/2

21-05132
