United Nations

S/PV.6338

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6338th meeting
Monday, 14 June 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Salam
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-40334 (E)

*1040334*

S/PV.6338

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Thabo Mbeki,
Chairperson of the African Union High-Level Panel on
Darfur; Mr. Djibril Bassolé, Joint African UnionUnited Nations Chief Mediator for Darfur; Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari, Joint African Union-United Nations Special
Representative for Darfur; and Mr. Haile Menkerios,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Sudan.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Mbeki, Mr. Bassolé, Mr. Gambari and
Mr. Menkerios. I now give the floor to Mr. Mbeki.
Mr. Mbeki: We would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for giving us this opportunity to engage
the Council on the issue of the Sudan.
As members will recall, the last time we were
here, in December 2009, we informed the Council that
the African Union (AU) had expanded our mandate to
follow up on its decisions on Darfur on the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) and the process of democratization
in the Sudan. Indeed, our Panel has been doing what it
can to honour that mandate. In that regard, I am happy
to inform the Council that, by common agreement, our
Panel works in close cooperation with the three
institutions that are playing a central role in assisting
the people of the Sudan to resolve their problems. I
refer here to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and the AU-United
Nations Joint Chief Mediator for Darfur — all of
which are correctly represented at this meeting and
will, as the President has said, address the Council.

2

I am certain that there is no need for us to
convince the Council about the importance of that
cooperation, which enables our four institutions to
share information, coordinate their actions and support
one another while fully respecting their various
mandates. On behalf of our Panel, I would like to take
this opportunity once more to thank Joint Special
Representative Ibrahim Gambari, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Haile Menkerios and Joint Chief
Mediator Djibril Bassolé for the opportunity that they
have given to our Panel to work with them and the
institutions they lead, which I am certain will greatly
assist in accelerating progress towards meeting the goals
on the Sudan, which are shared by the African Union and
the United Nations.
In that regard, I am certain that the Council is
aware of the fact of the Joint AU-United Nations
meeting on the Sudan held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia,
on 7 May, and of the statement the two organizations
issued at the end of that meeting, which reflects the
scope of their shared understanding and coordinated
approach. Similarly, the Council will also be familiar
with the fact of the 8 May meeting, again held in Addis
Ababa, convened by the AU and the United Nations,
which brought together the representatives of the
Governments and intergovernmental organizations that
are actively involved in work to help resolve the
challenges that the Sudan faces and which included all
the countries neighbouring the Sudan.
We were indeed very pleased that that inclusive
meeting again reached a common agreement on the
approach towards the major challenges facing the
Sudan and agreed that the AU and the United Nations
should convene a bi-monthly consultative forum to
ensure proper coordination of the interventions of the
entirety of the international community. Once again,
we are certain that the Council is familiar with the
decisions adopted at that meeting. The joint conveners
of the consultative forum, that is, the AU and the
United Nations, are determined that the forum should
meet as was agreed and effectively carry out the
principal tasks for which it was established, namely, to
ensure the effective coordination of international action
on the Sudan.
As the Council is aware, the 8 May meeting
agreed with the AU and the United Nations that the
global political agreement on Darfur should be
concluded this year, ahead of the holding of the
Southern Sudan referendum. I am happy to say that the

10-40334

S/PV.6338

Government of the Sudan has agreed with that
proposal. Accordingly, as did the 7 May and 8 May
Addis Ababa meetings, we fully support the Doha
negotiations, which are focused specifically on
concluding a peace agreement involving all the
belligerents, as well as a framework agreement. We
therefore fully support the efforts of the Joint Chief
Mediator, supported by the Government of the State of
Qatar, to bring all the belligerents into the peace
negotiations with a view to concluding those
negotiations as speedily as possible. Similarly, we
support the efforts of the Mediator and Qatar to
mobilize Darfur civil society to support the Doha peace
process.
Again as agreed at the 7 and 8 May meetings, we
will take steps immediately to prepare for the
convening of the fully inclusive process, in the form of
a Darfur-Darfur conference targeted at concluding a
global political agreement. Again, I am happy to
inform the Council that the Government of the Sudan
has agreed to that. In that regard, I should also mention
that, when we return to the Sudan later this month, we
will engage the officials designated by the Government
of the Sudan to work on the details relating to the
implementation of the decisions of the African Union
on the issues of justice and reconciliation in Darfur.
Our intention in this context is that, by the time the
Darfur-Darfur conference considers the item of justice
and reconciliation, we should have agreed on all the
relevant details with the Government of the Sudan.
With regard to Darfur, we would also like to
mention that when we return to the Sudan later this
month, we will again join the Government and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur to consider a detailed programme to improve
the security situation in Darfur. The meeting will also
take into account proposals on this important issue that
have been elaborated by the United States Special
Envoy, General Scott Gration.
Sustained improvement in the security situation
in Darfur would help to create the conditions to help
the refugees and internally displaced persons to realize
their wish to return to the villages from which they
were forcibly removed. In this regard, it is obvious that
such voluntary returns as may take place will have to
be accompanied by a process of reconstruction and
development to assist the returnees to resettle and build
better lives for themselves.

10-40334

With regard to matters relating to the CPA, the
Panel has convened for 21 June the first meeting of the
teams that will negotiate the post-referendum
arrangements, taking into account both possible
outcomes of the Southern Sudan referendum. This
meeting will mark the beginning of the postreferendum negotiations. As agreed with the CPA
parties, the Panel will then be on standby to assist the
parties in the event that they require intervention to
resolve any of the matters on the post-referendum
agenda.
Again, as agreed with the parties, the Panel will
work with them to help resolve outstanding CPA
matters, in particular the finalization of matters relating
to the North-South border, as well as Abyei. We will
work on these matters together with UNMIS, as we
will with regard to supporting the newly-constituted
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission, bearing in
mind the urgency that attends all these CPA issues.
Similarly, later this month we will begin work,
especially with UNMIS and the Sudan Council of
Churches, aimed at helping to end the communal
conflicts in Southern Sudan which continue to claim
many lives.
We will also continue to work, particularly with
the political parties in Southern Sudan, as we did
during the general elections, to help prepare the
conditions to ensure that the January 2011 Southern
Sudan and Abyei referendums are free and fair. In this
regard, we are confident that UNMIS will play a vital
role to assist in organizing those referendums.
We will also continue to attend to the important
issue of the further democratization of the Sudan. In
this regard, in particular, we are working towards
convening a forum of the Sudanese political parties
that will seek to develop a national consensus on the
major challenges facing the country, including the
process of democratization.
Like the Sudanese themselves and our United
Nations partners, our Panel is fully conscious of the
complexity of all the matters I have mentioned and the
time pressures under which the correct solutions have
to be found. In this regard, and to conclude, we would
like to take this opportunity to thank the United
Nations, the European Union, other intergovernmental
organizations, and individual Governments, including
members of this Council, for the support they have

3

S/PV.6338

extended to the Panel to empower us to do the work
expected of us.
We are pleased that both this Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council
remain seized of the question of the Sudan, convinced
that this will assist those of us on the AU Panel on the
Sudan, in UNAMID, UNMIS and the Darfur mediation
more effectively and expeditiously to discharge our
responsibilities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Mbeki for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Menkerios.
Mr. Menkerios: I would like to begin by
thanking the Council for this opportunity to report on
the situation in the Sudan, specifically on the
remaining phases in the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA).
Let me state at the very outset that both
signatories to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement —
the National Congress Party (NCP) and the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) — continue to
express commitment to the full implementation of the
CPA, including the timely conduct of the referendums
in Southern Sudan and Abyei, as well as the popular
consultations in the Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan
states. They also continue to reiterate their readiness to
respect the outcomes of these processes. So far, the
parties
have
maintained
progress
in
CPA
implementation without major breakdowns emerging
from the recent elections with parallel victories. As
they approach the end of the implementation period,
the stakes are higher as they face the outcomes in the
referendums and the final phases of the 2005 peace
agreement.
The path ahead is certainly not without
challenges and could be divided into two broad phases.
First, the peaceful and credible conduct of the
referendums in Southern Sudan and Abyei, scheduled
for 9 January 2011, and popular consultations in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states. The second,
perhaps more important challenge is the peaceful
implementation of the outcomes of these processes.
The immediate tasks that remain for the proper
and timely implementation of the CPA are the
formation of the Government of National Unity and the
Government of Southern Sudan; the formation and
launching of the referendums commissions for

4

Southern Sudan and Abyei; the demarcation of the
North-South border, as well as the Abyei border; the
commencement of the popular consultations in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile; and the initiation of
and progress on negotiations between the parties on
post-referendum arrangements. Both parties are
preoccupied with the formation of their respective
Governments — a task we expect to be announced
within this week or the next.
Widespread concerns exist about the tight time
frame for the preparation and conduct of the
referendums. The postponement of the national
elections from January 2009, as originally scheduled,
to April 2010 diminished the time available to prepare
for and conduct the referendums. Since the
announcement of the election results, the key priority
has been and continues to be the formation and
establishment of the referendum commissions for
Southern Sudan and Abyei. There is no more time to
lose.
On the referendum in Southern Sudan, I am glad
to inform the Council that the two sides have agreed on
the formation of the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission and last week tabled their proposal to
Parliament for approval, which is expected in the next
few days. The United Nations awaits the formation of
the Commission to start working with it. The priority
for the Commission, once established, is to develop an
operational plan and a budget so that resource needs
can be identified and mobilized. In addition, the
Commission needs to set up offices at all
administrative levels, recruit and train staff, conduct
voter registration, oversee the conduct of the
referendum and announce its outcome. This is a tall
order. I believe that if the parties act and cooperate on
their commitments with the sense of urgency the
situation calls for, a timely conduct of the referendums
is possible, albeit challenging.
As requested by the Council, the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) is finalizing its plans
and preparations to assist the parties with the conduct
of the referendums and the popular consultations on
time, consistent with the provisions of the CPA. The
parties need to be encouraged — indeed, urged — to
push on with the necessary preparations without further
delay.
On the referendum in Abyei, the parties have not
yet agreed on who is eligible to vote. This issue has

10-40334

S/PV.6338

been referred to the Abyei referendum commission to
finalize. While the parties have nominated their
members to the Commission, differences persist on
who should chair it, as the chairperson would have the
deciding vote, including on eligibility. The resolution
of the eligibility issue and establishment of a
commission are top priorities for the Abyei referendum
process to commence. Moreover, demarcation of
Abyei’s borders on the basis of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration decision continues to be stalled, for reasons
related to the lack of agreement on residency and
eligibility to vote in the referendum. My impression
from informal discussions with the parties, the NCP in
particular, is that the issues of residency and border
demarcation in Abyei are unlikely to be easily resolved
outside a broader post-referendum agreement on
grazing rights, resource sharing and citizenship, among
other issues.
The Ad Hoc Technical Border Committee has
presented its report to the parties, in which it describes
areas of agreement regarding the border and sections
where it was unable to agree. It is a welcome
development that the Committee has, with United
Nations technical and logistical support, started to
demarcate the sections of the border it has agreed
upon, with the exception of Abyei, citing security
threats. It is imperative, however, that the parties settle
the remaining contentious parts of the border and
demarcate them before the referendum is held.
The CPA gives the people of the Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states the right to decide on
their future governance through a process of popular
consultations. These are to be conducted by elected
state assemblies and should provide an opportunity for
a fresh approach to centre-periphery and minority
issues that, if properly implemented, could serve as a
model for the rest of the Sudan. However, a potential
continuation of the original North-South conflict is
also possible if the process is not handled with the
transparency and openness it demands. It is also of
concern that the timeline for the meaningful conduct of
these consultations remain tight, especially in Southern
Kordofan, due to the postponement of the census and
elections.
During my most recent briefing to the Council, I
emphasized that unity and secession do not need to be
a zero-sum game for the North and the South. It is thus
advisable for the two sides to continue to cooperate for
their mutual benefit, whether in unity or separation.

10-40334

The goal of making unity attractive, therefore, should
be a long-term one, irrespective of the outcome. In
interactions with the leaders of the two parties, we
have advised that separation should not be considered a
divorce, and that in the case of a vote for separation,
maintaining close linkages between the South and the
North is in the interests of both.
In this regard, agreement on post-referendum
arrangements not only becomes crucial for long-term
peace and stability in the Sudan and the region, but
will also seriously affect the smooth implementation of
the CPA in the remaining phases of the interim period.
Accordingly, the parties have been engaged in
discussions and must be encouraged and supported in
reaching agreement on key issues of common concern.
Formal negotiations between the parties are scheduled
to start on 21 June with the assistance of the African
Union (AU) High-Level Implementation Panel, and we
will be fully supporting this effort.
The security situation around much of the border
and within Southern Sudan remains of great concern.
Sporadic clashes between the Misseriya and Rizeigat
armed militias and the SPLM around the borders of
Abyei, Southern Kordofan and Western Bahr el-Ghazal
have continued. Within Southern Sudan, rebellious
armed elements in Unity and Jonglei states in
particular continue to cause security risks, as does the
Lord’s Resistance Army in Western Equatoria. UNMIS
continues to work with the parties to help address these
security threats.
The overall situation in Southern Sudan requires
a concerted and comprehensive capacity-building
effort, irrespective of the outcome of the referendum.
This effort would, as an immediate priority, require a
coherent strategy on security sector reform and
institutional capacity-building. A development plan
that focuses on the provision of basic services in the
short term and sustained economic growth in the long
term is also a must. The Government of Southern
Sudan, with the assistance of the United Nations
country team and other partners, is in the process of
refining such a plan. It is only through such a
multifaceted approach that we can help ensure a
peaceful transition and effective protection of civilians
both in the short and long terms.
The United Nations has stood firm in its
commitment to assisting the parties in implementing
the CPA. UNMIS and the United Nations country team

5

S/PV.6338

stand ready to help them to conclude this peace process
in a way that contributes to continuing peace, stability
and progress. With regard to support for the
referendums, the United Nations is ready to extend
technical and logistical assistance to the two
commissions as soon as they become operational. We
have been providing and will continue to provide the
requisite assistance for the conduct of the popular
consultations. In order to support these processes, we
have planned and begun to redeploy resources and staff
to locations beyond those covered during the elections.
The UNMIS military contingent is in the process
of identifying possible hotspots and revising its
deployment accordingly. We will continue to train and
help develop the institutional capacity of the Southern
Sudan Police Service. As requested by the Council, we
have revised and are implementing a more effective
approach to the protection of civilians, which is no
longer a task entrusted to a particular unit but is an
integral component of all Mission operations. The
strategy being implemented entails reinforced presence
at the state level where a state coordinator manages and
directs the efforts of all Mission components to protect
civilians; a more flexible military deployment will
further enhance this effort.
In partnership with the AU High-Level
Implementation Panel, and in collaboration with other
key partners, we have been engaging the parties on all
processes that require further agreement and shall
continue to do so. In this regard, a consultative forum
involving key international stakeholders met in Addis
Ababa in May and agreed to support the partnership of
the AU and the United Nations in taking the lead on
facilitating progress and cooperation in the peaceful
implementation of the CPA and beyond.
International monitoring of the referendums is
another important issue. The political significance of
the referendums to the future of the people of the
Sudan, and indeed to the whole region, has led to calls
by the two parties that they be conducted in a
transparent and credible manner, and thus with much
closer scrutiny by the international community than the
elections received. In fact, the two parties have
separately informed UNMIS that they desire United
Nations engagement at a much greater level than
during the elections to help ensure that the referendums
are prepared and conducted without any interference
from one side or the other. This implies a wider scope
of engagement for UNMIS that exceeds its current

6

mandate. We have advised both parties that they should
jointly define this greater level of United Nations
engagement and present their request to the
Organization together. We await this joint request to
pass it on to the Secretary-General.
In all this, the international community must not
only encourage and urge the parties to stay the course
to ensure the timely conclusion of CPA implementation
and continued peace and mutual benefit, but also assist
them in this endeavour. This will require political and
material support both in the conduct of the remaining
processes and in ensuring a soft landing in the postreferendum period.
There is much at stake for the future of the people
of the Sudan, the region and the African continent in
the outcome of the referendums and popular
consultations. The Sudan is a microcosm of Africa, and
its stability or instability will have far-reaching
implications. Alongside the exercise of selfdetermination for the peoples of Southern Sudan and
Abyei, and popular consultations in the concerned
states, the Sudan needs to be encouraged and assisted
to expand the democratic space opened by the recent
elections and establish a broad-based system of
national governance that will lead to a more equitable
society and durable peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Menkerios for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Gambari.
Mr. Gambari: I am very pleased and honoured to
address the members of the Security Council for the
second time in less than a month. Unlike my previous
briefing (see S/PV.6318), during which I had the
opportunity to introduce the Secretary-General’s report
on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), this briefing is mainly on the
unfolding security situation in Darfur and how it
affects the life of ordinary citizens, as well as its
implications for the work of UNAMID and the
international community. I will also comment briefly
on UNAMID’s engagement in the political process on
the ground in Darfur in collaboration with the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel under the
leadership of President Mbeki and Joint Chief
Mediator Bassolé.
On 20 May (see S/PV.6318), I informed Council
members that, during the first week of the month of

10-40334

S/PV.6338

May, parts of Darfur witnessed a serious escalation of
hostilities between the Justice and Equality Movement
(JEM) of Khalil Ibrahim and Government forces. It
saddens me to inform the Council that the fighting
between the two belligerent parties is still continuing
and that the security situation in parts of Darfur
remains tense and volatile.
Following JEM’s withdrawal from the Jebel Moon
area, JEM forces are now spread in small pockets in
North and Southern Darfur, notably in the areas towards
Southern Kordofan, engaging Government forces in
offensive and defensive clashes. Of great concern is the
unprecedented increase in the number of fatalities,
resulting largely from the recent clashes: 447 deaths
were recorded for the month of May 2010 alone.
Movement of equipment and the build-up of
troops continue to be witnessed on both sides, and it is
expected, unfortunately, that the military confrontations
may indeed continue for some time unless urgent efforts
to ensure a ceasefire are made by the international
community.
As members of the Council are aware, UNAMID’s
core mandate remains focused on the protection of
civilians. In implementing its strategy for the protection
of civilians, UNAMID is continuing to intensify its
military and police patrols through progressive increases
in its medium- and long-range patrols, as well as
strengthening joint civilian and military 24/7 patrolling
of selected camps for internally displaced persons.
New directives have also been recently issued to the
military and police components of UNAMID with
regard to robust patrolling and to a robust response to
attacks on our military and police personnel. This was
reflected in the response of Senegalese police during a
recent attack on them in Western Darfur.
As part of this new strategy, and with a view to
making this activity more effective and efficient,
UNAMID is planning, in collaboration with the
relevant Government of Sudan authorities, to assist in
opening more roads and rehabilitating others in order
to increase access and expand the scope of the
Mission’s protection mandate. These actions are being
taken in coordination with other protection actors such
as the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and UNICEF. Meanwhile, UNAMID
continues to provide full assistance and logistical
support to the humanitarian community in order to
expand humanitarian space and access.

10-40334

The recent upsurge in fighting has created very
serious hindrances to the effective implementation of
UNAMID’s protection mandate, as well as to the
provision of humanitarian assistance to those in dire
need of such support and assistance. Since the renewed
fighting began, civilian populations have moved away
from places where the fighting and aerial bombardments
were taking place. From Jebel Moon, they moved
towards the Chadian border and to areas east of Jebel
Moon as well as to some urban centres, including
El Fasher. From the hot spots in Jebel Marra and South
Darfur, they went into hiding in more secure locations
around those areas.
As a result of the denial of access as well as
logistical constraints and security concerns, it has not
been possible to determine the exact numbers, but the
figures for persons displaced as a result of the recent
fighting range between 10,000 and 50,000 in the
region. Of greatest concern is the continuing denial of
access for the humanitarian community to large parts
of Jebel Marra since the onset of fighting there in
February 2010. An assessment mission to the lowlands
of eastern Jebel Marra took place at the beginning of
April, but follow-up has been impossible to date due to
the worsening of the security situation and lack of
access to areas controlled either by the Government of
Sudan or the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdel Wahid
faction. Overall, these new displacements are posing
great challenges in terms of delivery of humanitarian
assistance and provision of basic services to those in
need. However, in the last week, there has been no
fighting reported, and JEM has in fact signalled its
willingness to release some prisoners.
Meanwhile, UNAMID continues to engage in
ongoing negotiations with the Government authorities
and the armed movements in order to ensure wider
access, including for humanitarian assessment missions,
to the deep field locations where increased violence and
displacements have been witnessed. On 10 June, just
last Thursday, I met with Vice-President Ali Osman
Taha, with whom I raised the very serious concerns of
both UNAMID and the humanitarian community on the
security agencies’ restriction of access to areas of
recent clashes, which has prevented access to affected
populations and other displaced and wounded persons
in those locations.
I am pleased to note that, shortly after our
meeting, the Government of the Sudan gave instructions
to the relevant agencies to allow, immediately and

7

S/PV.6338

wherever possible, access for both UNAMID and the
humanitarian agencies. It was also agreed at my
follow-up meeting at the Foreign Ministry that a
meeting would be held shortly between UNAMID, the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the national intelligence
and security services to discuss these issues and carry
them further. I have accordingly instructed the Force
Commander to follow up on this immediately. I am
informed that the Government of Sudan has lifted the
ban on helicopter flights, as of yesterday, 13 June 2010.
It is essential for the international community,
and in particular for those States with leverage on the
belligerents, to impress on them the need for an
immediate cessation of hostilities accompanied by
unfettered and unhindered access for UNAMID, the
United Nations country team and humanitarian agencies
to all areas of recent clashes in order to facilitate
delivery of humanitarian assistance to the affected
populations and displaced persons. Only then will the
security situation facilitate and enhance the possibility
for a negotiated settlement through the Doha peace
process, on which my colleague, Mr. Djibril Bassolé
will shortly be briefing the members of the Council. It
is essential to reiterate to all concerned that there can
be no military solution to the Darfur crisis and that a
speedy return by all to negotiations is the only viable
option.
Let me now briefly turn to the other issue on the
Council’s agenda relating to the complementary political
process in Darfur. One of UNAMID’s mandated tasks
is to support and assist the Joint Chief Mediator in his
work to bring the parties and the stakeholders together
to agree on a comprehensive peace agreement. In this
regard, coordination and collaboration between
UNAMID and the Joint Mediation at all levels is going
on smoothly. UNAMID has a key role to play with
respect to the inputs from civil society in the ongoing
talks, the design of ceasefire implementation
mechanisms and the actual implementation of those
agreements.
As part of this collaboration, UNAMID now has
the responsibility to organize and lead, along with the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel, a
Darfur conference to facilitate public agreement on
issues related to the peace process. The conference
aims to facilitate the achievement of an inclusive and
comprehensive political settlement for Darfur by or
hopefully before the end of this year in advance of the
referendum for Southern Sudan. While coordination in

8

this regard is currently ongoing with both the
Implementation Panel and the Mediation, UNAMID is
finalizing plans to ensure that all the diverse groups
and populations of Darfur are given the opportunity to
make substantial inputs to the negotiations and to the
outcome of discussions on the future of their region
and the future of their country.
This is where we are at the moment in Darfur. I
hope that, after its deliberations on these important and
topical issues, the Council will provide support and
guidance for our work in our collective efforts to bring
peace and stability to the whole of Sudan — because
Darfur cannot be considered in isolation from the
whole of Sudan. In addition to support and action in
bringing current fighting in Darfur to an end and
encouraging all the parties, including encouraging
those who are still outside the Doha process to join it,
the support of the Council will also be needed to
encourage those Member States that are in a position to
do so to provide critical enablers to UNAMID to
enhance its effectiveness in implementing its core
mandate. This includes but is not limited to the
provision of medium utility helicopters, transport
companies and aerial reconnaissance units. I am sure
we can count on the continuing support of the Security
Council on these matters.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Gambari for his briefing. I now give the floor to
Mr. Bassolé.
Mr. Bassolé (spoke in French): At the outset I
would like to convey to you, Sir, and to the members of
the Security Council our gratitude for the Council’s
consistent interest in and support for the peace process
in Darfur and to the work of the Joint Mediation Team,
which I lead in an exemplary and fruitful partnership
with the State of Qatar and the support of regional and
international partners.
I welcome the opportunity afforded me today to
brief the Council on the results we have achieved to
date, and especially to share with the Council the
activities of the Mediation Team within the framework
of the Doha negotiations, the ultimate goal of which is
to achieve a final, inclusive and comprehensive peace
agreement in Darfur.
It will be recalled that, in order to achieve this
objective, the mediators — in consultation with the
United Nations, the African Union, the League of Arab
States and regional actors — had decided to focus their

10-40334

S/PV.6338

efforts concomitantly on three main axes: direct
dialogue and negotiations among the parties to the
conflict; raising awareness and involving civil society
in the peace process; and improving relations between
Chad and the Sudan. With the backing of the
international community, these efforts resulted in the
signing in Doha of a Framework Agreement on
23 February 2010 between the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM) and the Government of National
Unity of the Sudan, which was initialled in
N’Djamena, and a Framework Agreement for a
ceasefire on 18 March between the Liberation and
Justice Movement (LJM) and the Government of the
Sudan.
Along with the recommendations of the first
forum of Darfur’s civil society, these agreements
constitute the reference points and the agenda of the
peace negotiations, which resumed on 6 June in Doha.
Indeed, following the suspension of peace negotiations
on 7 April, due to the schedule of the recent elections
in the Sudan, the mediators invited the signatories of
the Framework Agreements to Doha to continue efforts
to finalize the final peace negotiations. I take this
opportunity to draw Council members’ attention to the
fact that the Government of the Sudan and the LJM
have seized the opportunity of the resumption to
reaffirm their commitment to the Doha peace process
as the only forum for peace negotiations on Darfur.
The important issues for the newly launched
negotiations are to finalize the ceasefire agreements
and security arrangements with the assistance of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), and to draft the terms of reference
for a peace agreement based on the Sudan People’s
Initiative, civil society recommendations contained in
the Doha Declaration, the achievements of the Darfur
Peace Agreements, the recommendations of the African
Union High-Level Panel for Darfur and the Heidelberg
Darfur Dialogue Outcome Document, as well as the
peace offers and proposals of the parties to the conflict.
If definitive and lasting peace is to be achieved in
Darfur, it is imperative that all armed movements
without exception adhere to the peace negotiations.
The mediators will therefore pursue their consultations
with Mr. Khalil Ibrahim aimed at bringing the JEM
back to the negotiation table so that, as a priority and
in conformity with the commitments contained in the
agreements of 17 February 2009 and 20 February 2010,
the Government and the JEM can finalize and adopt the

10-40334

draft ceasefire agreement submitted by the mediators
on 3 March 2010, as well as the draft agenda. The
Government of the Sudan and the JEM must cease their
armed clashes, or risk irreparably undermining all
efforts to promote peace, security, reconciliation and
socio-economic development both in Darfur and the
neighbouring region of Eastern Chad.
In addition to the effective involvement of all
armed movements of Darfur in the peace negotiations,
the role of civil society is also of special importance, as
stipulated in paragraph 10 of resolution 1828 (2008)
and paragraph 6 of the Framework Agreement of
18 March 2010 concluded between the Government
and the JLM. This is why, in conformity with the Doha
Declaration of 20 November 2009, the mediators and
the State of Qatar, with the assistance of UNAMID,
will, during the first half of the month of July 2010,
convene the second forum of civil society representatives
of Darfur, who represent displaced persons, refugees,
women, young people, opinion leaders and all
components of the Darfurian community.
The main objective of the forum will be to back
the efforts of the Mediators to assist the parties to the
conflict in defining the objectives to be achieved and to
determine the modalities for the implementation of any
peace agreement to the benefit of the people of Darfur.
In addition, it will enable the mediators to promote
civil society ownership of the process for emerging
from the crisis.
Before the convening of the forum, a group of
some 100 refugees and displaced persons will
participate in the Doha negotiations starting 24 June
2010, side by side with the delegations of the JLM and
the Government. Following these discussions, the
mediators will propose to the parties that they sign a
protocol for an agreement on compensation, the
voluntary return of displaced persons and their
socio-economic reintegration. The launching of the
implementation of such a protocol will be a test of the
good will of the parties to the conflict to find
satisfactory solutions to crucial problems facing the
people of Darfur, who have been battered by the war.
Today, despite the very bloody clashes of recent
weeks, to which Mr. Gambari has just referred and
which constitute a violation of the agreements reached
between the JEM and the Government, efforts in
favour of peace are palpable. Indeed, the normalization
of relations between the Sudan and Chad, and the

9

S/PV.6338

general elections that took place on 13 April are factors
conducive to the achievement of peace and stability in
Darfur.
It is, however, incumbent on the Government of
National Unity of the Sudan, in its implementation of
the Darfur Peace Agreement and the decisions of the
Sudan People’s Initiative and within the framework of
the Doha peace negotiations, to make significant
concessions that will promote the establishment of an
environment of genuine security and justice in Darfur,
the resolution of land disputes, reparation and
compensation for damages caused by the armed
conflict, the social reintegration of displaced persons
and refugees, socio-economic development, and
institutional reforms likely to provide the people of
Darfur with the benefits of decentralization and good
governance, among others.
The mediators will target their efforts towards a
successful conclusion of the peace negotiations in
Doha. No effort will be spared to ensure the effective
participation of all the armed movements of Darfur in
this final phase of negotiations. The time has come to
put an end to the crisis in Darfur. I therefore request
Council members to encourage the Sudan and Chad to
continue improving their relations of goodneighbourliness and trust in order to strengthen
security on their joint border with Darfur; to demand
that the Government and the JEM immediately cease
hostilities and effectively implement article 1 of the
Framework Agreement of 23 February 2010; and to
encourage all the armed movements of Darfur and the
Government to make dialogue the only way to resolve
the crisis and to commit firmly to the negotiations
process which is under way in Doha.
Finally, the communiqué of the advisory meeting
on the Sudan, which was held on 8 May in Addis
Ababa, stipulates in paragraph 9 that every effort must
be made to ensure that a political agreement on the
crisis in Darfur be achieved before the referendum of
January 2011. The meeting also underscored the need
for the peace process in Darfur to be inclusive and to
take into account all issues of concern to the people of
Darfur, bearing in mind the progress achieved within
the framework of the Doha process, which must
continue.
Directly in line with these recommendations, my
colleagues Mr. Gambari and Mr. Haile Menkerios and
myself have consulted among ourselves and with

10

President Thabo Mbeki on a coordinated approach to
our peace efforts in the Sudan. In this regard, the
mediation has drawn up a schedule of negotiations that
will enable us to finalize partial protocols and then an
inclusive and final agreement as quickly as possible.
The agreement, which will be open to all the parties to
the conflict, should mark the end of international
mediation as a means to resolve the crisis in Darfur and
promote ways and means to effectively implement the
consensus that will have been achieved with the
involvement of civil society.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Bassolé for his briefing.
I now give the floor to members of the Security
Council.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to take this opportunity to extend a warm
welcome this morning to Mr. Mbeki and to thank him
for the important work that he is doing in the Sudan. I
would also like to thank him, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Menkerios, Joint Special
Representative Gambari and Joint Chief Mediator
Bassolé for their briefings to the Council this morning.
This is a defining moment for the Sudan and for
this Council, with over 30,000 peacekeepers on the
ground in Darfur, Abyei, Blue Nile, Southern Kordofan
and Southern Sudan. The Council has more invested in
the Sudan than in any other agenda item. There is no
greater challenge facing the Security Council over the
next 12 months than supporting the parties in securing
peace and prosperity for the people of the Sudan.
I would like to focus on three specific themes: the
lead-up to the referendum on self-determination for
Southern Sudan under the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), efforts to support longer-term
constructive relations between Northern and Southern
Sudan, and the continuing imperative of working to
end the conflict in Darfur.
With now less than seven months before the
referendum, we should focus on how we can best
support the Sudanese parties to ensure a full and
peaceful implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. We should not prejudge the results of the
referendum, but we should be clear that it must take
place on time. There must be a credible result beyond
dispute. Either outcome — unity or secession — can
lead to peaceful and friendly relations between the

10-40334

S/PV.6338

North and the South. It is our collective responsibility
to do whatever we can to ensure such a peaceful
outcome.
Much remains to be done. We must continue to
urge both parties to engage in serious and sustained
dialogue to reach agreement on the outstanding CPA
milestones. These include the urgent establishment of
the referendum commissions for Southern Sudan and
Abyei, as we have heard from Mr. Menkerios this
morning, and a clear focus on the popular consultations
in Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan. We need to see a
much greater sense of urgency in preparing for the
referendum.
But we must also look beyond the referendum.
Northern and Southern Sudan will remain neighbours
and essential partners regardless of the outcome of the
referendum. We must encourage the parties to approach
the issues with a view to their longer-term shared
interests. This is not a zero-sum game. They will need
to cooperate if they are to have a peaceful, prosperous
future, whatever is decided next January.
Our immediate focus should be to encourage
dialogue between the parties on the issues and
arrangements relating to the post-referendum period and
to support this process. In particular, we must encourage
the parties as a matter of urgency to agreed demarcation
of the North-South border, citizenship rights and
arrangements for wealth-sharing, particularly regarding
oil. We must also consider what capacity-building support
we can provide to Southern Sudan to help it meet its
longer-term development and security challenges and to
address the severe humanitarian situation. And we should
support the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) in its planning for what assistance the United
Nations might provide after the end of the interim
period.
We must not forget that the challenges the Sudan
faces are closely linked. It is only by addressing them
together that we can ensure a truly stable future for the
Sudan’s people. So we must continue to focus on
Darfur, where more than 2.5 million people remain
displaced from their homes by ongoing conflict. And
we must also not forget Eastern Sudan, where the
humanitarian indicators are some of the worst in the
world.
In Darfur, as Mr. Bassolé has said, an inclusive,
comprehensive, negotiated agreement that focuses on
the causes and consequences of the conflict is the only

10-40334

route to lasting peace. As we have heard again today
from Mr. Gambari about the increase in hostilities
across Darfur, we must urge all sides to show their
commitment to peace and security by ceasing
hostilities and engaging in the Doha process.
We must all — first and foremost the Sudanese
parties themselves — step up our engagement to meet
the challenges ahead. It is ultimately only the parties
themselves who can ensure a peaceful outcome. They
must show the political leadership and the vision
necessary for this task. This means engaging in serious
and sustained dialogue to reach agreement on the
issues I have mentioned.
The Security Council has a central role to play.
The Council’s leadership on the challenges ahead will
be critical as we approach the referendum. The Council
needs to take a truly strategic approach, looking
forward and anticipating the difficult decisions ahead
without anticipating any particular referendum
outcome. The work of the United Nations missions in
the Sudan, both UNMIS and the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, will remain vital
in supporting the implementation of the CPA,
particularly the referendum, and in providing security
and protection for civilians in Southern Sudan and
Darfur.
As we have heard this morning, the strong
engagement of the African Union, and particularly the
Sudan’s neighbours, will also be critical in securing
long-term peace in the Sudan. We commend in
particular the leadership of Mr. Mbeki and the work of
his Panel, and we look forward to close collaboration
between the United Nations and the African Union on
the challenges ahead.
Finally, I hope that the presidency will be able to
reflect our discussions in some agreed remarks to the
press, a draft of which has been circulated to Council
members.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking President Thabo Mbeki, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Menkerios,
Joint Special Representative Gambari and Joint Chief
Mediator Bassolé for their very helpful assessments
and briefings to the Council this morning. The United
States strongly supports their efforts to address the
situation in the Sudan.

11

S/PV.6338

I will focus today on three areas: the remaining
tasks for the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA), the Darfur peace process, and
the overwhelming importance of protecting civilians.
With the referendums fast approaching, all parties
must redouble their efforts to begin referendum
planning for Southern Sudan and Abyei. Referendum
commissions must be appointed immediately to begin
the difficult work of operational and budget planning,
voter registration, education, logistics and administration.
This includes resolving the difficult and sensitive issue of
who is eligible to vote in Abyei. We must also continue to
press the parties to completely demarcate the North-South
and Abyei borders, and we must continue to urge them to
prepare for popular consultations, which provide a vital
outlet for the people of Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
to express their views on the CPA and their States’
relationships with Khartoum.
Progress depends not only on the political will of
the parties, but also on support from the international
community. We must lay the groundwork now so that
we will be prepared to provide as much immediate
assistance as possible as conditions on the ground
allow. Regardless of the outcomes of the referendums,
attention should be paid now to the steps that must be
taken to promote a sustainable relationship between the
parties to the CPA beyond July 2011. Progress must be
made towards reaching agreements on post-referendum
wealth-sharing and citizenship, among other issues.
The international community stands ready to provide
diplomatic and technical support, but the parties
themselves must be willing to negotiate in earnest to
resolve these difficult issues.
With respect to elections, let me reiterate that the
April elections were characterized by serious
irregularities, including restrictions on political
freedoms, reports of logistical and administrative
challenges, harassment and intimidation by security
forces and concerns regarding the tabulation process.
Thirty-three constituencies still need to conduct or rerun elections, including the Southern Kordofan
legislative assembly. Without those elections, Southern
Kordofan cannot conduct its popular consultations.
We also remain deeply concerned about the
atmosphere of increasing political repression in
Khartoum by the Government of the Sudan and the
deplorable environment for civil and political rights in
the north. This includes the arrest of opposition

12

leaders, journalists and peaceful demonstrators. There
have been reports of restrictions on basic liberties in
the south as well. We remind the Governments of
Sudan and Southern Sudan that they must honour their
international obligations to respect human rights,
including freedom of expression, assembly and the
press.
We hope for a renewed focus on the Doha peace
process and strongly believe that the best way to end
conflict and resolve Darfur’s marginalization is by
finding a comprehensive political solution. The
situation in Darfur affects the stability of the region as
a whole. We urge the international community to
continue to support the negotiation process in Doha,
and we reiterate our call on all parties to come to the
negotiating table.
Accountability and peace are inextricably bound
together. The United States strongly supports
international efforts to bring those responsible for
genocide and war crimes in Darfur to justice, and we
firmly believe that there cannot be a lasting peace in
Darfur without accountability and justice. So, we call
again on the Government of Sudan and all other parties
to the conflict to cooperate fully with the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and its Prosecutor, as required by
Security Council resolution 1593 (2005).
The Council heard a disturbing briefing from ICC
Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo on Friday (see S/PV.6337). It
is clearer than ever that the Government of Sudan
continues to violate the Council’s resolutions, including
its obligation to cooperate with the ICC under resolution
1593 (2005). We are deeply concerned by the 25 May
Pre-Trial Chamber decision informing the Council of the
Government of Sudan’s failure to cooperate with the
Court.
We call again on the Government of Sudan and
all parties to the conflict to cooperate fully with the
ICC and its Prosecutor, as clearly required by
resolution 1593 (2005). Moreover, we urge all States,
including those not party to the Rome Statute, to
refrain from providing political or financial support to
Sudanese suspects indicted by the ICC.
We have repeatedly emphasized and will continue
to emphasize the need to place the highest priority on
the protection of civilians. We are gravely concerned
by the continuing insecurity and violence faced by the
civilian population in Sudan. In particular, we are
deeply disturbed by the recent large-scale offensive of

10-40334

S/PV.6338

the Sudanese Armed Forces against the Justice and
Equality Movement in Darfur. The Government of
Sudan continues to conduct aerial bombardments in
Darfur. These actions kill and maim civilians and result
in the additional displacement of innocent Darfuris.
We are also deeply concerned about continued
violence in the south, including intercommunal
violence and attacks by the Lord’s Resistance Army.
Since last January, 440,000 people have been displaced
in the south. The United States further deplores the
continued attacks on the personnel of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and the Government of Sudan’s continued
obstruction of access to UNAMID and other
humanitarian actors, which hinders independent
monitoring in Darfur.
Despite direct attacks on its peacekeepers,
UNAMID has played an essential role in ensuring
security for humanitarian assistance providers in
Sudan. But security is the primary responsibility of the
Government of Sudan. It must make increased efforts
to bring those who attack civilians and peacekeepers to
justice. It is important that the Government of Sudan
provide unfettered access for UNAMID. Neither
UNAMID nor humanitarian organizations have had
adequate access to areas of continued conflict in
Darfur. With the lives of more innocent civilians at
stake, that is unconscionable and unacceptable.
It is also important to redouble efforts to end the
sexual violence that plagues Darfur. During the recent
fighting in Jebel Marra, UNAMID documented nine
cases of such violence, including rape, attempted rape
and assault. That is part of a trend that has continued
for far too long. It must end. The Government of
Sudan, UNAMID and other United Nations entities, as
well as the non-governmental organization community,
must strengthen prevention and tools to respond to
sexual and gender-based violence. We urge UNAMID
to increase its reporting on sexual and gender-based
violence to the Council and call on the Government of
Sudan to ensure that such crimes are investigated and
prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.
We urge UNAMID and the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan also to utilize the full extent of
their mandates and capabilities to protect civilians in
danger. In Darfur, accelerating the training for
community police services for the internally displaced
in camps and those voluntarily returning to their

10-40334

villages of origin would help promote peace and
security.
In the south, we urge the Government of Southern
Sudan to develop a security framework ahead of the
referendum and to ensure that its capacity exists to
protect its own population. UNMIS must also increase
efforts to ensure that civilians are protected from
violence. Finally, we urge the Governments of Sudan
and Southern Sudan, and all others, to lift any and all
restrictions on the activities and movements of
UNMIS.
We have less than seven months until the
referendums, and there is still much work to be done.
But the United States remains hopeful that, with the
necessary political will of the parties and with adequate
international support, the referendums can be conducted
peacefully and successfully.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome President Mbeki and to
express my deep appreciation for his wise efforts. I
also welcome Mr. Menkerios, Mr. Bassolé and
Mr. Gambari and congratulate them on their efforts on
behalf of the Sudan. I thank them for their valuable
briefings.
The idea of this unusual meeting emerged during
Security Council consultations on 11 February, when
members expressed their wish to hold a in-depth
discussion of the situation in the Sudan with the two
mediators, President Mbeki and Mr. Bassolé, and the
two Special Representatives, Mr. Gambari and
Mr. Menkerios, in order to consider what can be done
to help that large country address its challenges and
overcome its crises and to reflect on what the United
Nations can do in that regard.
We express our deep appreciation for the
convening of today’s meeting and for the goodwill that
we perceive in support for the Sudan in meeting the
historic challenges that it faces today. We hope that our
efforts will be successful so as to benefit that country,
and consequently the entire region and the African
continent.
When we look at a number of issues before us —
such as the monitoring of the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, the referendum in
the South and its aftermath, the demarcation of the
Abyei borders, the question of the wealth-sharing, the
situation in Darfur, the humanitarian situation and the

13

S/PV.6338

displaced population — we see that the only option is
to support the path towards peace based on political
dialogue as the best way to settle the conflict in the
Sudan, to establish peace and stability and to address
all problems.
Five years after its signing, the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement has proved both its effectiveness and
the need for a thorough follow-up on the
implementation of all its provisions. It would have
been impossible to achieve any of these steps without
the political will and determination of the Sudanese
Government of National Unity and all other concerned
parties.
As Council Members know, this meeting is being
held only a few months before the scheduled
referendum on the fate of the South, and thus at a very
important stage in the history of the Sudan. In this
context, Lebanon would like to emphasize the
importance of the following points.
First, the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of the Sudan must be respected.
Second, the success of the multi-level electoral
process, which took place between 11 and 15 April,
should be commended, despite its shortcomings, and
considered an important step in guaranteeing the
stability and sustainability of the implementation of all
the provisions of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
Third, we call for continued efforts to guarantee
the successful implementation of the referendum on the
fate of the South, and we emphasize the importance of
making unity an attractive option, in accordance with
the provisions of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
Fourth, we support the negotiations for the postreferendum stage, regardless of the outcome of the
referendum.
Fifth, we welcome the improved relations
between the Sudan and Chad and the establishment of
joint forces to monitor their common borders.
Sixth, we support efforts to achieve a
comprehensive, final and peaceful solution in Darfur,
and we commend the State of Qatar and its Emir
Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani for hosting the
peace negotiations in Doha. We call upon all factions
to return to the negotiating table and to resolve all
disputed matters through dialogue. We call upon those

14

States with influence to exert pressure on the
remaining parties to join the negotiations.
Seventh, we caution against the danger of
politicization and double standards in the work of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), and we recall the
substance of the resolutions of the League of Arab
States rejecting the ICC decisions against President
Omer Hassan Al-Bashir.
It goes without saying that political efforts should
be accompanied by a social and economic plan to
contribute to addressing the root causes of the crisis
and the reconstruction of the Sudan.
In conclusion, we emphasize the importance of
the ongoing cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union, and call on the Organization of
the Islamic Conference, the Arab League, the African
Union and the Non-Aligned Movement to continue
their essential coordination role in order to achieve
peace and stability in the Sudan.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank you, Sir, for having organized this
special meeting on the Sudan — a matter at the very
heart of Gabon’s concerns.
I should like to welcome the presence among us
of President Mbeki, Djibril Bassolé, Ibrahim Gambari
and Haile Menkerios and, of course, to thank them for
their very enlightening briefings on the various aspects
of the crisis in the Sudan. The briefings were
particularly useful in presenting a holistic perspective
on the Sudanese crisis and in clearly illustrating
realities on the ground and the options under
consideration for supporting the peace process in the
Sudan. I welcome their ongoing efforts alongside the
United Nations and the African Union to help the
Sudanese people to return to the path to peace and
stability. I reiterate, of course, the support of Gabon for
their activities.
I appreciate the Ambassador of Lebanon’s
reminder of the context in which the Council wished to
hold this meeting and the objectives envisaged for it. In
the light of the relevant information that the briefers
have just conveyed to us, three fundamental concerns
need to be raised: the coordination of the activities of
the international community with a view to achieving a
holistic approach; the organization of the referendum
in the best possible conditions; and the options under

10-40334

S/PV.6338

consideration
for
effectively
referendum challenges.

managing

post-

In addressing the first of these points, Gabon
wishes to reaffirm its support for the peace process in
Darfur and Southern Sudan. The Darfur Peace
Agreement must be fully implemented. The Doha
agreements of February and March 2010, signed,
respectively, with the Justice and Equality Movement
and the Justice and Liberation Movement, should
encourage other rebel groups to join the peace process.
We encourage the Sudanese Government to continue
along this path. We call on those armed groups that
have not yet done so to join the peace process under
way in order to guarantee a lasting peace for the
populations continue to pay a heavy price.
We are particularly pleased with the evolution in
the discussions under way aimed at the conclusion of a
comprehensive peace agreement for Darfur. We
commend the commitment of the Sudanese
Government in this context. The Comprehensive Peace
Agreement in Southern Sudan must be implemented to
its full extent. Everything must be done to ensure that
the referendum of January 2011 takes place in the best
possible conditions and that its outcome, whichever
option is chosen, will be a stabilizing factor. We remain
convinced that the Comprehensive Peace Agreement is
an inclusive political tool essential to resolving the
crisis in Southern Sudan and achieving lasting peace in
the country.
We should like to reiterate our support for the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). We welcome the progress achieved
in the deployment of UNAMID and the efforts of the
contributing countries — Nepal, Sierra Leone, Burkina
Faso, Ethiopia and Tanzania — that have made these
results possible. We also welcome the efforts of the
Sudanese Government, whose cooperation has
facilitated this evolution towards a slightly more secure
and stable environment in Darfur. We reiterate our
support for the United Nations Mission in the Sudan,
whose efforts to protect the civilian population and to
secure humanitarian assistance play an effective role in
the peace process.
All these activities must be coordinated, and we
welcome the statements of various actors expressing
their total satisfaction with the cooperation of a number
of parties to ensure that the process achieves positive
results. We invite the United Nations, the African

10-40334

Union and all the other actors of the international
community to maintain these coordination efforts and
to ensure that the action being carried out in the
context of the peace process is integrated and leads to
the establishment of lasting peace in Southern Sudan.
I shall now turn to my second point, the
organization of the referendum. Gabon is following the
process under way with the keenest attention, and
urges the United Nations, the Sudanese Government
and the Government of Southern Sudan to do all they
can to ensure that the referendum takes place in a
peaceful climate. We believe that the assistance of the
United Nations will be more than decisive, and in that
respect we firmly support the efforts being made by
Mr. Menkerios. We invite him to continue his
consultations with the African Union and the countries
of the region. We are convinced that the support of
countries of the region and of the African Union will
help to strengthen the credibility of the process.
I should like to draw the attention of Council
members to my third point, which relates to the postreferendum challenges. I mention the various postreferendum challenges with the aim of focusing the
actors involved in the peace processes in Southern
Sudan and in Darfur, as well as Council members, on
possible post-referendum scenarios and their long-term
implications.
The referendum, as we are all well aware,
presents us two options. The first is that Southern
Sudan would remain part of the Sudanese State — a
result that would consolidate the unifying approach
strongly advocated by the African Union, which
remains committed to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Sudan. But it must also be born in mind
that, in that approach, the United Nations will continue
to play a role just as important as that it plays today.
But we will have to consider redefining the United
Nations role in helping to develop peaceful relations
between Khartoum and Juba in that context, and I
would invite the Council to consider that matter.
The second option is independence for Southern
Sudan, which poses very considerable challenges
including recognition of the new State, the
establishment of harmonious diplomatic relations with
Khartoum, demarcation of the North-South border,
wealth-sharing and the effects of this option on Darfur
and on eastern Sudan. All those challenges remind us
of the need to maintain the United Nations presence in

15

S/PV.6338

the Sudan so that it can play its important peacemaking
role. Beyond those challenges there is the future of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan. If this option is
considered, the Mission’s context could change, and
we must look at its mandate and role in that context.
In any event, I invite the Security Council and the
various actors, without prejudging the outcome of the
referendum, to bear in mind the need for an
international mechanism that could help in managing
all of those challenges, as well as the need for
strengthening close, peaceful relations between
Khartoum and Juba.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of Mr. Mbeki, Chairperson of the African
Union High-Level Panel on Darfur, Special
Representatives Gambari and Menkerios and Joint
Chief Mediator Bassolé. We thank them for sharing
their assessments of the situation.
The Sudan is passing through a decisive stage in
its history. Success will be crucial for regional peace
and stability. Our discussion reaffirms the need for a
comprehensive approach to the peace process in the
Sudan. Full implementation by the Sudanese parties,
with the active assistance of the international
community, of the North-South Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) remains the irreplaceable basis for a
Sudanese settlement. The Sudan’s recent general
elections marked an important stage in the
implementation of the Agreement.
We welcome the agreement between the parties
on the establishment of a bilateral mechanism to
discuss disputed issues within the framework of
preparations for the January 2011 referendum. Here,
the role of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) should be to assist the parties in resolving
their differences on the main elements of a settlement.
In our view, a priority for the international community
is to help create the conditions conducive to the
holding of the referendum in Southern Sudan and
Abyei.
The situation in Southern Sudan is a matter of
concern, with grave security problems and a
humanitarian crisis. Nearly 40 per cent of the
population of the South needs food aid, and almost
1.5 million people are threatened by hunger. In that
context, UNMIS should continue to carry out the
strategy of protecting the civilian population, including

16

expanded patrols in problematic areas of Southern
Sudan. Monitoring the process of disarming the
civilian population is another responsibility, along with
helping to set up local mechanisms for resolving tribal
disputes. But it is obvious that the main responsibility
for remedying the situation lies with the Southern
Sudanese authorities.
The only viable formula for resolving the
problem of Darfur remains the parties’ conclusion of
the necessary political agreements. The most pressing
task is to put in place a robust regime in Darfur to put
an end to armed activities, along with mechanisms to
monitor it.
The process of negotiations between the
Government and rebel groups is making only sporadic
progress. The international community must support
the position of the Government of the Sudan, in order
to rapidly achieve a comprehensive agreement to settle
the Darfur conflict, and it must urge the leaders of
rebel groups to resume their participation in the
political dialogue, without preconditions. In our view,
the rebels’ approach of using various pretexts to block
the Darfur negotiating process — which is under the
auspices of the Joint Chief Mediator and with the
assistance of Qatar — is unacceptable. The
international community should condemn the
destructive activities of armed groups in Darfur, which
is reflected, inter alia, by the rebels’ refusal to provide
peacekeepers of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
humanitarian organizations with access to areas under
their control and by their attempts to expand those
areas. We strongly welcome UNAMID’s activities and
its important stabilizing role.
Settlement of the Darfur conflict is being
promoted by the normalization of relations between the
Sudan and Chad, which should be consolidated and
supported. It is in keeping with the interests of the
entire subregion.
The coming period will determine the future of
the Sudan. The task of making unity attractive to the
population of Southern Sudan remains a priority. We
view as unacceptable all outside attempts to impose on
the parties formulas for the future status of the Sudan.
That fateful decision should be made solely by the
Sudanese themselves.
There is a need to ensure a coherent approach by
the international community to resolving Sudanese

10-40334

S/PV.6338

issues. Only in that way can we make progress towards
a settlement. The Sudan peace process should be based
on constructive, even-handed dialogue between the
international community and the Government of the
country, respecting the principles of sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I wish on
behalf of France, I thank you, Mr. President, and the
United Kingdom for having made possible this
discussion on the Sudan and for having invited
President Mbeki, Mr. Menkerios, Mr. Gambari and
Mr. Bassolé to participate. I thank them for being with
us today.
As all previous speakers have said, the coming
period is crucial for the Sudan and its people. We must
be united, which means that all international
community actors must work together, first and
foremost of course the United Nations and the African
Union. Thanks to the joint United Nations-African
Union forum set up following the Addis Ababa meeting
on 8 May, structured and continuous coordination
between the two organizations on all Sudan issues will
now be possible, in particular on the referendum. We
must take full advantage of this, in line with the
principles of the United Nations Charter and Security
Council resolutions.
Being united also means ensuring coherent action
by the representatives of the international community.
As the African Union High-Level Panel reports, we
cannot isolate the Sudan conflicts: they are all
interlinked.
And we must be vigilant. As the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement implementation period comes to an
end, we must ensure, in accordance with resolution
1919 (2010), that all stages leading to the January 2011
self-determination referendum can be completed. First
of all, the Government of the Sudan must meet its own
commitments. In the immediate future, the Referendum
Commissions, which are key in organizing next
January’s poll, must be established. France and the
European Union are prepared to provide technical and
financial support in organizing the referendum. The
deployment of European Union observers could also
help to make the process more transparent.
In the run-up to the referendum, the parties must
also make significant progress in settling outstanding
post-referendum issues, which, as already noted,
include demarcating the borders, clarifying the

10-40334

modalities for wealth-sharing and resolving citizenship
issues. Postponing those questions will only raise
questions about the credibility of the referendum.
The United Nations must also help in this
process, both with logistical support for meeting
deadlines and by making its expertise available to the
parties. Here, we expect that the Secretariat will play
an active role in supporting the parties. The Security
Council should remain vigilant in the coming months,
given the high stakes involved. France therefore calls
for the Council to be given regular briefings and
presentations on the progress in the preparations for the
referendum.
Of course, the support of the United Nations
should continue after the poll to implement the
decision that the people of Southern Sudan will take.
To that end, we have already called on the Secretariat
to consider modalities for a United Nations presence
following the interim period of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. This issue has already been properly
raised by my colleague from Gabon.
Beyond that political support, the United Nations
should monitor the humanitarian situation in the
Sudan. In particular, given the reported deterioration of
the
humanitarian
situation,
the
international
community should consider how it can bolster its
support for the development of Southern Sudan. The
Council could consider that issue in the coming weeks.
Turning now to Darfur, it is essential that all
parties participate in good faith in the negotiations led
by Joint Mediator Bassolé and the State of Qatar. We
encourage the African Union to continue its efforts to
pursue this political process.
A first stage has been initiated by the Justice and
Equality Movement and the Liberation and Justice
Movement with the signing of framework agreements
with the Sudanese Government. Those agreements
should be implemented as soon as possible. All
elements of the Movement for the Liberation of the
Sudan should join the process. It is unacceptable for
the Movement to remain outside the peace efforts.
With regard to the situation on the ground, we
must not accept that the free movement of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan and of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) should be impaired by Sudanese
authorities and rebel groups. The Missions should be

17

S/PV.6338

able to ensure the protection of civilian populations
and to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance
everywhere and without exception. In that regard, we
are concerned about the issue of access to humanitarian
assistance in camps in Darfur. We would like to have
more detailed information in that regard, as well as in
connection with the efforts of UNAMID to correct the
situation.
Lastly, we should promote justice in the Sudan.
We recently met with Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, whose briefing
was damning (see S/PV.6336). We cannot expect there
to be peace and stability without justice and without
combating impunity. France supports international
criminal justice, and we reiterate Sudan’s obligation to
cooperate, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). In that
regard, we are concerned about the Court’s new report
to the Security Council underscoring the lack of
cooperation by the Sudan (see S/2010/265). We should
follow up that communication. We cannot remain
silent. Moreover, international criminal justice to judge
the most serious crimes should go hand in hand with
the strengthening of the Sudanese justice system. That
system too must commit itself resolutely to combating
impunity and to developing a mechanism for
reconciliation at the local level.
In conclusion, I would like again to say that
France is prepared to participate in the joint efforts to
be taken so that the coming deadlines in the Sudan
provide an opportunity to bolster the stability of the
region and to put an end to the suffering of
populations, which has continued for far too long.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish to thank His
Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki, Chairperson of the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel on
Darfur, for his briefing and for the Panel’s highly
commendable work. I also thank Mr. Gambari, Joint
Special Representative for Darfur and head of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur
(UNAMID);
Mr.
Menkerios,
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS);
and Mr. Bassolé, the Joint African Union-United
Nations Chief Mediator, for their commendable work
and for their briefings on the situation in the Sudan.
Uganda welcomes the progress that has been
made towards peace and stability in the Sudan. The
recently concluded national elections, the ongoing

18

implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) and efforts to resolve the Darfur
conflict through the Doha peace process are significant
developments. We salute the good work by the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel and we
welcome the progress being made through a widely
consultative and inclusive approach. We also commend
UNAMID and UNMIS, under the leadership of
Mr. Gambari and Mr. Menkerios respectively, for the
contributions they are making to resolving the issues in
the Sudan.
My delegation welcomes the commitment
expressed by the Government of the Sudan to work
jointly with the Panel on all steps to be taken towards
advancing
peace,
justice
and
reconciliation.
Furthermore, we welcome the commitment by the
Government to agree to a joint implementation and
monitoring mechanism, both on Darfur and on the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
While we commend the progress made, we must
acknowledge that the Sudan is entering a critical stage.
There are still key outstanding issues that need to be
addressed to ensure the restoration of peace in Darfur,
the full implementation of the CPA and agreement on
post-referendum arrangements. We are concerned
about the recent upsurge of incidents of violence in
Darfur. We call upon the parties to respect the ceasefire
and to commit themselves to the peaceful resolution of
the conflict through the Doha peace process.
It is important to ensure the full and timely
implementation of the CPA. We call upon the National
Congress Party (NCP) and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement (SPLM) to adhere to the
timelines for the remaining tasks. The holding of the
recent national elections, in spite of their shortcomings,
attests to progress towards democratic transformation
in the Sudan.
Given the fact that, according to the CPA, the
referendum in Southern Sudan should be held by
9 January 2011, there is an urgent need to expedite the
establishment
and
operationalization
of
the
Referendum Commission and the demarcation of the
north-south border and of the Abyei border. It is
therefore critical that the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
United Nations and the wider international community
render greater support towards accomplishment of the
remaining tasks. That will entail UNMIS, among

10-40334

S/PV.6338

others, providing technical and logistical support to the
Referendum Commission to ensure that the referendum
is held as scheduled and that it is free, fair, transparent
and credible.
Finally, it is incumbent upon the leadership of the
NCP and the SPLM, as parties to the CPA, to maintain
their political goodwill and commitment to the full and
timely implementation of the CPA.
Uganda supports the elements of the President’s
remarks to the press prepared by the delegation of the
United Kingdom.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I would like to thank
President Mbeki, Ambassador Gambari, Mr. Menkerios
and Mr. Bassolé for their very useful briefings this
morning on the situation in the Sudan. They have not
only provided useful insights, but also given us a
comprehensive picture of the interlocking dimensions
of the challenges that lie ahead in the country. I
commend them for their individual and collective
efforts in the Sudan. The Council is now better
informed on what needs to be done in the next 12
months, especially.
The Sudan is at a critical juncture. With the
elections of April over, the business of inclusive
governance, starting with the formation of a
Government of national unity, must gather momentum
in order to translate lofty promises into concrete
results. It is therefore important for the Government of
the Sudan and all political leaders to press forward
with the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). Dialogue rather than force is the
key to solving the Sudan’s problems. Accordingly, we
call on all parties to adhere and recommit to the CPA.
The 2011 referendum is a central pillar of the
CPA. Its organization and outcome will have farreaching implications. It is therefore important that
preparations for the referendum be inclusive,
transparent, forward-looking and thorough. The
international community, in particular the Security
Council, should support the processes leading to the
referendum. In this regard, the security challenge in the
Sudan referred to by both Mr. Menkerios and
Ambassador Gambari must be given adequate
attention. Neither the Government of the Sudan nor the
African Union acting alone can meet the security needs
in the Sudan. It will take a global effort to cope with
the situation. The Security Council, with its primary

10-40334

responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, has a key role to play.
Support for and progress in the Doha peace
process will go a long way towards creating stability in
the Sudan, and more especially Darfur. The deep
mistrust that exists among the parties impedes
progress. We therefore call on the parties to engage
constructively and meaningfully in the peace process.
The continued presence of the United Nations
through the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur is a necessary complement to the peace process.
It is important, however, for the United Nations to
integrate its peace and security efforts with robust
development assistance in Darfur. The real dividends
of peace will be felt when recovery, reconstruction and
development take place in tandem. Otherwise, the goal
of integration through the voluntary return of internally
displaced persons may remain elusive.
For the United Nations, success in the Sudan will
depend on the predictability, sustainability and
flexibility of funding. This issue was well articulated in
the Prodi report (see A/63/666) and should be acted
upon. Of equal significance is the need to look beyond
the Multi-Donor Trust Fund as a means of supporting
African Union peacekeeping capacity. The African
Union lacks the capacity to undertake single-handed
the wide range of activities associated with early
warning, conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
post-conflict reconstruction in the conflict zones dotted
throughout Africa. I hope that our consultations today
will help in this direction.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would like begin my
remarks by welcoming all the esteemed dignitaries —
President Mbeki, Mr. Gambari, Mr. Menkerios and
Mr. Bassolé — who have briefed the Council today. We
appreciate their hard work and thank them for sharing
their valuable insights and recommendations with us.
The Sudan is at a crossroads, not only
geographically but also politically. How developments
unfold in the months ahead will have implications far
and wide. The United Nations and the international
community have invested heavily in bringing peace to
the Sudan, and that effort has yielded significant
dividends. Important progress has been made with the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), and such crucial milestones as the
Abyei decision and the recent national and presidential

19

S/PV.6338

elections have been met. The Sudan and Chad have
normalized their relations and, in Darfur, a political
process has been set in motion, with specific
mechanisms to address outstanding issues.
All these efforts in the right direction
notwithstanding, it is also clear that, be it in Darfur or
Southern Sudan, the situation overall remains fragile
and volatile. Armed clashes and widespread violence
are perpetuating insecurity, which in turn is driving
displacement and criminality. Much remains to be done
to achieve a stable state of security.
Turkey is committed to the sovereignty, unity,
independence and territorial integrity of the Sudan. On
the other hand, Turkey has lent its full support to the
CPA since its inception. In the coming months, the
body politic in the Sudan and the Council’s attention
will focus largely on ensuring the full implementation
of the CPA and on addressing post-referendum
arrangements. In that context, we believe that the
United Nations will continue to have a central role to
play not only in helping to build mutual trust and
confidence between the parties, but also in assisting
them in their negotiations and giving support, if
requested, for the referendums and popular
consultation processes. The United Nations continued
presence after the referendums will also be vital in
helping the Sudan to move forward.
On the other hand, while they are not comparable,
it is clear that CPA implementation, peace and peace
efforts in Darfur are separate but not separable
processes. Stagnation in one invariably impedes
progress in the other. Therefore, while there is no
direct linkage, every effort should be made to create a
mutually reinforcing and positive relationship between
the CPA and the Doha peace process.
As concerns Darfur, the Doha process is vital,
since security cannot realistically be attained in the
absence of a comprehensive political settlement.
International pressure must be applied on rebel groups
to participate constructively in Doha. They must not be
allowed to bide their time and hedge their bets on the
possibility of the CPA’s unravelling. A clear
pronouncement to rebel groups that the Doha peace
process is not an open-ended one and that there is no
alternative to peace talks would be useful.
Be it with regard to the CPA or the Doha process,
it is also crucial to ensure that, in tandem with
restoring mutual trust and confidence, the right

20

incentives remain in place. In Doha, the parties must be
able to perceive win-win situations where their genuine
grievances and rational expectations are being duly met
with meaningful and fair compromise package
solutions. In the context of the CPA, both parties need
to understand that, regardless of the results of the
referendums and popular consultations, they are bound
to live together. This interdependence is a reality that
has, unfortunately, been drawn out by simplistic
interpretations of the CPA. It is counterproductive to
present the potential outcome of the referendum in the
South as a foregone conclusion. Both sides must be
allowed to make their case, as envisaged in the CPA. In
this vein, it must be made clear once again that the
referendum in the South does not imply finality, but is
part of a larger process that has to be managed very
carefully.
In that connection, as my British colleague
mentioned, the leadership of the Council has a strategic
context, and we must make sure that the United
Nations involvement in the Sudan is not in any way
seen to prejudge the outcome of the referendum.
Meanwhile, whether they are ensured by the
United Nations, the Government of the Sudan or the
Government of Southern Sudan, the protection of
civilians and humanitarian assistance should be given
the highest priority. In taking the process forward,
continuing to cultivate national ownership of the
problems at hand, including at the grass-roots level,
will also be crucial since, ultimately, whether in Darfur
or with regard to the CPA, genuine solutions to existing
problems can be found only by the Sudanese
themselves.
Finally, it will be important to effectively take
into consideration the many regional dynamics in play.
Successfully incorporating regional approaches and
addressing concerns, whether of neighbours or
organizations such as the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, into the
solutions that are being worked on in the Sudan will
help prevent larger problems from emerging later in the
process. In this regard, Turkey continues to believe that
the report of the African Union High-Level Panel on
Darfur is, as a whole, extremely important. That report,
in particular in its findings and recommendations,
constitutes a point of reference for all parties in the
conflict in the Sudan. Based on the report, continued
active leadership on the part of the African Union

10-40334

S/PV.6338

High-Level Implementation Panel will be vital to
ensuring peace and stability in the Sudan.
I will conclude by making the observation that
the CPA has been supported by the international
community because it has brought peace to the Sudan.
The true test for the CPA and the parties will be about
not whether a specific outcome is reached in the
referendum, but whether peace can be sustained. That,
of course, will largely depend on the choices that the
parties to the CPA will make. Those choices will also
shape the response of the international community to
developments in 2011.
The United Nations and the Security Council,
together with the international community, must ensure
that the choices made now are those that favour peace,
stability, harmony and prosperity through compromise,
mutual respect and understanding. The Council and the
international community should ensure the full
implementation of the CPA while also demonstrating
political wisdom, foresight and flexibility when the
greater good requires it. Ultimately, the goal is to
provide a framework through which the peaceful
coexistence of North and South can be assured in the
long term, in whatever shape or form it best suits the
hopes of the Sudanese people.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to thank
President Mbeki, Mr. Menkerios, Mr. Gambari and
Mr. Bassolé for their insightful briefings. It is a rare
and valuable opportunity for the Council to be briefed
by the four main players collectively working for peace
in the Sudan. Today’s briefings showed clearly that
each speaker, within his mandate and capacity, is
contributing greatly, and in a complementary manner,
to the achievement of peace and security in the Sudan
and the region as a whole. I would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to their invaluable work, and
also to all United Nations personnel working there
under difficult conditions.
The Sudanese parties concerned have made a
strenuous effort to implement the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA) since 2005, despite the many
difficulties they have encountered. Japan would like to
commend the efforts of all Sudanese parties and
international entities involved. The appointment of the
members of the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission is testimony to those efforts. The primary
mover bringing about peace in the Sudan must be the
Sudanese people themselves. The United Nations, the

10-40334

African Union and the international community as a
whole fulfil a supporting role by assisting the national
efforts of the people of the Sudan.
The referendum to be held in January of next year
is the culmination of the implementation of the CPA,
and we should provide every possible support to make
it a success. We also support the agreement of the CPA
parties and encourage them to engage in discussion on
their own of post-referendum arrangements. If it is
requested and deemed necessary, we hope very much
that President Mbeki will play a role as mediator
between the parties. We put our trust in his wisdom and
guidance.
It is vitally important that the parties concerned
accept and respect the outcome of the referendum,
regardless of the result, and we urge the CPA parties
and the international community to maintain and
promote constructive relations. Based on this principle,
I wish to encourage Sudan’s neighbouring countries,
and the African Union in particular, to support the
people of the Sudan for the stability of that country.
It is also important to start exploring the future
role of the United Nations, in close coordination with
the parties concerned. Trust and confidence between
North and South must be promoted to serve their
mutual interests. In so doing, it is of key importance to
examine the issues, outlined by the CPA parties, of
security along the North-South border, oil and
pipelines, citizenship and freedom of movement. A
framework must be established for populations near the
border to discuss common problems openly and to
promote regular dialogue. Japan attaches particular
priority to the development of human resources in the
North and South through training and the creation of
employment. We urge the international community to
accelerate its efforts to provide support in this area.
There is a consensus on the importance of
achieving comprehensive peace in Darfur. The
resumption of the Doha peace process is welcome,
thanks to efforts led by Mr. Bassolé and Foreign
Minister Al-Mahmoud of Qatar. I wish to reiterate his
appeal to all parties — the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM), the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement and others — to engage actively in this
process. Dialogue should also continue with
Mr. Minnawi’s group concerning the signing of a peace
agreement with the Government. I am confident that

21

S/PV.6338

Mr. Gambari will do his best to promote dialogue for
peace at the grass-roots level.
We are deeply concerned with the deteriorating
security situation in Darfur. The JEM is increasing its
military offensive operations and expanding its area of
activity beyond Darfur. One of the causes is the
proliferation of small arms in Darfur and in the South.
We must act now to enforce the arms embargo and
other sanctions measures by promoting advocacy and
working with civil society organizations. The future
stability of the Sudan depends on achieving a lasting
peace in Darfur and constructive relations between the
North and the South. Every representative here today is
playing an important role in achieving the common
goal of realizing peace, security and development in
the Sudan. Their close coordination and cooperation
with each other is essential.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan’s
strong commitment to sustainable peace and prosperity
in the Sudan.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me start by joining
earlier speakers in extending a warm welcome to
President Thabo Mbeki. Brazil commends his
leadership and the excellent work of the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel. I thank Special
Representatives Ibrahim Gambari and Haile Menkerios
and Joint Chief Mediator Djibril Bassolé for their
statements. More importantly, we commend them for
their invaluable work.
This meeting reflects and consolidates the
relatively new integrated approach the United Nations
has been taking to Sudanese affairs. Such an approach
is imperative, since the various Sudanese crises are all
merely different manifestations of the tension between
centre and periphery in the Sudan, political, economic
or cultural. Today’s briefing also celebrates the fruitful
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union, combining the Charter-based authority
of the Security Council with the African Union’s
extensive knowledge of the political and cultural
context in which African conflicts occur, and Africans’
determination to play an active and constructive role in
the resolution of such conflicts. In Sudan, in particular,
that partnership is indispensable, given the importance
of the country’s affairs not only to its immediate
vicinity, but also to the continent as a whole.
This meeting is also an effort by the Security
Council to be ahead of events and engage in truly

22

preventive diplomacy. My delegation encourages the
Council to conduct similar exercises with respect to
other issues on its agenda that require the same kind of
forward-looking attitude.
I would like to make brief comments on a few
aspects of the issue at hand. On Sudan as a whole, we
attach great importance to the coordination of the
various international actors involved. If international
action is to be fully effective, not only do we have to
deal with Sudan in a holistic manner, but we also need
to ensure that multilateral and regional organizations,
peacekeeping missions, mediation teams, special
envoys, donors and other stakeholders move in the
same direction and support each other. For that to
happen, we must rely on adequate coordination
mechanisms.
The well-coordinated support of the international
community was crucial to the positive outcome of the
negotiations that led to the adoption of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). Its full
implementation will require the same unity of purpose,
in particular to assist the parties to overcome their
differences and mutual distrust. That is key not only to
help them make the difficult decisions that still lie
ahead, but also to build productive and cooperative
relations after the referendum. The meetings held in
Addis Ababa in early May, particularly the consultative
meeting of 8 May, were positive steps in the right
direction. The challenge now is to ensure that those
initiatives are focused and effective and that they
receive the proper follow-up.
Another aspect of utmost importance is ensuring
that the referendums are not only fair and credible but
are also perceived as such by the parties and the
population. To that end, no efforts should be spared in
appropriate preparation. The United Nations must be
ready to assist the parties, at their request, in whatever
they need, including in the determination of the
modalities for the holding of the referendums and
popular consultations.
Assistance must also be provided, as requested by
the parties, to facilitate arrangements on wealthsharing, power-sharing, citizenship rights, borders and
currency, among other sensitive issues, irrespective of
the outcome of the southern referendum. Needless to
say, such assistance must be rigorously consistent with
the CPA and must in no way prejudge or influence the
results of the referendums and popular consultations.

10-40334

S/PV.6338

The strict impartiality of the United Nations is the
political sine qua non condition of this necessary
exercise in preventive diplomacy.
The wide acceptance of the results of the
southern referendum and its timely implementation
will also depend on the prevalence of an environment
that is at least minimally peaceful. To that end, it will
be important to intensify current efforts to address the
immediate challenges posed by food insecurity,
intertribal clashes and fragile security institutions. The
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and
bilateral and multilateral donors have a particularly
relevant role to play in that regard. A modicum of
stability will also be needed in the aftermath of the
referendum.
This means that the United Nations presence in
Sudan will likely be required beyond the transitional
period established by the CPA in order to help maintain
peace, provide security and implement the outcome of
the referendum, whatever it might be. Such a presence
would need to rely extensively on the human and
material resources currently available to UNMIS.
Given the time required by the United Nations to
mobilize and deploy resources to the field, it is
important that the Secretariat develop very solid
contingency plans and, if necessary, submit to Member
States, as appropriate, a full assessment of the
Mission’s further needs. The Security Council should
also begin to reflect on the possible role that the
Peacebuilding Commission might play in both the
unity and secession scenarios.
Finally, I wish to say a few words regarding
Darfur. Reaching a peace agreement before January
2011 is very important. If that proves impossible, at
least a stable ceasefire seems necessary. We fully
support efforts by the Mediation to stimulate the
unified representation of all rebel movements.
Appropriate enforcement of the arms embargo is also
key. We also support measures taken to secure ample
participation of Darfurian civil society in the search for
peace. In that regard, we welcome the announcement,
during President Mbeki’s visit to Khartoum last week,
of the holding of the Darfur-Darfur conference. My
delegation hopes that the participants in the initiative
will discuss the issues of guaranteeing political
representation to the groups excluded from last April’s
elections.

10-40334

Fully implementing the CPA and ending the
Darfur conflict are formidable challenges. If we are
successful there, we will have gone a long way towards
helping bring enduring peace and long-term stability to
the whole African continent. We cannot but succeed.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would first like to
welcome President Thabo Mbeki, Chairperson of the
African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur, Mr. Haile
Menkerios, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sudan, Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Joint
African Union-United Nations Special Representative
for Darfur, and Mr. Djibril Bassolé, Joint African
Union-United Nations Chief Mediator for Darfur, and
to thank them for their presence here today and for
their presentations. Let me commend them and their
staffs for their tireless efforts. This high-level presence
is a strong signal of our common commitment to work
with the Sudanese people in addressing the challenges
they face. Today’s meeting is also an important symbol
of collaboration between the African Union and the
United Nations. We thank the United Kingdom and
Lebanon for this important initiative.
The year 2010 is a crucial one for the Sudan.
When the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) was
signed, the two parties pledged to do their utmost to
make unity attractive. The CPA provides that the
people of Southern Sudan can choose unity or
secession in a referendum in January 2011. We expect
both parties to fulfil their commitments to implement
the CPA, which includes undertaking a credible
referendum and abiding by its outcome.
This will also be a major challenge for the
African Union and, in a complementary way, for the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development. It will
be important that they establish and maintain smooth
working relations with both sides and that we extend
full support to these efforts.
Without prejudging the outcome of the
referendum, the international community has to step up
support and diplomatic efforts in the run-up to it.
Lessons learned from the election process have to be
applied. The outstanding issues in the implementation
of the CPA have to be resolved by the parties. These
include preparation of the two referendums and public
consultations, Abyei, wealth-sharing, oil-sharing and
border demarcation. Contingency planning will
logically also have to include the scenario of a vote in

23

S/PV.6338

favour of the independence of Southern Sudan and
support good governance under all possible outcomes.

recovery. We must work for durable solutions, and
Austria supports a role for UNAMID in this regard.

We must work to avert conflict, protect lives and
ensure regional stability. The protection and security of
civilians has to be fully guaranteed under all
circumstances. In those regards, support by the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) is important,
and I appreciate what Special Representative
Menkerios told us today about the efforts of UNMIS to
develop a mission-wide protection strategy.

We should also not forget about Sudanese
refugees in Chad. Options for their safe and voluntary
return must be explored, and they must have a stake in
the peace process. Weak rule of law and human rights
institutions contribute to significant gaps in the
protection of civilians. Violence against civilians,
especially women, remains unaddressed and the
perpetrators go unpunished. These shortcomings must
be urgently addressed in a comprehensive and effective
manner by the Government of the Sudan. Continued
attacks and obstruction of UNAMID movement and
activities, as well as attacks on and the kidnapping of
civilians, could be significant causes of alarm, and the
Government of the Sudan must do all it can to improve
security in Darfur and stop the culture of impunity.

Austria is concerned about the recent rise in
violence in Southern Sudan. While the main
responsibility for containing this violence and curbing
the proliferation of weapons lies with the Government
of Southern Sudan, the international community needs
to increase its support, including through effective
security sector reform.
While CPA implementation and referendum and
post-referendum planning are of the utmost urgency,
we must not lose sight of simultaneously coordinating
initiates to address the conflict in Darfur. Major
progress has been achieved in the improvement of
relations between Sudan and Chad. However, the
security situation in Darfur, as others have already
said, has recently worsened, with the highest number
of casualties having been logged in the month of May
since the inception of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
Recent fighting between rebel and Government forces
has overshadowed progress in the Darfur peace talks in
Doha. We urge all parties to refrain from hostilities and
to fulfil their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law. The solution of the
Darfur crisis can only be peaceful, and all parties must
join the peace process.
We strongly support the efforts of both the Joint
African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator for
Darfur, Mr. Djibril Bassolé, and Joint Special
Representative for the African Union and UNAMID,
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari. At the same time, the
international community cannot wait for a peace
agreement in Doha in order to take action to stabilize
and improve the living conditions of the people of
Darfur. We must reach consensus on moving forward
with an approach that complements the Doha efforts on
the ground to improve security and stabilize
communities with meaningful development. There
needs to be a transition from emergency relief to early

24

Any sustainable peace process must also address
the issue of justice and accountability, and redress for
victims of human rights and humanitarian law
violations.
The
African
Union
High-Level
Implementation Panel on Darfur, under the leadership
of President Mbeki, has our full support for its
activities in achieving this goal and its role in
democratically transforming the Sudan. In particular,
we support the recommendation made by the Panel on
ensuring accountability for the legacy of past abuses in
order to ensure a peaceful future in the Sudan. We
encourage the Government of the Sudan to implement
the recommendations of the Panel led by President
Mbeki, in particular in the justice sector.
Austria has taken note with concern of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) Pre-Trial
Chamber’s decision of 25 May 2010 and the briefing of
Chief Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo on this subject to
the Council last Friday (see S/PV.6336). We wish to
underline the need for the Government of the Sudan
and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur to
cooperate fully with the ICC. The international
community, together with the Government of the
Sudan, must continue to work to promote respect for
human rights and democracy throughout the entire
country.
My country is firmly convinced that seeking
peace and securing justice are mutually reinforcing
processes. It is true that, in the final outcome, justice
can thrive best in an atmosphere of peace, but at the

10-40334

S/PV.6338

same time it is also clear that there can be no lasting
peace without justice.
My delegation thanks the United Kingdom for the
draft presidential statement, which we support.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me welcome His Excellency President
Mbeki, Chairperson of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel for the Sudan; Mr. Menkerios,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General;
Mr. Gambari, Joint Special Representative; and
Mr. Bassolé, Joint African Union-United Nations Chief
Mediator for Darfur, and thank them for their insightful
briefings.
The Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA),
which is fundamental and indispensable to peace and
stability in the Sudan, is reaching a critical stage. In
just more than six months, referendums that will
determine the future shape of the Sudan will take
place. I would like to reiterate Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s support for the full implementation of
the CPA.

regional organization and their collaboration in Darfur
through their hybrid mission, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), have
not only contributed to an improved situation on the
ground, but strengthened hope and paved the way for
peace, as well. Experiences from this joint endeavour
will help in anticipating solutions for other conflicts
and crises in Africa.
A just solution has to be found for the people of
Darfur, who have suffered for too long. A lasting
solution for Darfur must include the equal participation
by the people of Darfur in the decision-making process
and the creation of conditions that will prevent any
marginalization of Darfur or its people. Substantial
numbers of the population in affected areas and
internally displaced persons did not participate in the
elections held in April. To address this issue, the
Government of the Sudan must find a way to ensure
that their voices are integrated into the political
process.

Bosnia and Herzegovina takes positive note of
the progress made by the CPA parties on a number of
issues, including adoption of related legislation. It is of
the utmost importance that the CPA parties engage
constructively in order to address outstanding issues
with regard to the implementation of the CPA. Border
demarcation, the establishment of the conditions for
peaceful
referendums,
and
post-referendum
arrangements must be prioritized.

Bosnia and Herzegovina supports the political
process and mediation efforts in Doha. It is vital that
the Doha peace process take place within the timeline
of the CPA. As the parties missed an opportunity to
conclude peace talks before the elections, it has now
become essential to achieve a comprehensive peace
agreement for Darfur as soon as possible in order to
ensure that its provisions are implemented before the
referendum. We call upon all parties to engage
constructively to reach a final peace agreement and put
an end to the conflict in Darfur.

The level of cooperation between the
Government of the Sudan and the Government of
Southern Sudan in the pre- and post-referendum
periods will determine the destiny not only of the
Sudan but of the entire region. We hope that the CPA
parties will resolve all outstanding issues in a friendly
and peaceful manner for the benefit of their peoples.

We commend the African Union High-level Panel
and its efforts to reveal the root causes of the conflict
in
Darfur
and
marvelous
articulation
of
recommendations for its settlement. The findings of the
Panel have also significantly contributed to a better
understanding of the situation in the Sudan in its
entirety.

It must be made clear that no option can leave
any side a loser. If unity prevails, a just power-sharing
system must be established. Moreover, the diversity
and equality of all regions, including Darfur, have to be
respected. On the other hand, if independence is
chosen, both sides must unite around the values and
principles of friendly relations and good cooperation.

It is essential that at this crucial time, regardless
of the future status of Southern Sudan, priority be
given to capacity-building of its authorities in order to
provide security and deliver services to the population.
Only a viable Southern Sudan with a strong local
structure will contribute to peace and stability within
the region.

The Sudan is a good example of close
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union. The symbiosis of a universal and

Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
welcomes
the
improvement in Chad-Sudan relations and their
positive influence on the Doha peace process. Their

10-40334

25

S/PV.6338

cooperation along the border has had a positive impact
on the security situation on the ground. There will
always be an interconnection between the situation in
the Sudan and the peace and stability of the region. The
people of the Sudan will resolve their own problems,
but an enabling environment in the region will also
facilitate positive developments in the Sudan.
The African Union Panel wisely contemplated the
interconnection
among
peace,
justice
and
reconciliation in the Sudan. The Sudanese by
themselves, with the assistance of the international
community, must find a golden equilibrium among
peace, justice and reconciliation in order to enter the
new phase of a democratic and prosperous Sudan.
At this stage, it is vital that the Governments of
the Sudan and Southern Sudan, as well as the
international stakeholders, draw lessons from the
elections held in April and utilize all resources to better
prepare for conducting the referendums in Abyei and
Southern Sudan. It is encouraging that the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan has already completed its
team for the preparation of the referendums.

on the question of the Sudan have basically been
established and their implementation is proceeding.
Progress has been achieved in the peacekeeping
deployments and the political negotiation in the Darfur
region. The Sudan’s national elections were held
successfully and preparations are under way for the
referendum in the South as the final step in the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). These developments demonstrate
that the people of the Sudan want stability and that
there is strong public support for the political
settlement of the question of the Sudan.
However, the question of the Sudan is complex.
Its satisfactory resolution will test the political wisdom
of the parties concerned. In the coming months, the
challenges will be even more daunting. We believe
that, so long as the concerned parties prioritize peace
and stability in the Sudan and Africa, cooperate in
good faith and move towards each other, it will be
possible to successfully address the difficulties and
challenges in the final stage of the Sudan peace
process.

Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
meeting of the Security Council on the question of the
Sudan. I welcome Mr. Mbeki, Chairman of the African
Union High-Level Panel on Darfur, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Menkerios,
Joint Special Representative Gambari and Joint Chief
Mediator Bassolé to today’s meeting. I thank them for
their work to resolve the question of the Sudan.

Secondly, it is necessary to fully exploit the
unique role of the African Union (AU) in the question
of the Sudan, as seen in the diplomatic practice of
recent years in Africa in the area of peace and security.
The AU’s comprehensive involvement in the question
of the Sudan is unprecedented. The AU initiated the
peacekeeping operations in Darfur and played the role
of fire brigade in containing the conflict in Darfur. The
AU and the United Nations created the joint operations
peacekeeping model in Darfur. The Sudanese
Government, the African Union and the United Nations
trilateral mechanism has functioned effectively on
Darfur. In all this, the African Union has played the
role of bridge and link in the international process on
the question of the Sudan. This model of cooperation
has provided the international community with new
experience in handling regional hot spots.

The Security Council has devoted a great deal of
energy to the question of the Sudan. At this critical
moment in the peace process in the Sudan, I would like
to emphasize the following two points. First, the
question of the Sudan is complicated but progress has
been achieved. The Sudan is the largest country in
Africa. The maintenance of its peace and stability bears
on the overall situation of peace in its region and the
African continent. Thanks to the tireless efforts of the
international community, the framework arrangements

Over the past year, the AU High-Level Panel on
Darfur, under Mr. Mbeki, has studied the question of
the Sudan in depth and made comprehensive and
practical proposals for achieving peace and
reconciliation through cooperation in the Sudan. We
expect the AU to continue to play an important role in
the next stage of the peace process in the Sudan. We
believe that the AU will enjoy further success in
maintaining peace and stability on the African
continent.

In conclusion, at this critical time all peace
processes in the Sudan — resolution of the conflict in
Darfur, the CPA, and North-South relations — deserve
the full attention of the international community. We
must all assist the peoples of the Sudan to find their
way towards a better future for their country and the
entire region.

26

10-40334

S/PV.6338

China has worked tirelessly to promote the proper
resolution of the question of the Sudan. We have
actively participated and promoted the dual-track
system and the trilateral mechanism so as to build a
framework of international cooperation on Darfur.
Chinese peacekeepers have always stood on the front
line of international peacekeeping in the Sudan. The
Government and private sector of China have made
practical contributions to the Sudan’s economic
development and the improvement of people’s lives.
We sincerely support the African Union’s playing
an important role in the question of the Sudan in the
future. The Chinese Government will continue to act in
a responsible manner to actively promote the peace
process in the Sudan and to make its own contributions
to peace in Africa.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.
We welcome the presence of President Mbeki and
thank him for his briefing. We also welcome
Mr. Menkerios, Mr. Gambari and Mr. Bassolé. We are
grateful for their briefings, since they all symbolize the
work of the international community. Their actions
with respect to the situation in the Sudan are invaluable
contributions to the work of this Council in the search
for peace and justice in that country.
As has been noted, the Sudan is facing a defining
moment for its future. As we move towards the
completion of the transitional period established by the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), the
challenges to consolidating peace and stability
throughout the country remain extensive. Six months
before the holding of the national referendum, the
situation is a major challenge not only to the country,
but also to the international community, which is
responsible for ensuring the well-being of the Sudanese
people. Hence, a timely and coordinated response is
expected from the United Nations and its partners in
order to avert any possible return to the armed conflict
faced by thousands of Sudanese for more than two
decades.
Today, we are analysing the different options for
cooperation with the Sudan. Although points of view
may differ with respect to identifying priorities, the
common denominator remains ensuring a better future
for the Sudanese people through peace, dialogue and
mutual respect among the parties.

10-40334

The parties have made some significant progress
since the implementation of the CPA began.
Nonetheless, important elements of the Agreement
remain unfulfilled due largely to a lack of trust among
the signatories. That is the first obstacle that we must
overcome in the coming months if we want to prepare
the conditions for holding a successful referendum. We
agree that the priority of the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan (UNMIS) in the coming months must be the
preparation for the referendum. The logistical and
security support that the Mission can offer the parties
is critical to ensuring comprehensive and peaceful
participation. The lessons learned from the recent
election process, especially with respect to voter
registration and the transportation of equipment, will
allow the Mission to better respond to the difficulties
on the ground.
Nonetheless, and mindful of the resources at the
disposal of UNMIS, we must not forget that all efforts
must be accompanied by the protection of civilians and
the facilitation of the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, since both are complementary to the
success of the election process and the outcome of the
voting. The parties must have a clear vision of the
framework to govern relations among them following
the referendum. The international community must do
all in its power to facilitate dialogue among the parties
and to offer its assistance when requested in order to
achieve a satisfactory agreement prior to the ballot.
As the implementation of the provisions of the
agreement moves forward, the United Nations will
have the opportunity to collaborate in other very
important areas, among them the drafting of
contingency plans and capacity-building for the
Government of Southern Sudan so that it can offer the
basic services that its population requires. The drafting
of comprehensive contingency plans at the national
level must be a priority of the Organization in the
coming months. Whatever the end result of the
referendum, the international community must stand
ready to respond rapidly and effectively to any
scenario.
For years, the tragic situation in Darfur has
engaged the conscience of millions around the world,
including in my country, where broad sectors of society
have called on the Security Council to ensure the
protection of the civilian population and to resolutely
promote a lasting solution to the conflict.

27

S/PV.6338

Today, that call takes on particular significance as
thousands of refugees and internally displaced persons
in that region of the Sudan will find themselves
affected by the strategic decisions that the Organization
will take following this debate; hence the need to adopt
a broad-based approach to the situation in the Sudan
and in Darfur. What happens in Darfur must be linked
to the broader context of what is happening in the rest
of the Sudan.
That holistic vision must be accompanied by a
reorganization of the various efforts of the actors on
the ground. The international community must
maintain close cooperation in order to address the
difficult challenges facing the Sudan. The United
Nations must maintain a single channel of
communication with the African Union High-Level
Panel and the various regional initiatives for the good
of the political process in that country.
Furthermore, regarding Darfur, instances of
progress the ground must serve as the true measures of
progress in the political process. In that way, in the
coming months, the international community should
ensure a cessation of hostilities and the return of all
parties to the negotiating table. The Security Council
should do its utmost so that all rebel factions join the
mediation process under way. The rebel leaders must
see that the international community is not prepared to
indefinitely support their aspirations to the cost of the
civilian population.
Whatever
the
situation
following
the
referendums, the Sudan will begin a fragile transition
period, which will require the support of the countries
of the region and the international community. From
that standpoint, the United Nations will continue to
have an important role in helping the population. By
remaining in the Sudan, the Organization will be in a
position to continue not only to meet its obligation to
maintain international peace and security, but also to
work to improve the situation of thousands of people
who still face devastating violence and poverty.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council and shall invite Mr. Mbeki to make a few
concluding remarks. I give him the floor.
Mr. Mbeki: Perhaps I should say first of all that I
was very pleased that the rest of the members of our
Panel were able to come to this meeting. Behind me
are sitting former Presidents Abubakar and Buyoya, the
other members of our Panel.

28

It would seem to me from the comments that have
been made by Council members here that we are
generally in agreement and of one mind about the
immediate challenges facing us with regard to all the
elements that relate to Sudan — Darfur, the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) and so on.
Thus, there is general agreement on the kind of focus
that is required. I think that it is a very good thing that
that sort of consensus has developed within the
Security Council. Certainly, from the point of view of
those of us who have to attend to the matter of Sudan
every day, I think that the comments that have been
made here by members of the Security Council indeed
reinforce the cooperation that is taking place among
ourselves on a daily basis in Sudan so that we can
advance on all of these matters.
The only other point that I would like to make in
that regard is that generally we are very optimistic
about this. I think the point has been made that one
thing that has happened as a result of the elections is
that the two principal players, particularly with regard
to the CPA — the National Congress Party and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement — have emerged
strengthened from the elections. That has of course
communicated the message to them of the critical
importance of their cooperating properly so that all the
things that need to be done are done.
Therefore, all of us will continue to engage with
them to ensure that they do indeed live up to their
responsibilities, because, without that, we are not going
to achieve the solutions that we are looking for in
Sudan.
I think that the atmosphere is very encouraging in
the sense that there is a commitment to making sure
that these things happen despite all the problems and
all the challenges. I would like to believe that a strong
message from the Security Council to encourage both
parties to live up to their responsibility would indeed
help in making sure that we advance the entirety of the
agenda relating to resolution of the challenges in the
Sudan.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

10-40334
