S/2002/678

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 June 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 17 June 2002 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I am attaching for your consideration and for the consideration of the members
of the Security Council a letter, dated 10 June 2002, from the President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Judge Claude Jorda (see annex).
Attached to President Jorda’s letter is a report that has been jointly prepared by
the President, the Prosecutor and the Registrar of the International Tribunal and that
has been considered and approved by its judges (see enclosure).
In the report, the International Tribunal outlines certain measures that it
believes that it must take if it is to be in a position to achieve the objective of
completing all trial activities at first instance by 2008.
The first measure is to concentrate on the prosecution and trial of the highestranking political, military and paramilitary leaders who are suspected of being
responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law committed in the
territory of the former Yugoslavia since 1991.
The second measure, which is complementary to the first, is to transfer cases
involving mid-level accused, that is, accused who, while they were not the principal
political, military and paramilitary leaders, are nevertheless alleged to have
exercised a measure of leadership or control, to national courts for prosecution and
trial.
It is envisaged that the cases against several accused who are currently
detained under the authority of the International Tribunal might possibly be
transferred to national courts for prosecution and trial in this way, as well as cases
involving some further 50 individuals against whom the Prosecutor anticipates
submitting indictments by the time she has completed the investigatory part of her
mandate, in 2004.
In view of the location where the crimes concerned are alleged to have been
committed, all of these cases would be referred for prosecution and trial to the
national courts of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
However, the Tribunal emphasizes that it would be in a position to refer cases
to a State for prosecution and trial only if it were known that its courts would be
able to handle those cases effectively and consistently with internationally
recognized standards of human rights and due process.

02-43447 (E)

250602

*0243447*

S/2002/678

The Tribunal notes that, according to information at its disposal, the judicial
systems in Bosnia and Herzegovina exhibit a number of serious shortcomings in
these respects. The Tribunal is consequently of the view that it would not be
possible for it to refer cases to the national jurisdictions of that State as they are
currently organized and function.
At the same time, the Tribunal considers that the newly established State Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina has the potential to be an appropriate forum to which it
might refer cases for prosecution and trial.
To that end, the Tribunal recommends that a division be created within the
State Court with specific responsibility for the conduct of cases involving serious
violations of international humanitarian law in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It further
recommends that, at least for an initial period, this division should be composed of
both international and national judges. The Tribunal also outlines certain measures
that would need to be adopted within the Bosnian legal system, as well as certain
practical arrangements that would need to be put in place, before any transfers of
cases could occur.
If these recommendations were implemented and these measures and
arrangements put in place, the Tribunal considers that it would then be in a position
to transfer cases against mid-level accused to the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for prosecution and trial.
The Tribunal seeks the endorsement of the Security Council for this broad
programme of action.
Should the Security Council confer such endorsement, the Tribunal would then
proceed to adopt the necessary amendments to its Rules of Procedure and Evidence.
Transfers of cases to the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina would
commence once it had been verified that all necessary corresponding measures had
been adopted within the Bosnian legal system and all necessary practical
arrangements put in place.
I would be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its attachments to
the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2
