Resolutiom1 adopted on reports of the Second Committee
526 (VI). Continuation of the regional economic
commi88ions
The General Assembly,
Having considered the account of the activities of
the regional economic commissions for Europe, Asia
and the Far East, and Latin America contained in the
report of the Economic and Social Council ( chapter
II)9,
Notes with satisfaction the valuable work which is
being done by the regional economic commissions and
the decision of the Economic and Social Council, contained in its resolution 414 (XIII), section C. I, of
20 September 1951, to continue them.
365th plenMy meeting,
26 January 1952.
527 (VI). Living standard,; of the working
population
The General Assembly,
Considering that general developments in the world
economic situation since the fifth session of the General
Assembly are likely to affect adversely the economic
stability of many countries, and considering ·that, in
addition, real wages in many countries have declined
owing to price increases and inflation, a circumstance
which may likewise adversely affect the living standards of the working population,
. Bearing in mind _that Art(cle SS of the Charter provides that th~ _Umted Nations shall promote higher
standards of hvmg, full employment, and conditions of
economic and . social progress and development, and
that under Article 56 of the Charter the Member States
ha~c pledged themselves to take ''joint and separate
action in co-operation with the Organization" for the
achievement of these purposes,
Considering that, in promoting economic progress
!)Ormal trade relations among all countries are most
important for the raising of living standards in both
exporting and im1~)fting countries,
Emphasizing the recommendations made by the Economic and Social Council at its twelfth and thirteenth
sessions regarding t~e maintenance of living standards
and of the purchasing power of the sections of the
pop~lation with lower incomes, and reg,J.rding the prevention of the development of inflationary pressure and
speculative profits,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to continue to pay spec~al_ attention to changes occurring in
the sta~dards of hvmg of the working population, and
to provide for the :Vorking out of adequate statistical
methods and techmques so as best to facilitate the
gathering and use of pertinent data in order to enable
the Secretary-General to publish regular annual reP?:ts sh?wing chang~s in absolut_e levels of living conditions m all countries and which would permit the
study o_f this ~r?blem in t~e ~ight of changing general
economic cund1t1ons; and mv1tes all Mc:mber States to
• See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session1
Supplement No. 3.

23

furnish to the Secretary-General all the data required
for this purpose ;
2. Recommends that all Members of the United
Nations, in order to combat inflation a11d to maintain
and raise the general standard of living of their populations, give special attention (i) in the domestic sphere,
to increasing the production of food and consumer
goods, to reducing the burden of taxation of the lowerincome population groups, to adopting social legislation
and other measures for improving conditions of health,
housing and education and for strengthening tradeunion rights; and (ii) in the international sphere, to
promoting economic and commercial relations between
all countries.
365th plenary meeting,
26 January 1952.

528 (VI). Production and distribution of newsprint and printing paper
The General Assembly
N ates with satisfaction:
1. The decision taken by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations at its Conference, 10
pursuant to the resolutions of the General Conference
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Orangization 11 and of the Economic and Social
Council, 12 to adopt a long-term programme to supply
the world with newsprint and printing paper;
2. The decision taken by the Economic and Social
Council to study at its fourteenth session the report to
be prepared by the Secretary-General pursuant to
Council resolution 374 (XIII) regarding measures '·to
improve the position and ultimately put an end to the
shortage of newsprint and printing paper", both "with
a view to immediate results" and "with a view to action over a longer period".
365th plenary meeting,
26 January 1952.
529. (VI). Libya: problem of war damages
The General Assembly,
I-! aving examined and noted the report 13 of the
Secretary-General containing a general survey of the
problem of war damages in Libya, submitted in accordance with resolution 389 (V) adopted by the General
Assembly on 15 December 1950,
Having heard a statement 14 made by a representative
of the United Kingdom of Libya,
Believing that the problem of war damages should
be considered within the general framework of the
over-all economic development plans for the country,
"See n:solution No. 26 adopted on 7 December 1951 by the
Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations at its sixth session.
a See resolution adopted on 13 July 1951 by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its sixth session. See also documents
E/2052/ Add. 1 and Corr. 1.
u See resolution 374 (XIII) adopted on 13 September 1951
by the Economic and Social Council.
"See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 21, document A/2000.
"Ibid., SL;cond Committee, 1"89th meeting.

24

General Aseemhly-Sixth ~ssion

Invites the ~ecretary-General, and the agencies par' ;cipating in the Technical Assistance Board, to give
sympathetic consideration to requests of the Libyan
Government for assistance with economic development programmes which would strengthen the Libyan
economy, including the repair or reconstruction of
damaged property an<l installations, public and private,
and in this connexion to appoint, as requested by the
Libyan Governm~nt, any additional experts that may
be required to collect the necessary data, to complete
the survey of the problem of war damages and to make
recommendations.
366th plenary meeting,
29 January 1952.

530 (VI). Economic and financial provisions
relating to Eritrea
Whereas, in accordance with the provisions of article
23 and paragraph 3 of annex XI of the Treaty of Peace
with Italy, 15 the question of the disposal of the former
Italian colonies was submitted on 15 September 1948
to the General Assembly by the Governments of France,
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republi~s, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
the United States of America,
Whereas, by virtue of the above-mentioned provisions, the four Powers have agreed to accept the recommendation of the General Assembly and to take appropriate measures for giving effect to it,
Whereas the General Assembly, by resolution 390 A
(V) of 2 December 1950, recommended that Eritrea be
constituted an autonomous unit federated with Ethiopia under the sovereignty of the Ethiopian Crown not
later than 15 September 1952, and laid down the necessary provisions for effecting the federation of Eritrea
with Ethiopia, and left for settlement by the United
Nations only the probkm referred to in paragraph 19
of annex XIV of the Treaty of Peace with Italy, while
taking into account, inter alia, the importance of assuring the continuing collaboration of the foreign communities in the ernnomic development of Eritrea,
Whereas paragraph 19 of annex XIV of the Treaty
of Peace with Italy, which contains the economic and
financial provisions relating to ceded territories, atates
that "The provisions of this Annex shall not apply to
the former Italian Colonies. The economic and financial
provisions to be applied therein will form part of the
arrangements for the final disposal of these territories
pursuant to article 23 of the present Treaty",
Whereas it is desirable that the economic and financial provisions relating to Eritrea should be determined
before Eritrea is constituted an autonomous unit federated with Ethiopia under the sovereignty of the Ethiopian Crown in order that they may be applied as soon
as possible,
The General Assembly
Approves the following articles:

11
See Treaty Series. Treaties and international agreements
rl'gistered or filed atr.d recorded ·with the Secretariat of the
U,1itcd Nations, volume 49, 1950 I, No. 747.

Article I
1. Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 4 and 5
of this article Eritrea• shall receive, without payment,
the movable and immovable property located in Eritr~a
owned by the Italian State, either in its own name or in
the name of the Italian administration in Eritrea, and
such property shall be transferred to Eritrea not later
than the effective date of the final transfer of power
from the Administering Power to the appropri_ate authorities referred to in paragraph 14 of resolution 390
(V) of the General Assembly of the United Nations.
2. The property referred to in paragraph 1 shall
.
be taken as comprising:
(a) The public property of the State (demanio
publico);
.
( b) The inalienable property of the State (patrimonio in dis ponibile) ;
( c) The property of the Fascist Party a!1d its organizations as listed in article 10 of the Italian Royal
Decree No. 513 of 28 April 1938;
(d) The alienable property of the State (patrimonio disponibile) ;
( e) The property belonging to the aut~nomous
agencies ( azicnde autonomc) of the State which are:
Ferro11ie dell 'Eritrea
Azienda Speciale A pprovigionamenti
Azienda Minicre Africa Orientale (AMAO)
Azienda Autonoma Strade Statali {AASS);
(f) The rights of the Italian State in the form of
shares and similar rights in the capital of institutio!1s,
companies and associations of a public character w~1ch
have their siege social in Eritrea. Where the operations
of such institutions, companies and associations extend
to Italy or to countries other than Eritrea, Eritrea shall
receive only those rights of the Italian State o: the
Italian administration of Eritrea which appertam to
the operations in Eritrea. In cases where the Italian
State or the Italian administration of Eritrea exercised only managerial control over such· institutio1;1s,
companies and associations, Eritrea shall have no claim
to any rights in those institutions, companies and associations.
3. Properties, institutions, companies and associations referred to in paragraph 2 of this article shall be
transferred as they stand at the date of transfer and
Eritrea will take over all commitments and liabilities
outstanding at that date in connexion with those concerns.
4. Italy shall retain the ownership of the following
property listed in paragraph 2 of this article, that is
to say:
(a) The immovable property necessary for the
functioning of Italian government representation in
Eritrea ;b
( b) The immovable and mo~able property as at the
date of the present resolution used for the functioning
of the schools and hospitals of the Italian community
in Eritrea.
• The term "Eritrea" as used in the present resolution is to
be interpreted in conformity with paragraph 3 of resolution 390
(V) where the jurisdiction and responsibilities of the Federal
Government and the Eritrean Government are set out.
b The nature of Italian Government representation remains
for settlement between the future Federal· Government and the
Italian Government in accordance with international law and
practice.
