S/PRST/2007/28

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 July 2007
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5721st meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 July 2007, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the deteriorating
security situation in the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
particular in North and South Kivu. The Council is particularly concerned
about the serious humanitarian consequences of violent actions of foreign
armed groups, in particular the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR), and military activities of the ‘mixed’ brigades.
“The Security Council urges all actors involved to refrain from any
action leading to a military confrontation, that could result in further tension
and aggravate the ongoing humanitarian crisis in the Kivus, and to seek a
solution to the current crisis through political and diplomatic means.
“The Security Council calls on the mixed brigades and their commanders
to integrate into the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(FARDC) and to stop recruiting activities. The Council condemns the
recruitment of children in violation of applicable international law and urges
the above-mentioned elements to release all children associated with them.
“The Security Council reiterates its grave concern at the continued threat
that the foreign and Congolese armed groups in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo pose to the local population and security in the region. It
reiterates its demand that those groups lay down their arms and engage
voluntarily and without preconditions in their demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement, and reintegration, as appropriate.
“The Security Council invites the Government to develop in close
coordination with the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) a global plan to ensure security in the
eastern part of the country, particularly by making further progress in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of Congolese combatants and
the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
of foreign combatants, and by ending impunity, promoting reconciliation,
social cohesion, recovery and development in the region. It notes with concern
the significant number of internally displaced persons and emphasizes the need

07-43411 (E) 230707

*0743411*

S/PRST/2007/28

to reassure the population and promote effective State administration in the
region. The Council welcomes the intention of the Congolese authorities to
facilitate an inclusive dialogue in the Kivus and looks forward to its
implementation.
“The Security Council encourages MONUC to continue, in conformity
with its mandate, to support the FARDC integrated brigades with a view to
disarming recalcitrant foreign and Congolese armed groups in order to ensure
their participation in the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration process, as appropriate. It encourages the
Congolese authorities to develop, in close consultation with MONUC, the
necessary planning to that end and stresses that any operation which may
require MONUC’s support should be jointly planned with it and in accordance
with international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law. The Council
requests the Secretary-General to keep it informed of this planning process. It
also underlines the importance of continued efforts by MONUC, in
implementing its mandate, to provide protection to civilians and contribute to
the improvement of the security conditions in which humanitarian assistance is
provided.
“The Security Council strongly encourages the Government to carry out
the reform of the security sector nationwide as a matter of priority, by pursuing
its efforts to consolidate the reform of the police and to integrate the armed
forces. In this context, the Council acknowledges the concerted efforts of the
Government and its partners towards convening a national round table on
security sector reform, scheduled for October in Kinshasa.
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern about the recruitment
of combatants, including children in violation of applicable international law,
inside and outside the Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially by forces
loyal to Laurent Nkunda.
“The Council urges the neighbouring states concerned to further facilitate
the effective reintegration of returning former combatants and to prevent all
recruiting activities within their territories. The Council recognizes that good
regional relations, in particular relations between the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Rwanda, are an important factor in solving the crisis in the
Kivus. It encourages both governments to continue to cooperate to solve their
common security concerns, to improve their diplomatic relations, and to
support the voluntary return of refugees, in consultation with the High
Commissioner for Refugees.
“The Security Council encourages MONUC, in conformity with its
mandate, to assist the Government, including through the provision of good
offices, in its efforts to find a lasting solution to the crisis in the Kivus through
promoting reconciliation and political dialogue.”

2

07-43411
