UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL
RECORDS
LN LlB/&linv

THIRTY-FOURTH

YEAR

2146th

MEETING:

NEW

JUN 1 7 1982

31 MAY

UWA
C):Clhb~C

1979

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

. . . . , . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 30 May 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13356) . .

1

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2146)
of the agenda

WPV.2146

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OjJiciaI Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is
given.
‘The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2146th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 31 May 1979, at 11.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Vasco FUTSCHER

PEREIRA

(Portugal).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2146)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 30 May 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13356)
The meeting was called to order at I.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 30 May 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13356)
1. The ‘PRESIDENT: I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received letters from the representatives
of Israel and Lebanon, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.
At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Tu&ni tLebanon1 took
the place reserved fir him at the Council tab& and Mr.‘Blum
(Israel) took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council is meeting
today in response to a request from the representative of
Lebanon which is contained in document S/13356. Members
of the Council also have before them document S/13361
which contains the text of a letter dated 30 May from the
representative of Lebanon.

3. I now call on the Secretary-General
make a statement.

who wishes to

4. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
It may be helpful to
the Council if I give a brief statement on the current situation in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area, based for the most part on reports from
Major-General Erskine, the Commander of UNIFIL.
5. Since 26 May there has been a heavy daily exchange
of artillery and mortar fire between the de facto forces
and the armed elements situated in the Tyre pocket and to
the north of the Litani River. To give some idea of the
magnitude of this exchange, the figures for the last three
days are as follows: on Monday, 28 May, the armed
elements fired 51 shells and the de facto forces 321; on
Tuesday, 29 May, the armed elements fired 144 shells and
the defacto forces 367; on Wednesday, 30 May, the armed
elements fired 66 shells and the de facto forces 145. The
armed elements’ tire has been directed at targets in the de
facto forces’ enclave and the defactoforces’fire
at targets
in the Tyre pocket, in locations north of the Litani River
and also in the UNIFIL
area of operation. General Erskine notes that the majority of exchanges of tire between
the de facto forces and the armed elements in recent days
were initiated by the latter.
6. The reason given by Major Haddad for shelling
targets in the UNIFIL
area of operation is that firing is
being directed on Major Haddad’s forces from inside that
area. This was also the reason given by him for rejecting
on 28 May the UNIFIL
proposal for a cease-fire, which
had been accepted by the armed elements. After an
exhaustive investigation and checking with approximately 100 UNIFIL posts in the area of operation, UNIFIL has totally rejected that allegation. A public
statement to this effect was made on 30 May.
7. In the past 72 hours the main developments
UNIFIL area of operation have been as follows:

in the

-First,
three artillery shells tired by the defacto forces
fell on the village of As Siddiqin in the Dutch contingent
area, killing four civilians and wounding one.
-Secondly,
12 artillery shells from the same source fell
in the centre of the village of Hebbarye in the Norwegian
sector. One of these shells impacted on the roof of a
shelter occupied by several Norwegian soldiers.
-Thirdly,
in the village of Haris one shell badly damaged the building occupied by the headquarters of the
Dutch battalion.

8. The inhabitants of these and several other villages are
extremely disturbed at the prospects of this situation’s
continuing and this has inevitably shaken their confidence in UNIFIL.
9. Today, 31 May, General Siilasvuo and General-Erskine have undertaken a new effort with all the parties
concerned to agree to a formal cease-fire as of 1300 hours
GMT. I have just been informed by General Siilasvuo
that all firing has ceased since 0800 hours local time this
morning, and that the de facto forces have now also
agreed to the cease-fire.
10. I should also make reference to certain recent incidents which took place outside the UNIFIL area of operation, since these incidents have a direct bearing on the
situation in Southern Lebanon. There were recently a
number of bomb explosions in Israel, particularly one on
23 May, and a series of air, sea and land strikes by Israeli
forces directed at targets in Lebanon north of the UNIFIL area of operation. These incidents have been the
subject of letters addressed to me by the representatives
of Israel and Lebanon and by the Palestine Liberation
Organization, which have been circulated as documents
of the Security Council. I have recently received a further
letter from Chairman Arafat on the same matter.
11. I am deeply concerned at the situation which has
developed in Lebanon in the past few days. There can be
no question but that, if a cease-fire is not maintained, the
exodus of the civilian population will increase, as will the
risk of loss of life both to the civilian population and to
UNIFIL personnel.
12. As regards the general situation of UNIFIL, since 15
May when the President of the Council made a statement on
this matter to the Council [214&h meering3, there have been
continuous efforts to facilitate progress on the four points
originally mentioned in my report of 12 January 1979
[S/Zj02a and, as an immediate priority, on the-improvement of the security of United Nations headquarters at
Naqoura. The long-term aim of these efforts has been to
further the UNIFIL deployment in the whole of its area of
operation. That is a prerequisite for the progressive restoration of the authority of the Lebanese Government in the
area as required by resolutions 425 (1978) and 444 (1979).
Further meetings with the appropriate authorities are to be
held in the area in the next day or two and I have asked
General Siilasvuo to come to Headquarters here in New
York immediately thereafter for consultations on this and.
other matters.
13. I very much hope that an effective cease-fire can be
maintained. I also would appreciate the continuing support
of those Governments which are in a position in the words
of resolution 444 (1979), “to bring their intluence to bear on
those concerned, so that the Force, can discharge its responsibilities fully and unhampered”. For my part I shall pursue
all possible means of securing the effective implementation
of the mandate-of UNIFIL.
:
14. In conclusion, Mr. President, I wish to express to you
my deep appreciation for the great efforts which you your-

self have made m pursme
set for UNIFIL.

goals which the Council has

15. The PRESIDENT: I thank the Secretary-General for
the very kind words addressed to me.
16. The next speaker is the representative of Lebanon on
whom I now call.
17. Mr. TUENI (Lebanon): Mr. President, two weeks
ago, on I5 May, the Council, with great simplicity yet also
with a certain solemnity, entrusted you, as President, with
an unprecedented mission. You accepted with grace, discretion and-if I may say so-a great measure of courage, to
carry out a diplomatic mandate on behalf of the world
community.
18. Pursuing and developing what your predecessor,
Ambassador Ole kg&d, had done, you have earnestly and
patiently used the presidency of the Council to initiate,
encourage and coordinate multilateral efforts aimed at
preventing continued bloodshed and creating better conditions for the implementation of the resolutions of the Council. You opted for perseverance, objectivity, calm and
moderation. We were so encouraged by your practical wisdom that my Government did not find it necessary to press
for a long overdue debate on the mini-invasion of Lebanon
by Israel, its defiance of the Council, and its aggression
against UNIFIL.
19. It is customary to congratulate the President of the
Council on assuming his functions and we regret that our
expression of gratitude and admiration, for both you and
the representative of Norway, should come so late in the
day, at the very end of your term, and well after the end of
his. May we invite you to have neither sorrow nor regret for
having tried so hard. We have none.
20. Every day and every hour of every day since 25 April
when we first called for an urgent meeting of the Council,
people have been dying in my country. Cities and villages
have been destroyed and devastated. Tens of thousands of
simple people, peaceful Lebanese citizens, have become
refugees in their, own homeland. Yet we chose to die in
silence. I almost said “we chose to die in peace”, for we are a
people that have, through long years of tragedy, learned the
hard lessons of patience, resistance and faith. Yet today we
all felt that the time had come to ask of the world community, here represented, that there should really be no more
war, no more bloodshed and no more suffering.
21. That is our agenda. We all agreed to debate not the
fate of Southern Lebanon, but the future of peace and
peace-keeping in this martyred country which you with us
have come to love so much. Allow me, therefore, to assure
members once more in the ‘name of Lebanon that my
country is neither for. sale nor for hire, that it is neither
dispensable nor negotiable, and that its determination to
survive is only equalled by our unshaken confidence in
justice and human rights. We are a naive people, but ,we
have come to you not in weakness but with strength. We
know that we probably stand alone as if condemned by
friends and foes alike to suffer beyond relief. But we also

know that we carry in us a challenge to which you cannot
fail to respond, the challenge of life to; death, d freedomforever rebelling, and of a long history of hope unending.

yesterday and circulated as an official document of the
Council [S/13361]. We shall not, at this stage, burden the
debate with any further elaboration. Nor shall we restate the
arguments in our letter of 7 May, [S/13301]. We beg,
however, that both documents be examined in a spirit of
realism, over and above the concern that the Council has
always shown for the plight of my country.

22. I had promised not to abuse the patience of the Council, whose members have already spent endless hours in
consultations on the issue now before us. Numerous documents, letters and reports have been distributed, read and
discussed. I wish to add here the report of the SecretaryGeneral, whose efforts have been so consistent in the service
of the cause of peace; the good news he brings us is certainly
a great encouragement.

27. In conclusion, I should like to be allowed to make
three brief remarks with the hope that the simple and candid
manner in which they are addressed to the Council, and
beyond the Council, will prompt an economy in the use of
words and perhaps in the Council’s time. My first remark is
about the Palestinians, my second is about the Christians in
Southern Lebanon, and my third is about the Lebanese
question.

23. I therefore submit that we should not transform the
Council-as we may all be tempted to do-into a forum for
rhetoric or a “debating society”. Let us, rather, try to
approach the question with pragmatism. Let us try to seek
solutions that will lead us all to the objectives set forth by
the Council in the series of resolutions and statements
agreed on with unprecedented unanimity since March 1978.
And let us, above all, trust each other’s ability to understand
the realities of the case, which none of us can disguise.

28. The Palestinians are in my country a “diaspora-inrevolt”. Their most earnest hope, and ours, is that an end
will be put to their dispersion and that they will be allowed to
return home. Only .peace, not further violence or further
terror, can bring an end to their revolt. What has happened
between the Palestinians and the Lebanese will go into our
history as a cataclysm similar to none in modern history.
We are now determined that this shall not be repeated.

24. In this perspective, what do we ask of the Council?
Our proposal is the following. First, we ask that the Council
issue an injunction in the most compelling manner, for the
halting of all acts of hostility against Lebanon and for an
end to Israeli violation of Lebanese sovereignty, and the
shameless sacrifice of human lives. Secondly, we propose
that a strong and determined effort be made to fulfil the
mandate of UNIFIL, beyond ambiguity. It has now been
over a year since soldiers of peace came gallantly and valiantly to restore security in Southern Lebanon and assist in
the restoration of our sovereignty. We have all carefully
built a structure for peace and security. This marvellous
achievement suddenly appears frail and threatened. We all
have an interest in maintaining its credibility and in giving it
the means to succeed, lest its coflapse bring further war not
only to Lebanon but to the whole of the Middle East and
probably beyond. And, thirdly, we ask for the immediate
restoration of the only valid framework of peace in Southem Lebanon, the General Armistice Agreement of 1949
which was designed to lead, and can still lead, to a just and
permanent settlement of the Palestinian question. For we all
have expressed, though in varying terms, the fact that there
cannot be peace in the Middle East without such a settlement and that no solution of the Palestinian question can be
sought through the artificial or accidental creation of a no
less dramatic Lebanese question.

29. Within a framework of Arab solidarity, both the Lebanese and the Palestinians are now firmly committed to
peace and to the undisputed restoration of Lebanese sovereignty over all of Lebanon. We expect our friends and the
world community to understand with us this commitment
and to believe once and for all that if there is no peace in
Lebanon there will not, cannot, and shall not, be peace
anywhere else in the whole Middle East.
30. The Christians in Southern Lebanon are, first and
foremost, Lebanese citizens. Neither their national dignity
nor their future aspirations can allow them to be looked
upon as accessories to Israel’s strategic interests. Their problem is a by-product of the wars that Lebanon has been
going through. Their fears andconcerns cannot legitimately
lead them to become what Israel seeks: a tool of destabilization and disunity. Their only future is in Lebanon’s restored
independence and sovereignty, Their present security can
best be guaranteed by UNIFIL, not by vicarious occupation
of their homeland. Never will Lebanon allow that they or
any part of the south be detached from our historic body
politic. Such a sacrifice is beyond our tolerance and, if ever
envisaged, will only lead to another war, a war that the
Lebanese will all wage together, in full unity, to preserve
Southern Lebanon for the Lebanese, and the Lebanese
alone, in freedom, security. and dignity.

25. My delegation is prepared to discuss, through the
proper conventional methods, a resolution which will articulatethese proposals in a manner that will safeguard the
spirit of consensus which has been maintained all through
our long, and sometimes very painful, handling of the Lebanese question. However, should hostilities be resumed or
continue, and should Israel persist in its defiance of previous resolutions, my delegation feels very strongly that a
condemnation of Israel will become imperative, and so will
the search for new avenues provided for by the Charter.

3 1. What follows from this attitude is that,while debating
the question of Southern Lebanon, it is the question of
Lebanon as a whole that the Council is really debating.
Every effort now deployed to preserve Lebanon’s unity, and
to restore Lebanon’s sovereignty and authority, wiI1 be
jeopardized if Southern Lebanon is allowed to explode. One
war in the South, if allowed to develop, will inevitably lead
to another, and Lebanon will then become again the arena it
has been for almost five years now, unable to rebuild its
national institutions and recover the unique position it

26. Our case, we believe, has been put very clearly in the
memorandum presented to the members of the Council
‘.
.$.

3

for this meeting, I wish to place briefly on record once again
Israel’s position with regard to the matter before us.

occupied in the Arab world, and the world at large, in
politics, and beyond in the broad realm of human
achievements.

40. Israel supports the national sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lebanon within its internationally recognized
boundaries. As Prime Minister Menachem Begin stated in
the Knesset on 7 May 1979:

32. My final words should be for peace, not for war. Yet I
must speak of the Lebanese army as the instrument on
which we all depend to restore the authority of Lebanon
over all its territory, within its internationally recognized
boundaries. For such has been the tenor of the Council’s
resolutions since March 1978.

“I hereby announce in the name of the Government of
Israel that our State does not have any territorial
demands on Lebanon. We support the territorial integrity
and national sovereignty of Lebanon.”

33. In three weeks, the mandate of UNIFIL will expire
and the Council will most probably be invited to renew it.
When resolution 444 (1979) was adopted, a phased programme of activities was called for, and Lebanon wasasked
to start deploying its own troops in the UNIFIL area of
operation.

41. The Government of Israel wants peace in and with
Lebanon. To this end it has made and will continue to make
all endeavours possible. Despite Lebanon’s ongoing problems and their complexity, Israel believes that the time has
none the less come to exert all efforts to move towards a
negotiated peace between Israel and Lebanon. In keeping
with this primary objective of Israeli foreign policy, the
Prime Minister of Israel extended a direct appeal to the
President of Lebanon, inviting him to a meeting with a view
to reaching a negotiated peace treaty between Israel and
Lebanon. I quote from his words in the Knesset on the same
occasion:

34. Very few here-let us admit it-really thought that the
challenge would be met. But it was, and we are proud that,
against all odds, Lebanon thus demonstrated very modestly
that it was prepared to share in carrying the burden of
reconstructing a viable, independent, sovereign republic.
Our soldiers are now under the operational command of
UNIFIL,
soldiers for peace. This is probably a unique
contribution to a unique peace-keeping force.

“I have the honour to invite the President of Lebanon,
Mr. Sarkii, to come to Jerusalem to meet with me. For
my part, I am prepared to leave by civilian airplane for
Beirut. The subject of our conversation, whether it takes
place in Jerusalem or in Beirut, or perhaps in a neutral
place, will be one-the signing of a peace treaty between
Israel and Lebanon.

35. So, let us see to it together that the Council’s debate
shall lead to a resolution that will express both our concern
for peace-keeping and the confidence and faith of the soldiers of peace who chose to imperil their lives.waging peace;
not war.
36. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Israel. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make a statement.

“I am confident that Lebanon will have no territorial
demands on Israel, and I declare in the name of the
Government of Israel that our State has no territorial
demands on Lebanon.”

37. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Mr. President, let me begin by
paying my warmest respects to you as President of the
Security Council for this month. You represent a country
with which Israel has the most cordial ties, and for which
Israel has the highest regard. You have conducted the business of the Council with absolute fairness, propriety and
wisdom, reflecting your outstanding diplomatic talents.

42. As has been acknowledged by the Secretary-General
in several of this reports concerning UNIFIL, and again in
his statement here today, the situation in Southern Lebanon
cannot be detached from the situation in the country as a
whole. Attempts to detach it will not enhance the cause of
international peace and security, in fact are bound to fail.

38. I should like also to take this opportunity of expressing my compliments to Mr. &gird of Norway, who, in his
capacity as President of the Council last month, conducted
its business with remarkable skill and efficaciousness. He
represents a people which, even before the establishment of
the State of Israel, demonstrated its deep understanding of
the plight of the Jewish people and its abhorrence of any
form of tyranny and discrimination. As President of the
Council he demonstrated his consummate skill as a diplomat, so much appreciated by all of us at the United Nations.

43. The terrorist group operating under the umbrella of
the murder organization calling itself the PLO are subverting the situation in Southern Lebanon, just as they have
been doing in the rest of the country. There are some 2,000
armed PLO terrorists south of the Litani River, mainly in
the Tyre area, and they constitute a threat to three tangible
targets: to the citizens of Israel, particularly in the north of
Israel, to the villagers in Southern Lebanon, and to the men
of UNIFIL in the fulfilment of their mandate. Beyond that,
there are another 10,000 to 12,000 armed PLO terrorists in
areas of Lebanon north of the Litani. Taken together, these
terrorists ‘constitute a menace to the restoration of the
authority of the Government of Lebanon in all parts ofthat
,.
troubled country.

39. We have been summoned once again to a meeting
which is designed to satisfy the domestic needs of the
Government of Lebanon, whose predicament is well known
to all of us. Israel is not prepared to be drawn into or to let
itself be used for a transparent exercise of this kind. However, since the Council has acceded to the Lebanese request

44. In the past few months, there has been a marked
escalation in the criminal acts against Israel perpetrated by
4

the terrorist PLO from Lebanese territory. lgiere has ako
been an increase-if such were possible-in the barb+
of
these outrages, as demonstrated in the brutal and abominable killing of a little girl of four and her father on the beach
at Nahariya on 22 April, on which I reported to the
Secretary-General in my letter of the same date [S/23264.
The ostensible aim of these atrocities, beyond mass murder
for its own sake, is, to judge by statements by the terrorist
PLO itself, to try to subvert the ongoing peace process in the
Middle East.
45. Lately, Israel has received information, based on
reliable sources, that a decision has been taken to step up
violence by the terrorist PLO in Southern Lebanon and
this is undoubtedly the cause of the heightened tension in
the area in the past few days.
46. The Secretary-General
in his statement today has
also confirmed that the majority of the acts of violence in
Southern Lebanon in recent days were initiated by the
terrorist PLO, euphemistically
referred to in United
Nations jargon as “armed elements”.
47. In my letter of 9 May [S/13312], I spelt out the
catalogue of violence against Israel conducted over the
past six months by PLO terrorists operating out of
Lebanon. I also indicated that, in almost every case, it
was through its news agency at Beirut and its radio
station broadcasting from Lebanon that the terrorist
PLO had openly boasted of its responsibility for those
criminal activities.
48. Let me reiterate the Israeli actions are specifically
directed against concentrations of terrorists in Lebanon.
The unfortunate fact is that for years now the terrorist
PLO has chosen to take cover behind refugees in camps
and Lebanese civilians in towns and villages throughout
that country.
49. This fact is well known and beyond dispute.
Moreover, the terrorist PLO marauds with complete freedom throughout Lebanon in total disregard for Lebanese
sovereignty. Who of us has forgotten the extraordinarily
candid speech made on 14 October 1976 by Ambassador
Ghorra,
the former
Permanent Representative
of
Lebanon? Addressing the General Assembly, he desi
cribed in detail, “constant Palestinian intervention in the
internal affairs of Lebanon and intolerable encroachment on its sovereignty*‘.*
Ambassador
Ghorra also
reminded us that in 1973 President. Suleiman Franjieh
“denounced the illegal occupation of parts of Lebanese
territory by Palestinian elements”.2 He recalled that the
terrorist PLO did not respect the many accords which
were concluded with them over the yearsto limit their
presence and activities in Lebanon. Let me again quote
‘.
from his statement:
“ . . . they [the Palestinians]. . . increasedtheinflux
of
arms into Lebanon . . . . They transformed most--if not
all-of the refugee camps into military bastions.
1 Official Records of the General Assembly,
nary Meetings, 32nd meeting,para. 61.
2 Ibid., para. 62.

I/ 1

.,

I

Thirty-Jirsl

Session. Ple-

. . . common-law criminals fleeing from Lebanese
justice found shelter and protection in the camps
. . .Those camps in fact became centres for the training
of mercenaries who were sent and financed by some
other Arab States . . . . Palestinian elements belonging to
various splinter organizations resorted to kidnapping
Lebanese-and
sometimes foreigners-holding
them
prisoners, questioning them, torturing them and even
sometimes killing them.. . . They committed all sorts of
crimes in Lebanon and also escaped Lebanese justice in
the protection of the camps. They smuggled goods
. . . . They went so far as to demand “protection” money.
“

“It is difficult to enumerate all the illegal activities
committed by those Palestinian elements.“3
50. In striking at the ‘terrorist bases from which the
murder gangs of the PLO launch their criminal raids
against the civilian population in Israel, my Government
is exercising its inherent right of self-defence, a right
enjoyed by every sovereign State, a right which has found
expression also in Article 51 of the Charter. Like any
other Government, the Government of Israel has the
right and, indeed, the duty to take all the measures necessary to protect the lives and safety of its citizens.
51. The right of a State to take the measures necessary
to hold back and to foil hostile activities emanating from
across its boundaries is a principle well recognized by
international law and international practice alike. What
is more, the very tolerance by a State on its territory of
armed bands engaged in hostile activities against another
State is considered a breach of international law on the
part of the State tolerating the presence of such bands on
its territory, irrespective of whether such a State is unwilling or unable to curb such activities. This principle was
clearly expressed by Fawcett in his series of lectures
delivered at the Hague Academy of International Law
under the title “Intervention
in International Law, A
Study of Some Recent Cases”:
‘6. . . where incursion of armed bands is a precursor
to an armed attack, or itself constitutes an attack, and
the authorities in the territory, from which the armed
bands came, are either unable or unwilling to control
and restrain them, then armed intervention, having as
its sole object the removal or destruction of their bases,
would . . . be justifiable under Article 51.“4
Israel’s response to the PLO’s criminal acts is thus what
any self-respecting,
sovereign State would do in the
circumstances.
52. Indeed, I ask, how many States represented here in
this chamber, would sit back passively and watch their
own women and children being killed and wounded by
terrorists? As the representative of a country that is one of
the prime targets of international terror, I can only repeat
what I have told the Council before: that the Government
’ Ibid. paras. 64-46.
’ J.E.S. Fawcett, “Intervention in International Law, A Study of
%Xne Recent Cases”, Academic de droit intematio@, Read &S
tours,

1961. vol. II, p.363.

,

8,

of Israel is in duty bound to take all measures necessary to
protect the lives and safety of all its citizens.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdel Rahman
(Polestine Liberation Organization) took a place at the Council tabIe.

53. Israel expects that the territory of Lebanon will not
be permitted to serve, as it has served in the past, as a
launching pad for harassment and indiscriminate terror
against the citizens of Israel.

60. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization has asked to speak, and I now call
on him.
61. Mr. ABDEL RAHMAN (Palestine Liberation Organization): I thank you sincerely, Mr. President, for allowing
me to speak and I apologize to the members of the Council
for speaking at such a late hour, but I promise to be brief.

54. Let me conclude by repeating what I said at the
outset, namely, that Israel sincerely desires peace with
and in Lebanon. Israel also desires that the national
sovereignty of Lebanon and the effective authority of its
Government be restored within the internationally recognized boundaries of that country.

62. I would not have asked to speak had it not been for the
barrage of lies, falsifications and distortions to which the
representative of the Government of Menachem Begin has
subjected the Council in his statement this afternoon.

55. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to inform the members of
the Council that I have just received a letter dated 31 May
[S/I33683 from the representative of Kuwait which
states:

63. The facts are very clear. Our position on Lebanon is
known to our Lebanese brothers and has been acknowledged by the representative of Lebanon. We are for the
sovereignty of Lebanon, for the territorial integrity of
Lebanon and for the national unity of Lebanon. We are
committed to those principles.

“I have the honour to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation to the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate in
the meetings of the Council to be convened pursuant to
the request by the representative of Lebanon which is
contained in document S/13356.”

64. We are not in Lebanon by choice. We are in Lebanon
because we have been expelled from our homes and property in Palestine, and we are in Lebanon because there are
people like the representative of Israel, who comes, like his
Prime Minister, from a country in eastern Europe. We are in
Lebanon because there are 3 million Jews and 80 per cent of
them are settlers and colonials occupying the houses and the
land of our people who are refugees in Lebanon now. We
are not in Lebanon because we want to be in Lebanon. We
are in Lebanon because we cannot be in Palestine at this
point. But we promise the international community and our
Lebanese brothers that once we have Palestine we will carry
the bones and the ashes of our martyrs out of Lebanon and
take them to Palestine.

56. This proposal is not made pursuant to rule 37 or rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure but, if approved by
the Council, the invitation to participate in the debate
would confer on the Palestine Liberation Organization the
same rights of participation as those conferred on Member
States when invited to participate pursuant to rule 37.
57. Does any member of the Council wish to speak on this
proposal?
58. Mr. PETREE (United States of America): The position of my Government on the proposal before us has been
made clear on a number of occasions in the past. We would
be prepared to agree to the requested hearing under rule 39,
which is the rule clearly applicable in this case. We are not
prepared, however, to agree to a hearing on the basis which
has been proposed and we therefore request that. the proposal be put to a vote.

65. The greatest act of terror that has been committed in
recent history has been the destruction of a nation, of the
Palestinian people. For the past 31 years our people have
been living in exile. For the past 12 years our people have
been living under military occupation. Military occupation
means soldiers with machine guns, violating the sanctity of
the people, violating the human rights of the people. The
occupation of our lands is unprecedented in human history.
As recently as on 2 May when the thirty-first anniversary of
the -Zionist State in Palestine was being celebrated, 70,000
settlers moved into the villages and towns of the West Bank,
beating people, insulting people, and one settler even
thought it proper to take out his gun and shoot a student at
Bir Zeit University.

59. The PRESIDENT: If no other member of the Council
wishes to speak at this stage, I take it that the Council is
ready to vote on the proposal of the representative of
Kuwait.
A vote was taken by show of han&.
Infavourr Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia
Against:

66. What does the international community expect of the
Palestinians? Does it really expect us to throw flowers at our
occupiers? Of course not; we are like the French people
under the Nazi occupation. They resisted occupation. We
are like every other people in this world which resists occupation and wants to live in freedom and dignity. That is our
purpose.

United States of America

Abstaining: France, Norway, Portugal, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The proposal was adopted by IO votes to 1, with 4
abstentions.
6

m

67. We are interested in peace. I do not think any other
people in the Middle East or elsewhere in the world is as
interested in peace as we the Palestinians, because no other
people in the world has suffered for as long and as often as
we have. We are’ separated from our families, we are
deprived of our right to be in our homes with our families.
That is the condition in which the Palestinian people are
living now, and, as a great people with a great heritage
which has existed for thousands of years and made a contribution to the international community throughout its history, we shall not disappear. We shall continue to struggle,
not for the sake of war but for the sake of peace. We shall
continue to struggle until our rights are restored to us, until
our right to self-determination is recognized and until our
right to establish our independent State in our homelandis
exercised.We shallnever acquiescein the colonial attitudes
or practicesagainst our people of the Zionist expansionist
settlers.It is our inherent God-given right to fight against
illegal occupation, and occupation is illegal and the members of the Security Council have recognizedthat occupation is illegal. Therefore resistanceto occupation must be
legal, becauseboth cannot be illegal. If occupationis illegal,
then to undo occupation is legal. Therefore, in resisting
occupation we are exercisingour basic, inherent, natural
right, becausewe are defendingour land, we are defending
our freedom.
68. The missionsof death that the Zionist State of Israel
conductson a daily basisagainstour civilian peopleand our
Lebanesebrothers are carried out with aircraft madeby the
United States: Phantoms, F-l%, F-16s. And the missiles
and rockets, which are sometimesas large as 1,000 kilograms,the clusterbombsand the fragmentation bombsthat
are usedto kill our civilians, and usedby their navy aswell
as their troops against our people, are made in the United
States.Ninety-nine per cent of the victims of the missionsof
death flown by Israeli Zionist pilots are civilians; only 1 per
cent, probably, are Palestiniancombatants.
69. We are told here that Israel is acting in self-defence.
What self-defence?If you have your boots on the neck of
someone and he tries to change that situation, does it
become aggressionbecausehe threatens the sta&r quo?
That isexactly our situation with the Zionists. they have had
their boots on our necks for the past 31 years, and the
international community, at one point at least, seemedto

accept that as the status quo. When we try to alter the
situation of victim and victimizer and makethe victim equal
to the victimizer we are calledterrorists and condemnedfor
exercisingour inherent right to changethe situation.
70. There have beencover-upsand bigjokes about autonomy and a peacefulsettlementin the Middle East. Onejoke
is that the other day a journalist askedthe Zionist, Menathem Begin “Suppose the Administrative Council on the
West Bank declaresindependence,what are you going to
do?“; and he said, “Well, I will clap them into gaol.”
71. This is the kind of autonomy that is offered to the
Palestinianpeople. At best what they receive may amount
to a bantustan and at worst to a reservation such asthose
herefor American Indians. We reject the conceptof bantustans and we will not be put into reservations. We shall
continue our legitimate struggleuntil our rights asa people
to self-determination and national independence are
recognized.
72. The PRESIDENT: As no further speakers are
inscribedto take the floor at this stage,I proposeto adjourn
the meeting now. The considerationby the Council of the
present agenda item will continue, and members‘f the
Council will be informed of the date of the next meeting.
73. Before we adjourn, I shouldlike asoutgoing President
of the Council to make a brief personalstatement.I should
like to thank the membersof the Council for the cooperative spirit they have shown throughout this month
and especiallyduring the consideration of the item before
us. Our work could not have been completedwithout the
help of the very competent personnelof the Secretariat, to
whom I also wish to expressmy appreciation.
74. In regardto the subjectunder discussion,I shouldlike,
before I relinquish my presidency,to addressan appealto
all parties, which I hope will be heeded, to respect the
cease-fire in accordance, inter aiia, with the Armistice
Agreement, to refrain from all acts of violence to help
UNIFIL to carry out the mission entrusted to it by the
Security Council in resolution 425 (1978).
The meetingroseat 2.15 p.m.

_’
:
.
:

.
:

_’
.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite
t Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section,
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

may
your

LES

PUBLICATIONS
be obtained
bookstore

or

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

DES

NATIONS

and
distributors
Nations,
Sales

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sont
en vente
dans
les librairies
d.+ositaires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
auprPs
de votre
libraire
B : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes.
New York ou Geneve.
NBAAHUR

KAK

IfOJIY’fIfTb

HJAamui
SHHLY
aau3eM
Haulrft.

OoraHw3auHw
O@bezWieHHbix
HauwR
MOXCI(HO wynwTb
B w?~xnbl~
bmmw arewrcTsax
so Bcex paRoHax
Papa.
Harronme
cnpamw
06 ~sAaHsu?x
a
x**xltHo*
Maraawsze
WAH n*ma=e
no anpecy
: Opramisawia
O@benwnemibrx
Cexqwa
no npoAazxe
HJ~a~HR.
HbH)-BopK
EXJIH XeHeBa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PIJBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
partes
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Ventas,

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

OPrAHZi

3AlWZI

DE

LAS

Naciones
Unidas
estin
de1 mundo.
Cons&e
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Price:

$U.S.

OG’bEAIIHEHHhIX

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

NACIONES

HAUUtl

UNIDAS

en venta
en libredas
a su librero
o dirfjase

1.50

y casas distria: Naciones

79-70002-February

1982-2.250
