A /76/PV.81

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

81st plenary meeting

Friday, 10 June 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Gastorn
(Tanzania), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(b) Election of members of the Economic and
Social Council
Letter dated 31 May 2022 from the Permanent
Mission of Denmark to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretariat (A/76/852)
The Acting President: The Assembly will first
proceed to a by-election to elect one member of the
Economic and Social Council to fill the seat of the
member that is relinquishing its seat before the end
of its term, in accordance with rule 140 of the rules
of procedure.
In connection with the by-election, I would like to
draw the attention of members to the letter dated 31 May
from the Permanent Representative of Denmark to the
United Nations (A/76/852), in which the Mission, in its
capacity as Chair of the Group of Western European
and other States for the month of May, announced that
Austria would relinquish its seat by the end of this year,
in favour of Liechtenstein. In line with the group’s
rotation agreement, Liechtenstein is endorsed to fill the
seat for the rest of the term.
As a result, one vacancy in the Council will occur,
and a new member must be elected to fill the unexpired

term of Austria, commencing on 1 January 2023 and
expiring on 31 December 2023. In accordance with
paragraph 4 of resolution 2847 (XXVI), of 20 December
1971, and taking into account that the vacancy will
occur from among the Western European and other
States, the new member should be elected from this
region. I should like to inform the Assembly that the
candidate that receives the greatest number of votes and
a two-thirds majority of those present and voting will be
declared elected. In accordance with rule 92 of the rules
of procedure, the election shall be held by secret ballot.
I should like to inform members that, as of 1 January
2023, the following eight States from among the
Western European and other States will be represented
on the Economic and Social Council: Belgium, Canada,
France, Israel, Italy, Portugal, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America. The names of these States should
therefore not appear on the ballot paper.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like
to remind representatives that, pursuant to rule 88 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, no
representative shall interrupt the voting except on a
point of order in connection with the actual conduct
of the voting. In addition, ballot papers will only
be given to the delegate seated directly behind the
country’s nameplate.
We shall now begin the voting process. Members
are requested to remain in their seats until all ballots
have been collected. I would like to remind members
that, at this stage, they are voting in the by-election for

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-37785 (E)

*2237785*

A/76/PV.81

one seat for the Western European and other States. The
election of 18 members of the Council will take place
immediately following this by-election. Ballot papers
will now be distributed, and the voting has thus begun.
In accordance with resolution 71/323 of 8 September
2017, the name of the State that has been communicated
to the Secretariat has been printed on the ballot papers.
Also, an additional blank line corresponding to the one
vacant seat to be filled has been provided on the ballot
paper for inscribing another State if desirable.
I request representatives to use only those ballot
papers that have been distributed and to put an “X” in
the box next to the name of the State printed on the
ballot paper or write the name of another eligible State
on the blank line. If the box next to the name of a State
is checked, the name of that State does not have to be
repeated on the blank line.
There should be no more than one checked box or
handwritten name for the vacant seat to be filled as
indicated on the ballot paper. A ballot will be declared
invalid if it contains more names of States from the
relevant region than the seat allocated to it.
Accordingly, members can only check the box
or write one name of an eligible Member State
from the Western European and other States in the
space provided.
If the ballot paper contains a vote for a Member
State that does not belong to the Western European and
other States or for a Member State that continues to be
a member of the Council next year, the ballot paper will
be declared invalid.
Finally, if a ballot paper contains any notation other
than a vote in favour of an eligible Member State, those
notations will be disregarded.
At the invitation of the President, the representatives
of
Algeria,
Ecuador,
Hungary,
Monaco,
Mozambique and Timor-Leste acted as tellers.
The Acting President: I shall now suspend the
meeting for five minutes.
The meeting was suspended at 10.15 a.m. and
resumed at 10.35 a.m.
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Group B — Western European and other States
Number of ballot papers:
191
2/22

10/06/2022

Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of Members voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Liechtenstein
Switzerland

0
191
16
175
117
174
1

Having obtained the required two-thirds majority,
Liechtenstein was elected a member of the Economic
and Social Council for a term of office beginning
on 1 January 2023 and ending on 31 December
2023 (decision 76/413B).
The Acting President: I congratulate Liechtenstein
on having been elected a member of the Economic and
Social Council.
The General Assembly will now proceed to the
election of 18 members of the Economic and Social
Council to replace those members whose term of office
expires on 31 December 2022.
The 18 outgoing members are: Bangladesh, Benin,
Botswana, China, Colombia, Congo, Denmark, Gabon,
Greece, Latvia, Montenegro, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway, Panama, the Republic of Korea, the Russian
Federation and Thailand. Pursuant to rule 146 of the
rules of procedure, those countries are eligible for
immediate re-election.
As of 1 January 2023, the following States will
be represented on the Economic and Social Council:
Afghanistan, Argentina, Belgium, Belize, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Eswatini,
France, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Madagascar, Mauritius, Mexico, Nigeria, Oman,
Peru, Portugal, Solomon Islands, Tunisia, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the United States of
America and Zimbabwe. The names of those States
should therefore not appear on the ballot papers.
In accordance with paragraph 4 of General
Assembly resolution 2847 (XXVI) of 20 December
1971, and taking into account the number of States that
will remain members of the Council after 1 January
2023, the 18 members should be elected as follows:
four from the Group of African States, four from the
Group of Asia-Pacific States, three from the Group
of Eastern European States, three from the Group of
22-37785

10/06/2022

Latin American and Caribbean States and four from
the Western European and other States. The ballot
papers reflect that pattern. I should like to inform
the Assembly that those candidates, their number not
exceeding the number of seats to be filled, that receive
the greatest number of votes and a two-thirds majority
of the votes by members present and voting, will be
declared elected.
If the number of candidates obtaining a twothirds majority is less than the number of members to
be elected, there shall be additional ballots to fill the
remaining places, the voting being restricted to the
candidates obtaining the greatest number of votes in
the previous ballot to a number not more than twice
the places remaining to be filled. Also, consistent with
past practice, in the case of a tied vote, and when it
becomes necessary to determine the candidates to be
elected or the ones to proceed to the next round of
restricted balloting, there will be a special restricted
ballot limited to those candidates that have obtained an
equal number of votes. May I take it that the General
Assembly agrees to those procedures?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Regarding candidatures,
I have been informed of the following. For the four
vacant seats for the Group of African States, four
endorsed candidates have been communicated, namely,
Botswana, Cabo Verde, Cameroon and Equatorial
Guinea. For the four vacant seats for the Group of
Asia-Pacific States, four endorsed candidates have
been communicated, namely, China, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Qatar and the Republic of
Korea. For the three vacant seats for the Group of
Eastern European States, three candidates have been
communicated, namely, the Russian Federation,
Slovakia and Slovenia. For the three vacant seats for the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, three
candidates have been communicated, namely, Brazil,
Colombia and Costa Rica. For the four vacant seats for
the Group of Western European and other States, four
endorsed candidates have been communicated, namely,
Denmark, Greece, New Zealand and Sweden.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
we shall now proceed to the election by secret ballot.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind representatives that, pursuant to rule 88 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, no
representative shall interrupt the voting except on a point
of order on the actual conduct of the voting. In addition,

A/76/PV.81

ballot papers will be given only to the representatives
seated directly behind the country’s nameplate.
We shall now begin the voting process. Members
are requested to remain seated until all ballots have
been collected. Ballot papers marked “A”, “B”, “C”,
“D” and “E” will now be distributed. The voting has
thus begun.
In accordance with resolution 71/323, of
8 September 2017, the names of the States that have
been communicated to the Secretariat at least 48 hours
prior to the election today have been printed on the
ballot papers for each of the regional groups. Also,
additional blank lines corresponding to the number of
vacant seats to be filled for each of the regional groups
have been provided on the ballot papers for inscribing
other names as necessary.
Representatives are requested to use only the ballot
papers that have been distributed and to check the
boxes next to the names of the States from the relevant
region for which they wish to vote and/or to write other
eligible names on the blank lines. If the box next to
the name printed on the ballot paper is checked, the
name of that State does not need to be repeated on the
blank line. The total number of checked boxes and
all handwritten names may not exceed the number of
vacant seats to be filled as indicated on the ballot paper.
A ballot paper containing more names of States from
the relevant region than the number of seats allocated
to it will be declared invalid.
Accordingly, for the ballot papers marked “A”, for
the African States, the total number of checked boxes
and handwritten names should not exceed four; for the
ballot papers marked “B”, for the Asia-Pacific States,
the total number of checked boxes and handwritten
names should not exceed four; for the ballot papers
marked “C”, for the Eastern European States, the
total number of checked boxes and handwritten names
should not exceed three; for the ballot papers marked
“D”, for the Latin America and Caribbean States, the
total number of checked boxes and handwritten names
should not exceed three; and for the ballot papers
marked “E”, for the Western European and other States,
the total number of checked boxes and handwritten
names should not exceed four.
The ballot paper will be declared invalid if none
of the names of the States on the ballot for which votes
were cast belong to the relevant region. If the ballot
paper of a region contains one of the following, the

22-377853/22

A/76/PV.81

ballot remains valid but the vote for these States will
not be counted: names of Member States that do not
belong to the region concerned or Member States that
will continue to be members of the Council.
If a ballot paper contains any notation other than
votes in favour of specific eligible candidates, those
notations will be disregarded.
At the invitation of the Acting President,
the representatives of Algeria, Ecuador,
Hungary,
Monaco,
Mozambique
and
Timor-Leste acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The Acting President: May I request delegations
that may not have voted to do so now by approaching
the front of the Hall to cast their votes.
The voting is now closed. No more ballot papers
will be accepted. In the interest of time, the General
Assembly will now proceed to consider the other items
announced in The Journal of the United Nations while
the ballots are being counted.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 115.
Agenda item 126
Multilingualism
Report of the Secretary-General (A/75/798)
Notes by the Secretary-General (A/75/960 and
A/75/960/Add.1)
Draft resolution (A/76/L.57)
The Acting President: Members will recall
that, in its decision 75/584, of 9 September 2021, the
General Assembly decided to defer consideration of
item 126, “Multilingualism”, as well as the reports
of the Secretary-General (A/75/798) and of the Joint
Inspection Unit (see A/75/960 and A/75/960/Add.1).
I now give the floor to the representative of Andorra
to introduce draft resolution A/76/L.57.
Mrs. Vives Balmaña (Andorra) (spoke in French):
On behalf of its more than 80 co-sponsors and of
Colombia, co-facilitator with my country, Andorra, I
have the honour to introduce draft resolution A/76/L.57,
entitled “Multilingualism”.
4/22

10/06/2022

First of all, we would like to express our warm
thanks to the States that co-sponsored the draft
resolution and participated actively and constructively
in the negotiation process. We would like in particular
to thank the Member States of the Group of Frenchspeaking Ambassadors and of the Group of Friends of
Spanish for their invaluable support.
We celebrate all the new contributions that have
undoubtedly enriched the draft resolution so that
multilingualism stands as another tool to promote,
internally and externally, the work of our Organization.
As a core value and founding principle of our
Organization, multilingualism, plays an essential
role in harmonious communication among peoples
and is undoubtedly one of the driving forces of
multilateral diplomacy.
Multilingualism promotes unity in diversity
as well as understanding, tolerance and dialogue
among countries. It has become one of the pillars that
contributes to the achievement of the objectives of the
United Nations set out in Article 1 of the United Nations
Charter, while helping to improve the efficiency, results
and transparency of our Organization. It is also one of
the priorities highlighted by the Secretary-General.
Allow me to highlight a few elements of the
draft resolution.
This year as in others, the Secretary-General
is requested to ensure that multilingualism is not
undermined by the measures taken in response to the
various crises that our Organization has experienced,
and that multilingualism is respected in all cases in
which such circumstances may recur in the future.
We once again thank the Coordinator for
Multilingualism for his work, in particular during
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and
we reiterate our support for the development of a
coherent framework on multilingualism throughout
the Secretariat that can support a comprehensive and
coordinated approach to multilingualism in the United
Nations system.
In the draft resolution, we therefore welcome the
ongoing development of the network of focal points
that supports the Coordinator for Multilingualism in
effectively and consistently implementing relevant
resolutions throughout all Secretariat entities, as well
as the formulation of concrete objectives with a view
to establishing an operational action plan in favour
of multilingualism.
22-37785

10/06/2022

With regard to the role of the Department of
Global Communications in multilingualism, the
draft resolution requests the Secretary-General to
intensify his efforts to ensure the full implementation
of existing mandates in the area of multilingualism
as they relate to information and communications. At
the same time, it highlights the delays in eliminating
the disparity between the use of English and the use
of the five other official languages in the archiving of
official meeting webcasts by the Department of Global
Communications. However, we acknowledge the
efforts made by the United Nations and the Department
of Global Communications to relay the Organization’s
messages in various languages around the world, via
information centres and in the official and non-official
languages of the Organization, as appropriate and
within the limits of existing resources.
In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, the
Organization’s website and social networks have
become essential tools for Member States, the
media, non-governmental organizations, educational
institutions and the general public. In that regard,
we would like to stress how important it is that the
Secretary-General ensure that the minimum standards
for multilingualism, which were developed by the
Department of Global Communications, guarantee
that all the official languages of the Organization are
used in an equitable manner on websites, regardless of
the content.
(spoke in Spanish)
With regard to human resources management
and staff training, the draft resolution encourages the
development of guidelines on the establishment of
language requirements and their application to future
vacancies and welcomes the development of the pilot
project to build an inventory of staff language skills,
but notes that the inventory has not yet been deployed.
In short, the draft resolution under consideration
is a tool for promoting equality among the six official
languages, as well as an acknowledgement of the
importance of the non-official languages.
I would not want to conclude without expressing
our appreciation for the work of the language services
staff in keeping multilingualism alive and active and
putting our agreements into practice in all areas of
the Organization. We hope to have the support of all
delegations for the adoption by consensus of draft
resolution A/76/L.57.

A/76/PV.81

Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to take the floor on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Spanish at the United Nations.
We are grateful for the arduous work carried out by
the facilitators, Colombia and Andorra, which allowed
us to reach agreement on this important draft resolution
(A/76/L.57) in spite of the difficulties caused by the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
The Group reiterates the importance of
multilingualism as a cornerstone of multilateralism.
It is also a central value and a fundamental principle
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. It is
a value that not only facilitates multilateral diplomacy
but also facilitates dialogue, tolerance and mutual
understanding. It also contributes to the achievement
of the three pillars of the United Nations: international
peace and security, sustainable development and
human rights.
Allow me to underscore the following points, which
are of relevance to the Group.
First, we recognize that the very essence of the
Organization is its universal nature, which is achieved,
inter alia, through multilingualism as a principal
mechanism of communication with and among the
citizens of the Member States. We therefore reiterate
the need to adopt a holistic approach to our exercise.
We need to begin by harmonizing terms, and we also
need to establish and disseminate original content on
official websites and social media platforms of the
United Nations.
Secondly, we urge the Secretariat to establish
strategies and action plans to achieve the effective
implementation of multilingualism as a cross-cutting
principle of the work of the Organization. Those
strategies must be coherent and must be implemented
in a harmonious fashion. Doing that would ensure the
implementation of multilingualism and language parity
across the United Nations system.
Thirdly, we regret that, in spite of the reiterated
appeals for compliance with the provisions established
by the linguistic recommendations of the various
organs and bodies of the Organization, we have not
yet achieved linguistic parity among the six official
languages, or full respect for multilingualism. We
reiterate the need to eradicate the clear preference
given to certain languages over others. We urge the
Secretariat to comply with the principle of linguistic

22-377855/22

A/76/PV.81

parity where the official languages of the Organization
are concerned.
Fourthly, in spite of the fact that more than two
years have elapsed since the beginning of the pandemic,
we reiterate the need for the interpretation services
and translation services to be fully implemented and
used across intergovernmental, in-person, virtual,
formal and informal meetings, as well as all meetings
held within the Organization. While we recognize the
challenges that we currently face, it is necessary to seek,
as soon as possible, alternative mechanisms that allow
us to uphold security standards, as well as mechanisms
that give us the capacity to cover all meetings in an
agile and efficient manner and at reasonable cost.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the readiness
of the Group of Friends of Spanish to continue moving
forward together for the benefit of the Spanish-speaking
community and for the benefit of the Organization as a
whole. In doing so, we will make substantive progress
on the issue under consideration today.
Mr. Fernandez De Soto Valderrama (Colombia)
(spoke in Spanish): Colombia aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of Costa Rica on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Spanish.
It was a privilege for Colombia to facilitate,
together with Andorra, draft resolution A/76/L.57,
which concerns an issue of the highest importance for
all Member States.
Colombia understands multilingualism as the
fundamental pillar of dialogue in the framework
of the United Nations, on which the foundations of
multilateralism and understanding among Member
States have been built. We greatly appreciate the
constructive spirit that characterized the participation
of all States throughout the negotiations, and we
express our appreciation for having reached agreement
to once again adopt by consensus the draft resolution
on multilingualism, thereby energizing the message
to the world from the United Nations. Likewise,
I want to thank the interpreters, who provided us
with their valuable service during the initial stage of
the negotiation process. Their effort is vital to our
daily work.
Our
determination
to
fully
implement
multilingualism since 1945 has made it possible to
bring positions closer together, address challenges
jointly and determine collective actions to fully realize
the mandate of our Organization. Languages express
6/22

10/06/2022

who we are and provide structure to our thoughts
and identities. That is why there can be no authentic
dialogue or effective international cooperation without
respect for linguistic diversity. They are a central
component of human rights and fundamental freedoms
and an essential tool to achieve the goals we have set for
ourselves to achieve sustainable development.
We should therefore reaffirm every day a strong
commitment to persist and ensure that our languages
leave their mark in the globalized world. It is clear that
languages and multilingualism make an extraordinary
contribution to the strengthening of inclusive societies
that leave no one behind, overcoming language barriers
and encouraging dialogue as the main tool of the
multilateral system.
We must be aware that the recovery following the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic requires,
hand in hand with determined political leadership,
a robust multilateralism that is conducive to making
informed decisions and that has a vision of the future.
That is where the full application of interconnected
multilateralism is essential. It strengthens coordination
among all international community actors who are able
to contribute to that end.
Undoubtedly, a multilingual approach enhances
the capacity of the United Nations to take action, bring
key messages and essential information to the entire
population in their languages so that they may confront
their daily realities and contribute to the constant
improvement of the quality of life. The draft resolution
that we will adopt today grants the appropriate
mandates and defines the relevant actions that promote
the preservation of various cultures and languages,
while fostering tolerance, the culture of peace and
non-violence.
As a Spanish-speaking country, we would like to
highlight the substantial progress made by our language
at the United Nations, according to reports of the
Secretary-General. We are pleased to note significant
growth on United Nations News platforms during the
COVID-19 pandemic, with an increase from 20 million
page views in 2019 to 70 million in 2020, with the United
Nations News site in Spanish experiencing an increase
of 265 per cent. We appreciate the fact that visits to the
Organization’s web pages in Spanish reached 30 million
visitors, and we are pleased that Spanish represents
26.7 per cent of the total visits to all United Nations
websites worldwide. We enthusiastically highlight that
the Spanish website of United Nations News was the
22-37785

10/06/2022

A/76/PV.81

most visited of the nine United Nations News websites
in 2021, 138 per cent above the 2019 average.

spreading greater awareness about global issues among
millions of Hindi-speaking people around the world.

Although there are many positive results, we cannot
ignore the fact that we observed many challenges to
the full implementation of multilingualism throughout
negotiations on the draft resolution. The trend towards
monolingualism, the scarce availability of resources
in the Secretariat to ensure language parity, the rapid
advance of phenomena such as disinformation and
the widening of the technology and information and
communications technologies gap are some of the
challenges that require our continued focus so that we
may rapidly overcome them.

In that context, I would like to recall resolution
13 (I), adopted on 13 February 1946 during the first
session of the General Assembly, which stated that the
United Nations cannot achieve its purposes unless the
people of the world are fully informed of its aims and
activities. It is imperative that multilingualism at the
United Nations, in a true sense, be embraced. India will
support the United Nations in achieving that objective.

The Assembly can continue to count on Colombia,
as a member of the Group of Friends of Spanish, to
maintain its unwavering commitment to affirm the
practice of multilingualism for the sake of the principles
of equity and justice towards all the regions represented
in the Organization.
In conclusion, I wish to recall the inspiring words
of Nelson Mandela:
“If you talk to a man in a language he understands,
that goes to his head. If you talk to him in his
language, that goes to his heart”.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Let me begin by
thanking the co-facilitators, Andorra and Colombia,
for successfully steering the consultations on draft
resolution A/76/L.57, on multilingualism, which India
is happy to co-sponsor. Multilingualism is recognized
as a core value of the United Nations, and we also thank
the Secretary-General for prioritizing multilingualism.
This year for the first time, the draft resolution
mentions the Hindi language. It encourages the
Department of Global Communications to continue
disseminating important communications and messages
in official as well as non-official languages, including
in the Hindi language. It also mentions the Bangla
and Urdu languages for the first time. We welcome all
those additions.
India has been partnering with the Department
of Global Communications since 2018 by providing
an extrabudgetary contribution to mainstream and
consolidate news and multimedia content in Hindi.
As part of those efforts, the Hindi@UN project was
launched in 2018, with the objective of enhancing the
public outreach of the United Nations in Hindi and

Mr. Arbeiter (Canada) (spoke in French): Allow
me, at the outset, to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (A/75/798), as well as the co-facilitators of draft
resolution A/76/L.57, Andorra and Colombia, for all
their efforts during the negotiations. Canada is proud
to once again co-sponsor the draft resolution this year.
(spoke in Spanish)
I wish to sincerely thank Andorra and Colombia for
their leadership of this process, which is so vital to our
work here at the United Nations.
(spoke in French)
Multilingualism is one of the core values of the
United Nations. It allows us to exchange and share
ideas and debate in the six official languages. In that
regard, I wish to warmly thank the interpreters and the
translators for all their work.
It is important to note that multilingualism has
suffered during the coronavirus disease pandemic. Too
often, meetings were offered without interpretation
services, which hindered many representatives from
fully participating in our work. We hope that lessons
have been drawn from that experience.
(spoke in English)
Canada also notes the difficulties reported
by Secretariat entities in compiling accurate
and comprehensive data for the report of the
Secretary-General and welcomes efforts to produce
disaggregated data by language to allow for
evidence-based policymaking.
More than one in five Canadians were born outside
Canada. As an officially bilingual country, with 60
indigenous languages and citizens who communicate
in more than 200 languages, Canada understands that
with a language comes cultures, heritage, experience,
insights and knowledge that enrich the fabric of our
communities. Multilingualism promotes dialogue and

22-377857/22

A/76/PV.81

understanding, which are essential to our work here
at the United Nations. Canada will remain strongly
committed to its promotion and its preservation.
Mr. Segura Aragón (El Salvador) (spoke in
English): El Salvador aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Costa Rica on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Spanish and would like to make
some additional remarks in our national capacity.
We would like to take this opportunity to echo the
thanks expressed for the great dedication and efforts of
the co-facilitators, Colombia and Andorra, which today
will allow us to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.57, which
is important for the work of the Organization.
As a core value of the United Nations,
multilingualism not only contributes to achieving
the purposes and principles of the Organization but
is also a crucial component of multilateral diplomacy
and strengthens our ability to communicate with
the peoples of the world in their own languages.
Consequently, we underscore the value of adopting the
draft resolution, which we believe to be an important
step towards recognizing that multilingualism is pivotal
to guaranteeing the relevance, smooth functioning and
sustainability of the United Nations.
The discussions that were held during negotiations
were undertaken after the coronavirus disease pandemic
had already had a profound impact on the work of the
Organization. As such, we believe it is of the utmost
importance that the draft resolution recognize the
measures adopted to preserve multilingualism in
turbulent times.
Beyond challenges related to the crisis that the
Organization has faced in recent years, we wish to
recognize that there are also long-term challenges to
ensuring that multilingualism is a cross-cutting principle
that permeates the work of the entire Organization. We
therefore issue an appeal for linguistic parity to be
upheld among the six official languages. We deeply
regret that, although that principle is enshrined in a
significant number of intergovernmental decisions, it
is still not upheld.
We are convinced that the internal and external
implementation of multilingual policies and strategies
by the Organization makes a difference. Today more
than ever, disseminating multilingual information is
vital to fully inform the peoples of the world of the goals
and activities of the United Nations and to strengthen
international support for its activities.
8/22

10/06/2022

In that vein, we hope that draft resolution
A/76/L.57 — and indeed all resolutions that establish
language regimes for the official languages of the
United Nations and the working languages of the
Secretariat — will be fully implemented to ensure
that multilingualism becomes a genuine cross-cutting
principle and core value of the Organization.
Ms. Fatima (Bangladesh): I would like to thank
the President for convening this important debate on
multilingualism, as well as the Secretary-General for
his report (A/75/798). I also want to acknowledge with
appreciation the contribution and leadership of UnderSecretary-General Abelian in his role as Coordinator of
Multilingualism and to take this opportunity to thank
the Permanent Missions of Colombia and Andorra for
their excellent facilitation of the multilingualism draft
resolution, A/76/L.57, of which we are pleased to be
a sponsor.
Multilingualism continues to face challenges.
Nearly half of the world’s languages are endangered and
at risk of becoming extinct by the turn of the century.
According to a study by UNESCO, an estimated 40 per
cent of the world’s population do not have access to
an education in a language they speak or understand.
There is clearly an urgent need to save our languages,
which are our heritage and identity.
Bangladesh’s commitment to multilingualism is
rooted in its history. We are perhaps the only country
in the world that has had to shed blood to protect the
sanctity of our mother tongue. On 21 February 1952,
a group of courageous young men and women gave
their lives to establish Bangla as our State language.
What started as a movement to assure our language
of its rightful place led to the emergence in 1971 of
the independent State of Bangladesh — a land of the
Bengali, the Bangla-speaking people. The most fitting
tribute to the language martyrs of Bangladesh was
UNESCO’s proclamation in 1999 that 21 February
each year would be observed as International Mother
Language Day, subsequently endorsed by multiple
resolutions of the General Assembly. All States
Members of the United Nations have observed that
day every year since 1999 in order to promote mother
languages and multilingualism.
In Bangladesh, we promote mother-language-based
education for all. There are 132 schools that provide
education in the mother languages of our various
smaller ethnic and tribal groups. The national
curriculum textbooks are also produced in the main
22-37785

10/06/2022

five tribal languages. In Dhaka in 2001 we established
the International Mother Language Institute, which
works with UNESCO for the preservation of the nearly
extinct languages of the world.
In a rapidly changing global scenario, we need to stay
true to our commitment to promoting multilingualism,
and for that we need concerted efforts at all levels.
Let me share a few thoughts in that regard. First, the
United Nations should lead by example in promoting
multilingualism in its work. A large number of nations
and peoples of the world are excluded from using their
own languages at the United Nations, including Bangla
speakers, who represent more than 260 million people
globally, as Bangla is the seventh most spoken language
in the world. We would like to see greater efforts by the
United Nations to ensure the inclusion of all languages
in our Organization, including sign languages.
Secondly, the United Nations should use its
communications tool to reach a global audience at
large. In that regard, we commend the Department of
Global Communications for its efforts in highlighting
some recent important communications and messages
of the Secretary-General in non-official languages,
including Bangla, in addition to the Organization’s
official languages. The United Nations country teams
and especially its information centres should be
strengthened in order to promote and translate all of
our Organization’s documents into various national and
local languages.
Thirdly, technology has an important role in
promoting multilingualism. However, to reap the
benefits of technology, we must ensure that it is
accessible to all, especially those living in lessdeveloped and developing countries where the digital
divide is a major challenge. We appreciate the use in
the United Nations, including during the coronavirus
disease pandemic, of innovative online language tools
and translation technologies such as eLUNa, which
help make human translation more efficient, as well as
the United Nations terminology database, UNTERM.
But we need to see them further scaled up and, most
importantly, made accessible to the developing world.
I would like to conclude by reiterating my
delegation’s full support to all United Nations efforts
to promote and preserve multilingualism everywhere.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the President for convening this important
meeting on multilingualism, one of the core values of

A/76/PV.81

multilateralism as enshrined in Article 1 of the Charter
of the United Nations. The Kingdom of Morocco would
also like to take this opportunity to extend its heartfelt
thanks to Andorra and Colombia, the facilitators of the
draft resolution on multilingualism (A/76/L.57), for
their valuable and tireless efforts, which have proved
effective throughout the negotiation period. The draft
resolution has a clear vision, constructive objectives and
a realistic methodology for developing multilingualism
within the United Nations. As in previous years,
Morocco has become a sponsor of today’s draft
resolution, in a demonstration of the great importance
we attach to multilingualism and multilateralism in the
United Nations.
Morocco welcomed the Secretary-General’s
report on multilingualism (A/75/798), which once
again emphasized the vital importance and urgency of
multilingualism in the United Nations as a necessary
tool for achieving our goals and serving all peoples
throughout the world. We thank and congratulate
the Secretary-General and the Secretariat for their
tireless efforts to consolidate multilingualism within
our Organization, and in that context, we reiterate
our deep appreciation to the Secretary-General for
appointing a Coordinator of Multilingualism within
the Organization.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights many
facts that the Kingdom of Morocco has always defended.
First, multilingualism contributes significantly to
the efficiency, performance and transparency of the
United Nations. We once again stress the importance
of linguistic parity among the Organization’s six
official languages.
Secondly, the coronavirus disease pandemic has
increased the demand for virtual work, particularly
through online platforms and social media. In that regard,
I commend the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management and the Department of Global
Communications for their tireless efforts in enabling
us to continue using the six official languages of the
United Nations as much as possible throughout the
pandemic. I want to underscore the importance of the
use of virtual language tools to ensure linguistic parity
among the six official languages.
Thirdly, supporting multilingualism at the United
Nations in accordance with the universal principles and
values enshrined in the Charter also requires Member
States to provide the important and necessary financial

22-377859/22

A/76/PV.81

support to the Secretariat and the Organization in order
to consolidate multilingualism.
Fourthly, strengthening the roles of civil-society
actors and other stakeholders, including academic
specialists, enables them to play an active and vital role
in strengthening and promoting multilingualism within
our Organization.
Morocco has always played a significant and
internationally recognized role as a humanitarian,
cultural, civilizational and religious focal point as well
as a bridge between Africa, Europe and the Arab world.
As a country with a long history of multiculturalism,
the Kingdom of Morocco plays an important role in
defending multilingualism and respecting the diversity
of identities and cultures that we believe greatly
enriches every nation, as well as the international
community in general.
(spoke in French)
We consider languages to be priceless treasures.
When a language is lost, centuries of memory, history,
skills and knowledge about people, places and nations
disappear with it. The threat of losing languages that
are dying or becoming endangered is far graver than
losing a physical, tangible or recoverable object. At
stake are the traditions, as well as the concepts of time
and space, of the people who use those languages as a
means of expression. In that regard, languages are not
merely means of communication but are ceaselessly
evolving, living archives that hold within them valuable
information about history, people and geographies.
Languages are also constantly evolving to incorporate
new data into their memories, reflecting developments
in the societies in which they are spoken. That is why we
must ensure that multilingualism is strengthened at all
levels, taking into account the continuing developments
across language sectors.
In addition, respect for multilingualism within
our Organization contributes to the strengthening
of intercultural and intercivilizational dialogue, and
ultimately to consolidating a culture of peace that
reflects the linguistic and cultural diversity of different
nations and civilizations. Multilingualism contributes
to strengthening the implementation of the three pillars
of our Organization, namely, peace and security,
development and human rights.
Finally, the celebration of multilingualism this
year is another important reminder that we must take
into account the expression of linguistic realities in our
10/22

10/06/2022

young people and societies in order to shape generations
that are anchored in our cultures and identities, while
also maintaining a strong link with the rest of the world.
Strengthening multilingualism within the United
Nations will undoubtedly contribute to that noble goal.
Ms. Tambwe (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation would like to thank the co-facilitators of
draft resolution A/76/L.57.
I want to highlight the importance of multilingualism
as a fundamental value for enhancing communication
in the United Nations system. Kiswahili, one of the
unofficial languages recognized by our Organization,
ranks among the 10 most-spoken languages in the world,
with more than 200 million speakers. In November,
UNESCO recognized Kiswahili and designated 7 July
as World Kiswahili Language Day. For the first time
this year, Kiswahili will be celebrated at the United
Nations. I therefore wish to welcome everyone to the
commemorative event for World Kiswahili Language
Day that will be held here at the United Nations on
7 July.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 126.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/76/L.57, entitled “Multilingualism”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): The present
statement, pertaining to paragraph 10 of draft resolution
A/76/L.57 and made in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, will also
be distributed to the Member States.
The request contained in paragraph 10 of the draft
resolution would entail the translation in 2022 of the
Procurement Manual into three additional languages,
with a word count of approximately 78,400 words, to
be made available in all official languages. That would
constitute an addition to the documentation workload for
the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management in 2022, and the related non-recurrent
resources requirements are estimated at $139,000.
However, the Department will make every effort to
implement the request within its existing capacities.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt draft
resolution A/76/L.57, no additional requirements would
arise under the programme budget for 2022.
22-37785

10/06/2022

A/76/PV.81

I should like to announce that, since the submission
of draft resolution A/76/L.57, and in addition to those
delegations listed in the document, the following
countries have also become sponsors of draft resolution
A/76/L.57: Afghanistan, Albania, Antigua and
Barbuda, Bahrain, Belgium, Benin, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Central
African Republic, Chad, Comoros, El Salvador, Gabon,
the Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Guinea, Iceland,
Indonesia, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi,
Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria,
North Macedonia, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Qatar, the Republic of Moldova, Suriname, Togo and
Timor-Leste.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.57?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 76/268).

A/76/L.57

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 126?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 124 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will resume its consideration of agenda item 124,
entitled “Strengthening of the United Nations system”,
to continue the debate, pursuant to resolution 76/262,
of 26 April 2022, on the situation as to which a veto
was cast by two permanent members of the Security
Council at its 9048th meeting, on 26 May 2022, under
the agenda item entitled “Non-proliferation/Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea”.
Mr. Amorín (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): This is
the first time that the General Assembly has convened
pursuant to resolution 76/262, entitled “Standing
mandate for a General Assembly debate when a veto
is cast in the Security Council”, which was adopted by
consensus on 26 April and co-sponsored by Uruguay.
The resolution — through its mechanism for
enshrining transparency and accountability for the
permanent members of the Security Council — marks
a break with previous Security Council practice and a
turning point in the relationship between the Council
and the Assembly. The new framework does not alter

that institutional relationship or the specific mandates
of the Council and the Assembly; rather, as we
mentioned, it adds a mechanism of accountability and
increased transparency for the benefit of all Members
of the Organization.
For its part, our country continues to be in favour
of such practices for ensuring accountability among the
permanent members of the Council, such as through
our decision to join the French-Mexican initiative for
members to suspend the use of the veto in the event
of systematic human rights violations. Article 24 of
the Charter of the United Nations confers the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security on the Council, in accordance with
the purposes and principles of our Organization.
That is why for Uruguay, it is crucial that the work
of the Council on this serious matter not be hindered.
When, as in this case, the Council’s permanent
members do not use the veto mechanism responsibly,
our Organization is prevented from realizing its most
important purpose, as enshrined in the Preamble to
the Charter and its Article 1. We therefore reiterate
the need for the responsible use of the veto mechanism
and highlight the efforts in that regard of an important
group of Member States, including Uruguay, in the
framework of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group.
We urge the permanent members of the Council
to seek to negotiate, through dialogue, additional
solutions to respond to the situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and return to adopting
them by consensus as resolutions of the Council,
as was the practice until recently. With regard to
the issue in question that resulted in draft resolution
S/2022/431 being submitted to the Council, we would
like to reaffirm Uruguay’s position condemning the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s ballistic
missile test launches and reiterating the call for strict
compliance with previous resolutions of the Council on
that situation, all of which were adopted by consensus.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must
also comply with the international non-proliferation
regime, in particular its obligations under the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards. We
would like to take this opportunity to recall our position,
as a signatory State to the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty, that ensuring the Treaty’s entry into force
is essential.

22-3778511/22

A/76/PV.81

Mr. Penaranda (Philippines): The Philippines
condemns the intercontinental ballistic missile test
conducted by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. That reckless and provocative action poses
a grave threat to all nations, compromises the global
non-proliferation regime and undermines peace and
stability on the Korean peninsula, the entire region and
the world.
Peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region
is invariably linked to the situation on the Korean
peninsula. We are firm in our conviction that there is
no military solution to a fraternal conflict and that the
pursuit of lasting peace in the Korean peninsula is the
collective responsibility of our entire region.
The Philippines will continue to play a constructive
role in advancing a peaceful and denuclearized Korean
peninsula through confidence-building measures
among stakeholders bilaterally and Association of
Southeast Asian Nations-led mechanisms.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): Lithuania aligns
itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the
European Union and its member States (see A/76/
PV.77). I would like to add the following remarks in my
national capacity.
We share the concern of the States Members of
the United Nations with regard to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s continuation and further
development of its unlawful nuclear weapons and
ballistic missile programmes, in particular its most
recent launches of ballistic missiles.
We urge the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to comply fully with all its obligations under
the resolutions of the Security Council. It remains of
the utmost importance that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea engage in meaningful discussions
with all relevant parties with a view to building a basis
for sustainable peace and security and that it take steps
to pursue the complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
Lithuania is concerned that the misuse of the veto
power by Russia and China — two permanent members
of the Security Council — has prevented the Council
from acting in fulfilment of its responsibility to maintain
peace and security. Draft resolution S/2022/431 was
rightly supported by 13 members of the Council, but
that did not prove sufficient for a subsequent decision
based on the earlier consensus decision of the Council
to impose further sanctions in the event of a further
12/22

10/06/2022

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea nuclear test or
launch of a ballistic missile system capable of reaching
intercontinental ranges.
In that regard, we welcome the President’s prompt
decision to schedule today’s plenary meeting, thereby
for the first time activating resolution 76/262, entitled
“Standing mandate for a General Assembly debate
when a veto is cast in the Security Council”. The current
context reminds us of the dire implications of the
reduced ability of the Council to take effective action
against threats to international peace and security. Let
us underscore once again the pressing need to reaffirm
our commitment to the Charter of the United Nations
and strengthening the role of the General Assembly.
Mr. Lam Padilla (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I must say that I am concerned that we are
meeting in the General Assembly to consider an issue
that, unfortunately, was not properly addressed by the
Security Council. Today the Assembly has convened,
in accordance with the provisions of resolution 76/262,
because the use of the veto by two permanent members
of the Council blocked it from adopting the measures
necessary for it to exercise its essential functions,
namely, to maintain international peace and security.
Guatemala considers it necessary and timely for the
Council to take measures in the light of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s rapid and illegal
development of nuclear and ballistic-missile launching
activities, which seriously threaten the security of
the Korean peninsula and the rest of the international
community. Given the very great importance of that
issue, it is regrettable that the veto was misused on draft
resolution S/2022/431, which contained significant
actions in full accordance with the non-proliferation
regime and addressed the deplorable humanitarian
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
including with regard to cyber space.
Guatemala supports efforts towards disarmament
and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
We adhere to the vast majority of international
frameworks on that issue, and our principled position
in support of the non-proliferation regime continues to
be more valid and necessary than ever.
It is unacceptable that, since the beginning of this
year alone, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has conducted more than 12 ballistic missile tests,
including intercontinental missile tests, putting the lives
of thousands of people at risk and flagrantly violating
22-37785

10/06/2022

A/76/PV.81

the Charter of the United Nations, the resolutions
of the Council and the provisions of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, among
other instruments. Such actions undoubtedly disrupt
international peace and security, increase regional
tensions and hinder multilateral efforts to promote
dialogue, trust and cooperation towards ensuring peace
and denuclearization on the Korean peninsula.

We call on the members of the Council that hold
the right of the veto to consider weighing the cost of
rendering an already dysfunctional body unable to
fulfil its higher mission of effectively ensuring, through
collective action, international peace and security,
as well as preventing and removing threats to it. The
membership is fully cognizant of what needs to be done
in order to make progress in that regard.

In that regard, my delegation calls on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to comply
with the basic obligations under the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. We find it unacceptable that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues
to consider carrying out such tests, both on land and
at sea, without taking into account the environmental
and humanitarian consequences of such harmful and
irreversible explosions. In addition, my country regrets
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea places
a higher priority on developing and testing nuclear
weapons, including ballistic missiles, than on investing
in the development of its population.

We are aware of the complex context in which
today’s debate is taking place. For that reason, we call
for flexibility and increased foresight in our discussions,
as well as solutions to enable this new mechanism
to truly contribute to constructively addressing
international crises, because we cannot leave them
in limbo. We recognize that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s continued launches of ballistic
missiles, including those with an intercontinental
range, represent a clear threat to international peace
and security.

Finally, Guatemala urges for dialogue to continue
in pursuit of a diplomatic and definitive solution to
the conflict. We also urge the Council to continue to
work with Member States, taking into account the
seriousness of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s actions, and to fulfil its responsibilities under
our Organization’s Charter to put an end to those
constant threats to international peace and security.
Mr. Ojeda (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
would like to underscore that today’s meeting — the
first of its kind activating the standing mandate for a
General Assembly debate when a veto is cast in the
Security Council — will prove useful in our pursuit
of transparency and accountability. We recognize the
complexity of the use of the veto and understand that
there are no middle-ground options or compromises
built into that mechanism.
In that regard, as a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, my country has
subscribed to its code of conduct on Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes. We urge the permanent members
of the Council not to use the veto in the face of such
atrocities. Chile also supports the French-Mexican
initiative to suspend the use of the veto in the event
of mass atrocities and serious violations of human
rights and international law — and that initiative is
complementary to the group’s code of conduct.

Finally, we urge respect for the decisions of the
Council, the Charter of the United Nations and the
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation regime. The
only way to return to the negotiating table is through a
peaceful and diplomatic solution. That is the inalienable
function of multilateralism, the very raison d’être and
essence of our Organization.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): As a
founding Member of our Organization, Argentina is
firmly committed to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. We have maintained a
very firm position against the use of the veto since the
negotiations at the San Francisco Conference in 1945.
Unfortunately, the General Assembly is meeting
today to address yet another threat to international
peace and security on which the Security Council has
been unable to take action, owing to the use of the veto
on draft resolution S/2022/431, of 26 May, by some of
its permanent members (see S/PV.9048).
Argentina sees the veto as a privilege undermining
the principle of sovereign equality among States, and
it should be abolished. We have reiterated our position
against the veto and in favour of the reform of the
Council, which has received the consensus support of
Member States every time the issue has been considered,
particularly in the process of intergovernmental
negotiations. The Council must be more democratic,
transparent, efficient, representative and accountable
to the international community.

22-3778513/22

A/76/PV.81

On 25 March, Argentina issued a communiqué in
which we expressed our strongest condemnation of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s launch of an
intercontinental ballistic missile on 24 March, in yet
another act of hostility and provocation against the
international community.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
nuclear programme has been identified as one of the
most relevant challenges to the international nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation regime, given
the fact that it withdrew from the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) by openly
violating it in developing technology for non-peaceful
uses while it was a State party to the Treaty.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
disassociated itself from the NPT safeguards system
following its denunciation of the Treaty in 2003, to
which it had acceded in 1985. Between 2006 and 2017,
it conducted six nuclear tests of different scales, each
of which gave rise to Council resolutions condemning
its actions and imposing different types of punitive
measures for limiting and delaying the progress of its
nuclear programme.
Argentina has always strongly condemned the
actions and military programme of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. We call for full compliance
with the obligations under relevant Council resolutions
and urge the regime to return to the NPT. We call on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to cooperate
without delay with the International Atomic Energy
Agency in the full and effective implementation of its
NPT Safeguards Agreement and resolve all outstanding
issues, including those that have arisen during the
period in which the Agency’s inspectors were absent
from the country.
The situation in North Korea highlights the
importance of the universalization and early entry into
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
as well as the need to achieve general, verifiable and
complete nuclear disarmament. Argentina takes this
opportunity to once again urge the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to immediately comply with the
relevant Security Council resolutions, putting an end
to this pattern of hostile acts in the region, which
constitute a threat to international peace and security.
Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Measures adopted by
the Security Council under the provisions of Chapter
14/22

10/06/2022

VII of the Charter of the United Nations are of a legally
binding nature for all Members of our Organization.
However, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is
convinced that such measures should always be seen as
a tool and not as an end in themselves.
More than 15 years have passed since the Security
Council adopted a strict, far-reaching and comprehensive
sanctions regime against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. That was accompanied by a series
of unilateral coercive measures illegally imposed by
the United States Government, which clearly had, and
continue to have today, a negative impact on the wellbeing and human rights of all the people of North Korea.
Today the situation on the Korean peninsula is of
great concern to the entire international community,
particularly amid the current international context.
We are therefore extremely concerned by the fact that,
although time has shown that sanctions are not the
solution to this issue and that unilateral approaches
have failed, there is an attempt to insist, in a cruel and
inhumane manner, on the expansion of such regimes,
which ultimately end up affecting the most vulnerable,
especially today, when the world and the heroic people
of that nation continue to face the onslaught of the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
Against that backdrop, our country believes that,
if denuclearization is truly to be achieved, the time
has come to change the approach to dealing with the
situation of the Korean peninsula. In that regard, we
believe that three specific steps should be taken as a
matter of urgency.
First, the Security Council must play a proactive,
inclusive and constructive role on the issue.
Secondly, progress must be made in alleviating
the human suffering of the heroic North Korean
people, which requires, on the one hand, expanding the
humanitarian exemptions to the sanctions imposed by
the Security Council and, on the other hand, putting an
end to the illegal application of all coercive, restrictive,
punitive and unilateral measures against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
Thirdly, dialogue and negotiation among the
parties must be pursued as the only way to achieve
tangible results.
Like any situation, the issue of the Korean peninsula
must be addressed in a holistic and comprehensive
manner, taking its background and root causes into
22-37785

10/06/2022

account and bearing in mind the developments,
dynamics and realities in that region That is why we can
understand the reasons that led the Chinese and Russian
delegations to vote against draft resolution S/2022/431,
submitted to the Security Council on 26 May, which
resulted in the convening of this meeting. In that
regard, we acknowledge the transparency with which
both delegations have participated in this meeting and
explained their reasons for vetoing the draft text.
In that context, we take this opportunity to draw
attention to the increasing trend to escalate provocation
and threats against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. That is evidenced by the expansion of the
military presence of Powers outside the region on the
Korean peninsula, the increase in the number of joint
military exercises, the launching of ballistic missiles by
the United States and the Republic of Korea last Monday,
the establishment of new partnerships and military
blocs in the region and even statements by high-ranking
officials calling for the deployment of nuclear weapons
in the region, in addition to the lack of reciprocity and
the failure of the United States Government to fulfil
its commitments made between 2018 and 2019. In that
regard, it is necessary to emphasize that the principle of
the indivisibility of security means that the security of
one country cannot be at the expense of that of others.
In addition, today we once again reiterate our
grave concern about the recent cooperation agreements
on nuclear submarines among the United States, the
United Kingdom and Australia, which threaten nuclear
proliferation in the South Pacific, in violation of the
Rarotonga Treaty, and which, furthermore, seem to
revive the Cold War mentality by resurrecting the
politics of alliances and zones of military control based
on nuclear potential. We stress that no first use of
nuclear weapons at any time or under any circumstances
and no use or threat of use of weapons, especially in
nuclear-weapon-free zones, must remain a matter of
common sense in order to maintain international peace
and security.
In the light of all the above, as a responsible
member of the international community, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela calls for an end to any
provocation, policy of maximum pressure or hostile
action against the Democratic Republic of Korea, as
well as interference in its internal affairs. Instead, we
deem it necessary to pursue all diplomatic efforts to
create an atmosphere conducive to the early resumption
of dialogue and negotiation among the parties in order

A/76/PV.81

to achieve a mutually acceptable political solution to
this situation in the interests of regional peace, stability
and security. We also call for the urgent implementation
of confidence-building and reconciliation measures,
in which the legitimate and reasonable concerns of
the Pyongyang authorities must necessarily be taken
into account.
In conclusion, true to the principles of our
Bolivarian Diplomacy for Peace, we reaffirm our
strong determination to preserve, promote and
defend the United Nations Charter, as well as our
principled and historic position on disarmament
and non-proliferation, including our unwavering
commitment to efforts towards building a world free
of nuclear weapons through their total, irreversible,
verifiable and non-discriminatory elimination, while
calling on the parties to exercise maximum restraint
and to avoid taking any steps that could escalate
tensions and result in serious miscalculations with
inconceivable consequences for all humankind. Only
political dialogue, direct negotiation and diplomacy
will lead to lasting peace and the denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula.
Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
the European Union, in its capacity as observer (see
A/76/PV.77). Our delegation would like to make some
remarks in its national capacity.
As one of the co-sponsors of resolution 76/262,
entitled “Standing mandate for a General Assembly
debate when a veto is cast in the Security Council”,
Ukraine welcomes today’s debate. We believe that this
debate will strengthen multilateralism and contribute
to international peace and stability.
However, we regret that the Security Council
failed to exercise its primary responsibility when draft
resolution S/2022/431, on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s nuclear and ballistic-missile
programme, was vetoed at the Security Council last
month (see S/PV.9048).
Ukraine
strongly
condemns
the
recent
intercontinental ballistic missile launch conducted by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
series of other ballistic missile launches conducted by
Pyongyang throughout 2022 in blatant violation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, which undermine
international peace and security as well as the global
non-proliferation regime.

22-3778515/22

A/76/PV.81

We urge the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to fully implement and respect all Security
Council resolutions related to its weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) and ballistic missile programmes
by abandoning all nuclear and any other existing
WMD and ballistic missile programmes in a complete,
verifiable and irreversible manner.
It is worth recalling that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea can never have the status of a
nuclear-weapon State in accordance with the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Therefore, Pyongyang must immediately return to
compliance with the NPT and the comprehensive
safeguards agreement of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), including by signing and
ratifying the additional protocol thereto, as well as the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
While we are discussing the nuclear and ballisticmissile threats stemming from the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, we cannot but draw attention to
Russia’s ongoing aggression against Ukraine.
From the beginning of Russia’s war against Ukraine,
Russian troops have been attacking Ukrainian territory
and its peaceful cities and villages with various types
of conventional weapons, including cruise and ballistic
missiles, which have already led to a terrible toll
among civilians.
On 3 March, the whole international community
became aware of yet another example of Russia’s
reckless behaviour when the Kremlin put its nuclear
deterrent forces on high alert and started to threaten
the international community with nuclear weapons.
In addition, Russia’s armed forces attacked and
seized Ukrainian nuclear power plants and other
facilities. The constant missile attacks on Ukrainian
territory by Russia, in particular in the direction of
nuclear power plants, pose an unprecedented threat to
nuclear security — in Ukraine, Europe and the whole
world. Russia must strictly abide by the laws and customs
of war, including those related to nuclear facilities.
While the Chornobyl nuclear power plant has been
liberated from the occupying forces, the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant, the largest in Europe, remains
under Russia’s control. It is clear that the actions of
the Russian troops and representatives of its energy
companies at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
and in the temporarily occupied city of Enerhodar
are nothing less than nuclear terrorism. There cannot
16/22

10/06/2022

be any justification for the obstacles created by the
aggressor country to the joint efforts of Ukraine
and the international community to deoccupy the
station and restore its sustainable operation under the
IAEA safeguards.
In conclusion, the failure of the Security Council to
adopt the draft resolution in response to the actions of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as well as
other cases of the use of the veto in recent years by the
permanent member to block different draft resolutions,
including on Ukraine, while ongoing aggression and
atrocity crimes were being committed, once again
prove the need for a deep and comprehensive reform of
the United Nations, in particular in the context of the
veto right.
Mrs. Horváth (Hungary): On 26 April, the General
Assembly adopted resolution 76/262, on the so-called
veto initiative, which enables States Members of the
United Nations to discuss the issue in the framework of
a formal meeting of the General Assembly if a veto was
previously cast on the situation in the Security Council.
This historic meeting is the first of its kind.
Hungary aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the European Union, in its
capacity as observer (see A/76/PV.77). Nevertheless,
I would like to express Hungary’s position on the
repeated violations of international law and its
international obligations by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
Hungary is deeply concerned by the unprecedented
number of missile tests conducted by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea since the beginning of this
year. That clear escalation and continued pursuit of
illegal weapons systems, including launches of new
types of weapons, is a violation of multiple Security
Council resolutions and a serious threat to international
and regional peace and security.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must
comply with the relevant Security Council resolutions
by abandoning all its nuclear weapons, other weapons
of mass destruction and ballistic-missile and nuclearweapon programmes in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner and immediately cease all
related activities.
Furthermore, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea should refrain from any further action that could
increase tensions in the region, as well as globally.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s blatant
22-37785

10/06/2022

violations of international law divert resources from its
own people’s needs, prevent its economic development
and undermine the welfare of its people. Hungary urges
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to respect
international law and obligations, abandon its nuclearweapon and ballistic-missile programmes and resume
dialogue with the relevant parties.
In that regard, we support the diplomatic efforts
of the Republic of Korea, the United States and
regional partners aimed at preserving peace on the
Korean peninsula and enhancing regional stability.
The unity of the international community is now more
critical than ever in that respect. Hungary supports the
complete, irreversible and verifiable denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula and any meaningful diplomatic
process to that end.
Ahead of the tenth Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), Hungary urges the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to return to
compliance with the NPT as a non-nuclear-weapon
State and the comprehensive safeguards agreement
of the International Atomic Energy Agency and to
bring into force the additional protocol. At the same
time, Hungary urges Pyongyang to sign and ratify the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
Mr. Segura Aragón (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): The delegation of the Republic of El Salvador
is grateful to the President for convening this plenary
meeting, held pursuant to the provisions of resolution
76/262, entitled “Standing mandate for a General
Assembly debate when a veto is cast in the Security
Council”. El Salvador believes that the convening of
this debate as the first pursuant to that resolution is an
expression of the General Assembly’s commitment to a
strengthened and effective multilateralism. Moreover,
in our view, it is also a step towards accountability and
transparency in our Organization.
In entrusting the Security Council with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
security, States Members of the United Nations recognize
that the Council acts on our behalf in discharging
its duties in accordance with that responsibility.
We therefore welcome this discussion as a result of
acknowledging the role that the General Assembly
also plays in situations related to the maintenance
of international peace and security, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations. Moreover, El
Salvador takes note of the special report of the Security

A/76/PV.81

Council (A/76/853, annex) prepared in accordance with
paragraph 3 of resolution 76/262 and in accordance
with Article 24 of our Organization’s Charter.
As a State that champions disarmament and
non-proliferation, El Salvador expresses its grave
concern at the launches of medium- and long-range
ballistic missiles, intercontinental ballistic missile
launches and nuclear tests conducted by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, particularly the latest
missile launches, carried out in May. My country
believes that that portends a pattern whereby such
tests are being increased, which unfortunately serves
to escalate tensions on the Korean peninsula. That
threatens regional and international peace and security.
El Salvador believes that such tests and efforts
aimed at improving or modernizing weapons of
mass destruction and their systems of delivery for
such weapons undermine international peace and
security, while endangering human lives and posing
a grave challenge to efforts to strengthen the nuclear
non-proliferation regime established by the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
whose next Review Conference will be held in the
near future.
Against that backdrop, El Salvador calls on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to comply
with its international obligations, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions, and to engage in a
constructive dialogue in order to promote lasting peace
on the Korean peninsula. Moreover, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea should pay due attention
to alleviating the humanitarian impact caused by the
coronavirus disease pandemic and, in cooperation with
the international community, provide timely assistance
to the most vulnerable people.
Similarly, in line with what we have previously
said in other related forums, we express our concern
about reports of the malign use of information and
communications technology by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, which runs counter to the framework
for responsible State behaviour in cyberspace and its
voluntary norms.
We also call on all Member States to exercise
due diligence to prevent their territories from being
used for coordinating cyberattacks in violation of the
sovereignty of States. We reiterate the applicability of
international law in cyberspace.

22-3778517/22

A/76/PV.81

10/06/2022

In conclusion, it is important to note that, as a State
party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, El Salvador advocates that all States adhere
to the Treaty’s proliferation control regime and the
safeguards system of the International Atomic Energy
Agency for the peaceful use of nuclear energy. In that
regard, we call on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to return to compliance with the NPT and its
control system as soon as possible.
The Acting President: As the counting of ballots
has been completed for the election of members of
the Economic and Social Council, I will now briefly
suspend consideration of this item.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(b) Election of members of the Economic and
Social Council
Letter dated 31 May 2022 from the Permanent
Mission of Denmark to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretariat (A/76/852)
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Group A — African States (4 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members present and voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Botswana
Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Equatorial Guinea

192
0
192
1
191
128
190
190
189
186

Group B — Asia and Pacific States (4 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
192
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
192
Abstentions:
0
Number of members present and voting:
192
Required two-thirds majority:
128
Number of votes obtained:
Qatar
186
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
181
Republic of Korea
178
China
172
18/22

Group C — Eastern European States (3 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
192
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
192
Abstentions:
1
Number of members present and voting:
191
Required two-thirds majority:
128
Number of votes obtained:
Slovenia
176
Slovakia
173
Russian Federation
118
North Macedonia
38
Republic of Moldova1
Group D — Latin American and Caribbean States
(3 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
192
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
192
Abstentions:
4
Number of members present and voting:
188
Required two-thirds majority:
126
Number of votes obtained:
Brazil
183
Costa Rica
182
Colombia
108
Group E — Western European and other States
(4 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
192
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
192
Abstentions:
6
Number of members present and voting:
186
Required two-thirds majority:
124
Number of votes obtained:
Greece
176
Sweden
175
Denmark
174
New Zealand
174
Having obtained the required two-thirds majority
of members present and voting and the greatest
number of votes, the following 17 States are elected
members of the Economic and Social Council for
a three-year term beginning on 1 January 2023:
Botswana, Brazil, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Equatorial
Guinea, Greece, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, New Zealand, Qatar, the Republic of
Korea, Slovakia, Slovenia and Sweden.
22-37785

10/06/2022

The Acting President: As only two candidates
obtained the required two-thirds majority in the
previous balloting, there remains one seat to be filled
from among the Eastern European States. We shall
therefore proceed to the first restricted ballot. In
accordance with rule 94 of the rules of procedure, the
second round of balloting shall be restricted to the two
States from among the Eastern European States that
were not elected but that obtained the largest number
of votes in the previous round of unrestricted balloting,
namely, North Macedonia and the Russian Federation.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order on
the actual conduct of the voting.
I give the floor to the representative of North
Macedonia on a point of order.
Mr. Danailov Frchkoski (North Macedonia): We
are grateful to all the countries that voted in our favour
and are considering North Macedonia as a candidate
for membership in the Economic and Social Council.
I have the honour to inform the Assembly that North
Macedonia is ready to run in a second round of balloting
for the remaining seat allocated to the Group of Eastern
European States for membership in the Economic and
Social Council for the 2023-2025 term. We call on all
Member States to support North Macedonia in the next
round of balloting.
The Acting President: We shall now begin the
voting process.
I request representatives to use only those ballot
papers that have been distributed. Members are
requested to put an X in the box next to the name printed
on the ballot paper. The total number of checked boxes
or handwritten names should not exceed the number
of vacant seats to be filled as indicated on the ballot
paper. A ballot will be declared invalid if it contains
more names of Member States from the relevant region
than the seats allocated to it. If a ballot paper contains
any notations other than a vote in favour of an eligible
Member State, those notations will be disregarded.
At the invitation of the President, the representatives
of
Algeria,
Ecuador,
Hungary,
Monaco,
Mozambique and Timor-Leste acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.

A/76/PV.81

The meeting was suspended at 12.35 pm and
resumed at 12.40 p.m.
The Acting President: In the interest of time, the
General Assembly will continue the plenary meeting
to take up agenda item 124 while the ballots are
being counted.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage
of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 115.
Agenda item 124 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
resume its consideration of agenda item 124, entitled
“Strengthening of the United Nations system”, to
continue the debate pursuant to resolution 76/262 of
26 April 2022 on the situation in which the veto was cast
by the two permanent members at the 9048th meeting
of the Security Council on 26 May 2022, under the
agenda item entitled “Non-proliferation/Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea”.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Our debate today on this item
marks the first time ever that the General Assembly is
discussing a matter of international peace and security
after the casting of a veto in the Security Council. It is
our view that the issue at hand should be addressed with
great care, while taking into account the particularities
and concerns of the relevant States so as to facilitate
the maintenance of regional and international security,
as well as efforts to achieve comprehensive agreements
among the related parties, and should also be conducive
to the fulfilment of the functions and duties of the major
organs of the United Nations, including the General
Assembly and the Security Council.
Viet Nam has consistently supported every effort in
the area of nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament
aimed at the total elimination of nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. Over the years Viet Nam has therefore steadfastly
supported the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula, the full implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the efforts to advance
dialogue and negotiations among the relevant parties.
To that end, ensuring peace, stability, cooperation and
sustainable development on the peninsula should be our
top priority. In that connection, we have followed the
recent developments on the Korean peninsula closely
and share the concerns about them. Viet Nam does not

22-3778519/22

A/76/PV.81

support any action that aggravates tensions in the region,
harms regional and international peace and security or
violates related Security Council resolutions.
We call on all the parties to exercise the utmost
restraint, refrain from action that could escalate tensions
and instead resume negotiations in order to build on the
hard-won achievements reached through dialogue in
the past few years. All differences should be resolved
through peaceful means, in line with international law.
Furthermore, we firmly believe that a comprehensive
and long-term solution for the denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula and other related issues should
take into consideration the interests and concerns of
all parties for the sake of lasting peace, stability and
development in the region. In that respect, we are of the
view that the efforts and initiatives of the international
community should take into account the hardships
caused by the natural disasters, the pandemic and
other humanitarian issues that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has recently been facing with a view
to protecting the livelihoods of its people.
We call on international partners to continue
providing assistance to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea so that it can overcome those
difficulties, based on the country’s needs and requests.
For its part, Viet Nam remains fully committed to
implementing the obligations under the related Security
Council resolutions. We stand ready to contribute
constructively to all efforts to promote dialogue and
negotiations between the relevant parties on this
important matter.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): We commend the President
of the General Assembly for initiating this historic
debate, in line with resolution 76/262. We also
commend all the delegations that have taken and will
take the rostrum. The cause of international peace and
security belongs to every nation. None of us are safe
from the scourge of war, particularly if it is a conflict
that risks the use of weapons of mass destruction. On
26 May, the Security Council recorded negative votes
by permanent members on draft resolution S/2022/431,
regarding missile launches by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, launches that violated previous
Security Council resolutions.
As an elected member of the Council, Kenya
voted for the adoption of that draft resolution. We did
so based on our understanding that brazen breaches
of binding resolutions fatally undermine effective
multilateralism, which the world so desperately needs.
20/22

10/06/2022

The negative votes meant that the Council failed to
send a clear message that those missile launches were
unacceptable. In the vacuum created by the Council’s
paralysis, the situation is tending to a dangerous arms
race, and if it is left to fester, a potential accident caused
by tense military forces could lead to a catastrophic
war on the Korean peninsula. This past weekend, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea launched eight
more missiles, using ballistic technology. The lack
of diplomatic negotiations to resolve the outstanding
disagreements in this area only increases tensions and
invites disaster.
The Security Council should not remain immobilized
when the risks to the world are so clear and present. The
conflict in Ukraine and its impact on all our economies
and peoples are evidence enough that the fates of all
193 members of the General Assembly are deeply
connected. It has added to the effects of climate change
and the coronavirus disease pandemic, driving many
millions into even deeper poverty. Everything must be
done to prevent a war from breaking out on the Korean
peninsula. Added to the multiple crises we are dealing
with, it could push the world into a major economic
depression, which would lead to large-scale suffering
and death, particularly in developing countries.
The General Assembly does not have power under
the Charter of the United Nations to compel States to
act. For that reason, there are reasonable voices that
question the utility of our debate today. However, we
believe that the moral force of humankind’s aversion to
war and the threat of it is the fundamental underpinning
of effective multilateralism. It is our right and obligation
to give voice to that human yearning. We therefore call
on the Security Council to act on its responsibilities
and obligations to protect our shared peace. Should
there be further missile launches or other actions that
breach nuclear non-proliferation, the Council should
take strong action. If it does not, global opinion, shaped
in no small part by a General Assembly determined to
make its voice heard, will add impetus to the appetite
for fundamental reform.
For now, we are glad to note that today’s debate
furthers Africa’s Ezulwini Consensus, which seeks to
improve on the balance of the respective purviews of
the General Assembly and the Security Council. We
believe that negative votes cast by permanent members
of the Security Council, followed by a debate pursuant
to resolution 76/262, will increase the urgency that
delegations show in seeking Security Council reform.
22-37785

10/06/2022

I conclude by urging the parties on the Korean
peninsula to take all necessary measures to settle the
unfolding situation by peaceful means.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): Today’s debate deals with
one of the most dangerous and persistent challenges
the world has faced and the most pressing security
challenge facing the State of Israel — the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. Preventing extremist
authoritarian regimes, as well as murderous terrorist
groups, from developing or acquiring such weapons
must remain at the top of the Security Council’s agenda.
In that regard, Israel condemns in the strongest terms
North Korea’s repeated ballistic-missile launches,
as well as its continuing development of a nuclear
programme. We support Security Council resolution
1718 (2006) and the related subsequent resolution 2397
(2017) and call for the country’s complete, verifiable
and irreversible denuclearization.
The threat stemming from North Korea’s
development of ballistic and nuclear programmes is
twofold — first, the threat of a rogue State’s possession
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery, and secondly of their proliferation to other
rogue States and non-State actors. In fact, we have
witnessed repeated attempts by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to proliferate weapons of mass
destruction, such as its aid to Syria in 2006 to develop
a reactor in Deir ez-Zor for the production of weaponsgrade plutonium. More recently, and even more
alarmingly, the ongoing relationship between North
Korea and the Iranian Ayatollah regime poses a critical
threat to the security not only of Israel but the entire
Middle East and the rest of the world. That dangerous
relationship has been documented by numerous sources,
including successive reports by the Panel of Experts of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006). North Korea consistently helps Iran to bolster
its murderous ballistic and nuclear programme. That
deadly alliance between two rogue regimes is a clear
violation of Security Council resolutions and a grave
threat to international peace and security, and it must
be stopped today.
The Security Council must speak in one united
voice about the alarming and dangerous issue of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and Israel
calls for the full implementation of the existing sanctions
on North Korea with a view to ending its unlawful
programmes for ballistic missiles and weapons of mass
destruction. The Security Council should also remain

A/76/PV.81

vigilant about the Iranian regime’s malign activities
in violation of multiple Security Council resolutions,
such as resolution 2231 (2015), which adversely affect
regional and international peace and security. As we all
witnessed just this week, the true face of Iran’s nuclear
deception has been laid bare. Following the resolution
adopted by the Board of Governors of the International
Atomic Energy Agency condemning Iran, the Ayatollah
regime proceeded to remove 27 cameras from its
nuclear facilities, leaving the international community
in the dark, while continuing to run centrifuges at full
capacity. The production and proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction by rogue regimes, whether in North
Korea, Iran or anywhere else, must end.
This institution was founded on the premise of
preventing genocide, and if it cannot prevent genocidal
regimes from acquiring weapons whose sole purpose
is to create devastation, we really must ask ourselves
whether the United Nations can uphold its most basic
mandate. This must end now.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): Our
participation in today’s historic event, the first of its
kind since the establishment of the United Nations,
reflects our support of resolution 76/262, which Libya
co-sponsored in April. It seeks to restrict the use of the
veto depending on the situation in which a veto is cast
by any permanent member of the Security Council. We
want to once again underscore that what we are seeking
today through the implementation of resolution 76/262
is to highlight the importance of avoiding the use of the
veto and calling on the five permanent members of the
Security Council to assume their responsibility in that
regard before the international community. If they use
the veto, they must be able to justify it.
The right to cast a veto was granted more than 76
years ago. At the time, the world was very different.
Since then we have seen many peoples around the world
experience injustice because of the use of the veto,
particularly the historical injustice that it has helped to
inflict on Africa. We believe that comprehensive reform
is important in that regard and that Africa should be
fairly represented within the Council, as outlined in the
Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration. We are
participating in today’s debate, along with many other
countries around the world, because we want to promote
multilateralism and express our views on these kinds of
issues. In the same context, we should also underscore
that based on our commitment to restricting the use
of the veto, we call on the members of the Security

22-3778521/22

A/76/PV.81

Council, in particular the five permanent members,
to work together seriously to reach consensus on
issues before the Council before they are put to a vote,
especially when there is every likelihood of failure.
With regard to the topic under consideration today,
we maintain our previous positions, which are in line
with the positions of the Group of Arab States. We
support the United Nations machinery for disarmament
and non-proliferation. Any testing of weapons or
provocations that undermine regional and international
peace and security must stop. We urge everyone to
refrain from adopting double standards, because we will
be able to achieve international peace and security only
when we rid ourselves of arms such as nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction everywhere in
the world, without exception. We must avoid selectivity
on the issue, and that applies particularly to the Middle
East, which should be a zone totally free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction.
We all bear a collective responsibility to rid
humankind of those weapons in an irreversible manner
and under international verification and supervision.
The huge physical and human resources that are
dedicated to those inhumane weapons should be
used for achieving development and prosperity. We
want to see the Conference on Disarmament revived
and its ongoing stalemate ended. It is the only forum
for negotiations in the context of the United Nations
disarmament machinery, especially considering the
current complex international security situation. We
must immediately start negotiations to ensure that
nuclear-weapon States are committed to providing
non-nuclear-weapon States with unconditional security
safeguards. Ensuring disarmament of nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction must remain
a top priority for the United Nations, and that applies
both to States that publicly announce their possession
of nuclear weapons and those that have not yet done
so. They are the only weapons that have existential
consequences for the world.
In conclusion, we call on the members of the
Security Council, particularly the five permanent
members, to take positive account of our debate today
and return to the negotiating table, while working to
reach a consensus on ending the significant, growing
and unprecedented divisions that we have seen recently.
The Security Council has become like a political
wrestling ring. People all over the world are in despair

22/22

10/06/2022

and have lost confidence in the entire United Nations
system. It is no surprise that they feel these injustices
and long to see radical and comprehensive reform of the
Security Council. Simply put, many view the Security
Council as having been transformed from a guarantor
of international peace and security to a source that
directly threatens both peace and security.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate for this meeting. We shall hear
the remaining speakers this afternoon.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 124.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(b) Election of members of the Economic and
Social Council
Letter dated 31 May 2022 from the Permanent
Mission of Denmark to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretariat (A/76/852)
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Eastern European States (1 seat)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members present and voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Russian Federation:
North Macedonia:

181
0
181
4
177
118
100
77

The Acting President: As no candidate has received
the required two-thirds majority in the restricted ballot,
there remains one seat to be filled from among the
Eastern European States. We shall therefore proceed to
a series of balloting in accordance with rule 94 of the
rules of procedure. Given the lateness of the hour, the
next round of balloting will take place at 3 p.m. sharp
this afternoon.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 115.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

22-37785
