S/2001/820

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 August 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 24 August 2001 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 24 August
2001, which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-52077 (E) 270801

*0152077*

S/2001/820

Annex
Letter dated 24 August 2001 from the Secretary-General of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
monthly report on the operations of the Stabilization Force. I would appreciate your
making this report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) George Robertson

2

S/2001/820

Enclosure
Monthly report to the Security Council on the operations of the
Stabilization Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1-31 July 2001), there were just over 19,500 troops
deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, with contributions from all the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) allies and from 15 non-NATO countries.
2.
During the period under review, the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
remained stable. The Stabilization Force (SFOR) continued to ensure a safe and
secure environment throughout the area and provided a significant presence during
various religious ceremonies and commemorations that were held in July.
3.
In particular, SFOR supported local police and the International Police Task
Force (IPTF) at the Srebrenica observance ceremony on 11 July at Potocari. Six
thousand people attended the ceremony, 3,000 of whom had crossed the inter-entity
boundary line to reach the site where the separation of families had taken place.
Local police will provide security for the new Srebrenica memorial. On 12 July,
Bratunac war veterans held a ceremony in Kravica for the Bosnian Serbs who died
there. On 14, 21 and 22 July, SFOR was deployed nearby to Bosansca Gradisca,
Brdjani, Trnopolje and Paleznica Gornja in support of local police forces during
either opening or stone-laying ceremonies for some mosques and a church. All
gatherings took place peacefully.
4.
SFOR also provided support to the International Community for Missing
People (ICMP) during exhumations in the areas of Foca, Sarajevo Pale, Gorazde,
Visegrad, Ravnice and Ozren.
5.
Attacks made against SFOR during the reporting period included a threat made
with a hand grenade to SFOR soldiers in Kula Grad by an Albanian male, who was
handed over to the local police, and four shots fired at an SFOR vehicle travelling in
a convoy near Medna in the Republika Srpska.
6.
In other incidents, two men with long-barrelled weapons were seen firing into
the air near the SFOR Butmir Base; the men escaped. There was also a gun and
grenade attack on the Bosnian Serb Koran Barracks in Pale, where a weapons
warehouse was broken into.
7.
SFOR troops continued to conduct reconnaissance and surveillance operations
using ground and air patrols. Other operations included area security, monitoring the
border with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, monitoring the Entity Armed
Forces, conducting weapons storage site inspections, providing support to the
international organizations in theatre and collecting weapons and ammunition in the
framework of Operation Harvest.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
8.
The situation in theatre remained relatively calm throughout the reporting
period, with the entities in substantial compliance with the military provisions of the
Peace Agreement. The majority of Bosnian Croat troops have returned to barracks
and are under new contracts. Although a small number of troops remain loyal to the
Bosnian Croat HNS/HDZ (Croat National Assembly/Croatian Democratic Union),
there have been no reports of any friction within the Bosnian Croat forces.

3

S/2001/820

9.
Over the period, SFOR troops conducted 109 weapons storage site inspections:
33 Bosnian Serb; 17 Bosniac; 15 Bosnian Croat; 40 Federation; and 4 Federation
Army Department. Inspection and verification of weapons storage sites remains one
of SFOR’s priority tasks.
10. SFOR troops monitored 408 training and movement activities: 209 Bosnian
Serb; 103 Bosniac; 76 Federation; and 20 Federation Army Department.
11. Over the period, a total of 483 mine-clearing activities were conducted: 197
Bosnian Serb; 226 Bosniac; 2 Bosnian Croat; and 58 Federation.
Cooperation with international organizations
12. Within capabilities and in accordance with its mandate, SFOR continues to
provide assistance to the international organizations in theatre, including the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, IPTF, the Office of the High
Representative (OHR), the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
13. SFOR continues to support the efforts of the OHR to establish common
institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina, to protect the OHR Administrator of the
Hercegovacka Banka in Mostar and to assist in the effort to open airfields. SFOR
continues to assist the local police and IPTF in monitoring the situation in the
Sarajevo suburb of Dobrinja.
Outlook
14. The overall security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains under
control. Rising tension among ethnic groups following the return of refugees and
displaced persons will continue to be of concern. The most significant forthcoming
event is the HDZ congress planned for 15 August and the related campaign to give
more publicity to the so-called “third entity” issue.

4
