Ill.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
--

-- --- ---

special session _devo~ed to d_isarmament in 1982 and ~o
set up, at its th1rty-f1fth session, a preparatory committee for the second special session,
Reaffirming the validity of the Final Document of t~e
Tenth Special Session of the Genera) Assembly" and its
conviction that disarmament remains one of the essential objectives of the United Nations,
Expressing its concern over _the con_tinuation of the
arms race, which aggravates mternat10nal peace and
security and also diverts vast resources urgently needed
for economic and social development,
Reiterating its conviction that peace can be secured
through the implementation of disarmament !11easures,
particularly of nuclear disarmament, conducive to the
realization of the final objective, namely, general and
complete disarmament under effective international
control,
I. Decides to establish a Preparatory Committee for
the Second Special Session of the General Asse~bly
Devoted to Disarmament composed of seventy-eight
Member States appointed by the ~resident of the_ Ge_neral Assembly on the basis of equitable geographic distribution;
2. Requests the Preparatory Committee to prepare a
draft agenda for the special session_, to examine all ~elevant questions relating to that session and to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session its recommendations thereon, including those in respect of
the implementation of the decision_s and recom~endations adopted by the Assembly at its tenth special session;
3. Invites all Member States to communicate to the
Secretary-General their views on the agenda _and ot~er
relevant questions relating to the second special session
of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament not
later than I April 198 I;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
replies of Member States relevant to paragraph 3 above
to the Preparatory Committee and to render to it all n~cessary assistance, including the provision of essential
background information, relevant documents and summary records;
5. Requests the Preparatory Committee to meet for
a short organizational session of not longer than one
week before the end of the thirty-fifth session of the
General Assembly in order, inter alia, to set the dates for
its substantive sessions;
6. Further requests the Preparatory Committee _to
submit its progress report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session an item entitled: "Second special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament:
report of the Preparatory Committee for the Second
Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to
Disarmament".

79th plenary meeting
3 December 1980

*

*

*

At the 79th plenary meeting, the President of the General Assembly
announced that, in accordance with paragraph I of the above resolution
and on the basis of consultations held in the First Committee. he had ap'Resolution S-10/2.

----

-

_._

--

-

57

-

pointed the following States as members of the Preparatory Committ~e
for the Second Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to ~1sarmament. it being understood that any Member State would be_e~lllled
to participate in the work of the Committee ~nder the same condu'.ons as
those laid down for the Preparatory Committee for the first special session of the ,General Assembly devoted to disarmament: ALGERIA.
ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA, AIISTRIA, BAHAMAS, BANGLADESH. BELGIUM,
BFNIN, BRAZIL, 8UlGARlA, BIIRU1'DI, BYELORUSSIAN SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPllBl It, CANADA, CHINA, COLOMBIA, CONGO, COSTA RICA, CUBA.
CYl'RllS, CZECHOSI OVA KIA. DFNMARK. ECUADOR, EGYPT. ETHIOPIA,
FIJI. FINI AND, FRAME. Gl·RMAN DEMOCRATIC RF.PUBLIC. GERMANY.
FFDFRAI
INDI,\.

RFPUBI.IC OF. GRH('l. GUYANA,

fNDONESI,\,

l.HlANON.

]RAN.

LiBI-.RIA,

IRAQ.

LIB\ .\N

HONDURAS. HUN(iARY,

ITAI Y.

JAMAICA.

ARAB

JAMAHIRIY•\,

JAPAN,

KLNYA.

MAI AYSIA.

MAURl'l ll'S. MEXICO, MOMiOLIA. MOROCCO. NEPAi. NETHERLANDS,
NEW

Zl·ALAND,

NIGERIA.

NORWAY.

PAKISTAN.

PANAMA,

PERU.

PHIi IPl'INES. POLAND. ROMANIA, SFNEGAI., SIERRA LFONF. SPAIN. SRI
LANKA. SlllHN. SURINAM I. SWHJIN, TUNISIA, TllRKF.Y, UKRAINIAN
SOVII-T SOCIALIST R~PUBl.ll. UNION 01· Sov1n SOCIALIST RFPLIBI.ICS.
UNITI.D

KIN(;IJOM 01·

GRI AT

UNI n I)

REP\iBI.IC OF

T.-\Nl,\NIA.

BRITAIN AND
UNITrD

NORTIILRN

IRl-1 AND.

STA n s OI

AMI RICA,

V1 NI /l 11 A. Y11c;os1AVIA. Z-\IRI andZAMBL'<

35/141.

Economic and social consequences of the armaments race and its extremely harmful effects on
world peace and security

The General Assembly.
Having considered the item entitled "Economi_c and
social consequences of the armaments race and 1t~ e~tremely harmful effects on world peace and secunty ,
Deeply concerned that t~~ arms race,_ particularly in
nuclear armaments and m1htary expenditures, _has continued to increase at an alarming speed, absorbmg enormous material and human resources, which represents a
heavy burden for the peoples of all countries and _constitutes a grave danger for world peace and secunty,
Convinced that, disarmament being a matter of universal concern, there is a pressing need for all Governments and peoples to be informed about and be aware of
the problems created by the armament~ race an_d of the
need for disarmament. and that the United Nations has
a central role in this connexion,
Noting that since the preparation of the updated
report of the Secretary-General entitled Economi~. and

Social Consequences of the Arms Race and of M1ftta~y
Expenditures,' new developments have taken_ place m

the fields covered by the report that are ?~ part1cul~r. relevance in the present economic and poht1cal cond1t1ons
of the world,
Recalling its decision. as reaffirmed in its resolution
32/75 of 12 December 1977. to keep the item under constant review,
Recalling further paragraph 93 (c) of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, x which provides that the Secretary-General shall
periodically submit reports to the Assembly on the
economic and social consequences of the armaments
race and its extremely harmful effects on world peace
and security.
l. Requests the Secretary-q~neral to bring up t~
date, with the assistance of quahf1ed consultant experts
appointed by him, the report entitled Econom!~ and So-

cial Consequences of the Arms Race and of M1htary Ex-, -Unit;;-d-N-;tions publication. Sales No. E.78.IX. l.
'Resolution S-10/2.
.
.
' Subsequently referred to as the Group of Experts on _the Econorn,_c
and Social Consequences of the Arms Race and of Military Expen,d1tures.

SS

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

penditures, covering the basic topics of that report, and
to transmit it to the General Assembly at its thirtyseventh session;
2. Invites all Governments to extend to the SecretaryGeneral their support and full co-operation to ensure
that the study will be carried out in the most effective
way;
3. Calls upon non-governmental organizations and
international institutions and organizations to cooperate with the Secretary-General in the preparation of
the report;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Economic and social
consequences of the armaments race and its extremely
harmful effects on world peace and security"
94th plenary meeting
I 2 December 1980

35/142.

Reduction of military budgets
A

The General Assembly,
Expressing its deep concern about the ever-spiralling
arms. race and growing military expenditures, which
constitute a heavy burden for the economies of all nations and have extremely harmful effects on world peace
and security,
Deeply convinced that the common aspirations of
mankind for peace, security and progress require the
urgent cessation of the arms race, particularly of the
nucl~ar-arms race, and the reduction of military expenditures, as well as the adoption of effective measures
leading towards general and complete disarmament,
Reaffirming the provisions of the Final Document of
the ~enth Spe_cial Session of the General Assembly accordmg to which gradual reduction of military budgets
~n a mut~ally agreed basis, for example, in absolute
figures or m terms of percentage points, particularly by
nuclear-weapon States and other militarily significant
States, would be a measure that would contribute to
c_urbing the arm~ race and would increase the possibilit1~s. of reallocat1on of resources now being used for
m1h~ary purposes to economic and social development,
particularly for the benefit of the developing countries, 111
Reaffirming that it is possible to achieve reductions in
military bu_dgets without a~fecting the military balance
to the detriment of the national security of any State.
. Re~alli1;g its resolution 34/83 F of 11 December 1979,
m which 1t, inter alia, stipulated that, in the light of the
above-mentioned provision of the Final Document a
new impetus should be given to endeavours to achi~ve
agreements to freeze, reduce or otherwise restrain, in a
balanced manner, military expenditures, including adequate measures of verification satisfactory to all parties
concerned, and, to this end, requested the Disarmament Commission to undertake during 1980 to examine
and identify effective ways and means of achieving such
agreements,
Having considered the report of the Disarmament
c;ommission ?n the work accomplished during its session of 1980 m pursuance of resolution 34/83 F, 11
10

Resolution S-10/2, para. 89.
Official Records of the Uenera/ A.rsnnh!i-. 7hirlv-fifih Session.
Supplement No. 42 (A/JS/42).
11

Noting also the recommendation of the Disarmament
Commission concerning the elements of the Declaration of the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade, 12
which provides that during the Decade renewed efforts
should be made to reach agreement on the reduction of
military expenditures and the reallocation of resources
from military purposes to economic and social development, especially for the benefit of developing countries,
Aware of the various proposals submitted by States
and of the activities carried out so far within the framework of the United Nations in the field of the reduction
of military budgets.
~ecalling also paragraph 41 of the Final Document,
which refers, inter alia, to the contribution of the unilateral measures to the attainment of the disarmament
goals, and welcoming in this connexion such measures
taken by States aimed at the freezing and the reduction
of their military expenditures,
I. Reaffirms the urgent need to reinforce the endeavours of all States and international action in the
area of the reduction of military budgets, with a view to
reaching international agreements to freeze reduce or
otherwise restrain military expenditures;
'
2. Reiterat~s the appeal to all States, in particular
the most heavily armed States, pending the conclusion
of agreements_ on the reduction of military expenditures, to exercise self-restraint in their military expenditure with a view to reallocating the funds thus saved to
economic and social development, particularly for the
benefit of developing countries;
3. Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue at its session to be held in 1981 the consideration
of ~he _item entitled "Reduction of military budgets",
takmg mto account the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 34 /83 F as well as those of the present resolution, and, in particular, to identify and elaborate on
the principles which should govern further actions of
States in the field of the freezing and reduction of
military _expenditures, keeping in mind the possibility of
embodymg such principles into a suitable document at
an appropriate stage;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member
S_tates to ~xpress their views and suggestions on the principles which should govern their actions in the field of
the freezing and reduction of military expenditures and
to_ prepare on this basis a report to be submitted to the
Disarmament Cc)mmission at its session in 1981;
_5. Consider.~ that !hi_s action to be carried out by the
Disarmament Comm1ss1on should be regarded as complementary to any other ongoing activity within the
framework of the United Nations related to the question _of reduction of military budgets as well as to any
possible unilateral initiatives which may be undertaken
by States in this field;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Reduction of
military budget~--.

94th plenary meeting
12 Decemher I 980
B
The General Assm1h!y,
Recalling the provision of paragraph 90 of the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
,.· See rcsnlut1on ,, -+6 ahove.
