S/PV.7435

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7435th meeting

Tuesday, 28 April 2015, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kawar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Jordan)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Baublys
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2015/246)

15-12067 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1512067*

S/PV.7435

The situation concerning Western Sahara

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
concerning Western Sahara (S/2015/246)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2015/285, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France, Spain, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/246, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation concerning Western
Sahara.
The Council is ready to proceed to a vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The draft resolution
received 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has
been adopted unanimously as resolution 2218 (2015).
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): My delegation takes the
floor to explain its vote or resolution 2218 (2015), which
the Security Council has just adopted.
We would like to underscore Malaysia’s full
support for the efforts of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), as
well as those of the Secretary-General and his Personal
Envoy, towards finding a solution to the question
of Western Sahara. We also support the Secretary2/6

28/04/2015

General’s recommendation to extend the mandate of
MINURSO until 30 April 2016. In that regard, we call
for the parties to the dispute to continue negotiations
under the auspices of the Secretary-General, in a
constructive manner, with a view to achieving a
mutually acceptable political solution to all, as well
as ensuring an improvement in the well-being of the
people of Western Sahara.
We remain hopeful that, in future, a more
transparent and inclusive consultation process that
takes into account the views of all Council members
could be undertaken. That would certainly contribute
immensely to our collective efforts to find a mutually
acceptable solution to the question of Western Sahara.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Permanent Mission of the United States for having
prepared the draft of resolution 2218 (2015), concerning
Western Sahara. France voted in favour of the resolution,
which it also sponsored, as it appropriately addresses
the whole host of aspects pertaining to the question of
Western Sahara. It provides the necessary impetus to
the political process. It renews for a year the mandate
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO). And, lastly, it refers to
the human dimension of the situation in the territory.
This resolution, which we adopted unanimously,
provides the necessary momentum to the political
situation. The text clearly indicates that the
consolidation of the status quo is not acceptable, and
that the parties must engage with more resolve and
demonstrate greater political will, realism and spirit of
compromise in order to advance towards a just, lasting
and mutually acceptable political solution.
Resolving the question of Western Sahara is
necessary to respond to the expectations of the
population of the territory, to achieve the political and
economic integration of the Maghreb and to respond to
the deteriorating security situation in the Sahel, where
we must together overcome the challenge posed by the
heightened threat of terrorism.
The historic differences can be resolved. The United
Nations has a responsibility to help the parties to move
ahead in the negotiations. In that regard, we reiterate
our full support for the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy, Ambassador Christopher Ross, whose shuttle
diplomacy is necessary to facilitate dialogue and bring
the positions closer together. Moreover, France believes
that the autonomy plan presented by Morocco to the

15-12067

28/04/2015

The situation concerning Western Sahara

Secretary-General on 7 April is a serious and credible
basis for a negotiated solution.
This resolution renews MINURSO’s mandate.
France supports the role of MINURSO and of the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Ms. Kim
Bolduc, with whom the parties should continue their
full cooperation. For more than 20 years, MINURSO
has been making a contribution to maintaining
calm in a region experiencing numerous challenges.
It has done so by carrying out the three aspects
of its mandate, namely, monitoring the ceasefire,
contributing to de-mining activities and supporting
confidence-building measures, especially the family
visit programme, to which the resolution refers. In that
connection, we regret the suspension of the programme,
which was put in place by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and which
provided relief to refugee families while maintaining
channels for dialogue. We hope that the programme
will resume without delay.
Lastly, the resolution appropriately addresses the
human aspect of the issue of Western Sahara. We urge
the parties to continue their efforts to strengthen and
promote human rights in Western Sahara and in the
Tindouf refugee camps. As the resolution underscores,
Morocco has taken steps to strengthen its National
Council on Human Rights commissions operating in
Dakhla and Laayoune, as well as its interaction with
the special procedures of the Human Rights Council
and with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. We welcome those
initiatives and the other structural reforms carried
out by Morocco — such as its ratification of the
additional protocol to the Convention against Torture
and its reform of the law on military tribunals — which
benefit the population of Western Sahara. The situation
also recalls that the very precarious situation of the
Saharaoui population in the Tindouf camps must not
be forgotten. In that connection, it calls for further
efforts to be made in order to register the refugees in
the camps. This is in the general direction of the goal
of maintaining the necessary provision of international
humanitarian assistance in the camps.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): The United
States supports the Security Council’s adoption of
resolution 2218 (2015), which renews for another
year the mandate of the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO).
MINURSO is indispensable in its role of supporting

S/PV.7435

stability and security in Western Sahara, as it has for
the past 24 years. The United States believes that the
United Nations has the legitimacy and impartiality
necessary to facilitate a lasting political solution to this
conflict.
The United States is hopeful that the adoption
of this resolution will encourage the parties to
demonstrate their serious and genuine commitment to
the United Nations-led political process to achieve a
just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution
that provides for the self-determination of the people of
Western Sahara and to engage in negotiations as soon
as possible. We look forward to both sides bringing
forward new ideas to that dialogue.
We witnessed several developments of concern this
past year: stalled family visits, dwindling humanitarian
assistance and rising tensions inside Saharaoui refugee
camps, as well as greater security concerns in the
region, which illustrate that the status quo is clearly
untenable. Over the past year, the United Nations also
suffered a significant and regrettable loss of diplomatic
engagement. The loss of valuable time and diplomatic
engagement must not be repeated.
The United States is determined to see that parties
make significant progress towards a mutual political
solution and to improve the human rights situation
throughout the next year. We encourage the resumption
of family reunification visits, which underscore the vary
real human dimension to this conflict. We also look
forward to the United Nations briefings in October, and
we hope we will hear of greater progress at that time.
We call upon the parties to demonstrate their resolve
in implementing all the elements of this resolution,
including facilitating full access for MINURSO staff
to all interlocutors. We further remind the parties of the
ongoing need for the Council to receive reports from
the United Nations on the situation on the ground in
Western Sahara and in the refugee camps near Tindouf.
We encourage the parties to continue to cooperate with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and its visits to the region, as well
as to continue to promote and protect human rights in
both areas.
The United States remains committed to the
United Nations efforts for Western Sahara, including
those led by Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General
Christopher Ross, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Kim Bolduc and the Office of the

15-120673/6

S/PV.7435

The situation concerning Western Sahara

High Commissioner for Human Rights. The United
Nations has our unwavering support for its efforts to
achieve a political solution.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Since 1991, the work of the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) has
been essential, among other things, in fulfilment of
its mandate, maintaining the ceasefire agreed by the
parties. Spain therefore welcomes today’s extension of
MINURSO’s mandate based on the text put forward by
the Group of Friends of Western Sahara. We appreciate
the work of the United States in the course of drafting
the resolution.
MINURSO should continue its work because the
presence of the United Nations in Western Sahara and
the refugee camps is, as the Secretary-General says in
his report,
“relevant to ensur[ing] the parties’ observation
of the ceasefire and as a visible representation of
the international community’s commitment to
achieving a resolution to the conflict” (S/2015/246,
para. 75).
As the resolution just adopted notes, it is important
that the parties
“cooperate fully with the operations of MINURSO,
including its free interaction with all interlocutors,
and to take the necessary steps to ensure the
security of as well as unhindered movement and
immediate access for the United Nations and
associated personnel in carrying out their mandate,
in conformity with existing agreements” (resolution
2218 (2015), para. 3).
Spain wishes to emphasize that, as a draft version
of the resolution stated before being strengthened for
the final text just adopted, the support of the Security
Council for the efforts of the Secretary-General’s
Personal Envoy and his Special Representative is
unqualified, and that, as an innovation, Member
States are called on to continue making voluntary
contributions in support of the food programmes to
ensure that the humanitarian needs of the refugees
are adequately addressed. For Spain, the improvement
of the situation of refugees is a priority and we will
therefore do everything in our power to respond to
this appeal. We encourage others to do the same. This
reinforced support for the Personal Envoy should serve
to reaffirm the central role of the United Nations and

4/6

28/04/2015

facilitate a renewed effort to push for a solution to the
conflict.
Spain believes that once the resolution has been
adopted, the priority is to advance the political process.
The efforts of the international community must focus
on helping the parties — Morocco and the Frente
Polisario — to agree on a political, just, lasting and
mutually acceptable political solution that provides
for the free determination of the people of Western
Sahara in the context of arrangements consistent to the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations. This solution, for which the political will of
the parties is necessary, would put an end to a conflict
that has lasted too many years and would contribute to
the stability of the region.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela voted in favour of resolution 2218 (2015),
renewing the mandate of the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), as we
are convinced of its important role in the supervision
of the ceasefire, reducing the threat of unexploded
mines and ordnance and promoting measures to build
confidence between the parties in order to achieve
the holding of the referendum, which is its principal
mandate under resolution 690 (1991).
In supporting the management, facilitation and
efforts of the Secretary-General to bring about an
agreement between the parties, MINURSO should
continue to extend its cooperation to a range of
assistance programmes aimed at addressing the plight
of Sahrawi families that are spread out and separated,
and bring new life into direct negotiations between the
Frente Polisario and Morocco.
However, we wish to express certain concerns
about the procedure used in the drafting of the
resolution just adopted. A text was presented to us that
had been previously agreed by the Group of Friends of
Western Sahara which did not address the legitimate
concerns and proposals that were made by numerous
countries that are interested in this specific issue,
Venezuela among them. These proposals were aimed at
strengthening the role of MINURSO in the promotion
and protection of human rights of the population of
Western Sahara, bearing in mind the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2015/246)
and the features of all United Nations missions. It is
therefore necessary that future negotiation processes

15-12067

28/04/2015

The situation concerning Western Sahara

on the matter before us see an improvement in working
methods with the aim of helping to promote a broad,
inclusive and transparent discussion.
In the context of the proposals made, the
amendment that sought to increase the frequency with
which the Security Council reviews the topic was not
adopted. Another amendment was aimed at reaffirming
the responsibilities of the Council in facilitating a
fair and lasting solution to the situation in Western
Sahara through the holding of a referendum on selfdetermination that would allow for completion of the
unfinished process of decolonization, a situation that
has lasted for more than four decades. It is essential that
we ensure the implementation of resolution 690 (1991),
which provided for the holding of the referendum. We
are concerned that, without a referendum, the process of
colonizing Western Sahara will continue, including the
deterioration of human rights of the Sahrawi people and
the illegal exploitation of their natural resources — all
of which is to the detriment of stability and peace in
the region.
Furthermore, we regret that the consultations held
on this topic were not preceded by an open meeting in
which we could ensure the participation of the Special
Envoy of the African Union for Western Sahara, former
President Joaquim Chissano, in the light of the request
made by that regional organization, which, together
with the United Nations, is facilitating the process of
negotiation between the parties. It is paradoxical that a
strategic United Nations ally in efforts to find solutions
to conflicts affecting peace and security on the African
continent would be excluded from discussions in
this body. We hope that this Council can correct this
omission in the near term.
To conclude, we reaffirm the Council’s responsibility
in working with resolve towards a fair and lasting
solution to the colonial situation endured by the Sahrawi
people through the fulfilment of their right to selfdetermination, including the option of independence,
pursuant to international law, and in particular the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2218 (2015). In
co-sponsoring it, we wish to reiterate our full support for
the Secretary-General, Special Representative Bolduc
and Ambassador Ross. We appreciate their efforts to
achieve a lasting and mutually acceptable political

S/PV.7435

solution that provides for the self-determination of the
people of Western Sahara.
Despite the efforts of Ambassador Ross, it is
clear that no progress has been made on the substance
of the dispute. This stalemate is regrettable and has
implications for the stability and security of the
Maghreb region. As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/246) notes, there is a growing threat from
criminal and extremist activities in the regions adjacent
to the territory, and growing frustrations among
Saharan youth and Polisario military only compound
our concern.
Forty years after the start of this conflict, it is
clear that the status quo is simply not sustainable.
During Ambassador Ross’ recent trip to the region,
all interlocutors committed to cooperating fully with
the United Nations and to finding a solution as soon as
possible. We welcome this pledge, but the parties must
match their words with actions and do everything they
can to honour their commitment and end the stalemate.
It is clear that the political future of Western Sahara
will be determined only by renewed engagements on
the part of the parties. They will continue to have the
support of the Security Council and the international
community in their efforts. But unless political will
can be found by the parties, we will be no closer to the
realization of a political solution. It is high time for that
to change.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): The Security
Council has just adopted resolution 2218 (2015), which
extends the mandate of the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara. I am speaking in
explanation of vote in my capacity as coordinator of
the African State Members of the Security Council,
that is, Angola, Chad and Nigeria, and taking into
account our adopted position, recommended to us by
the African Union Peace and Security Council, with a
view to playing a more active and constructive role in
the search for solutions to the issue of Western Sahara.
The three African Member States of the Security
Council voted in favour of today’s resolution in the
conviction that first, the Security Council is really
committed to the self-determination of the people of
Western Sahara; secondly, that it is committed to ending
the current impasse in efforts to achieve progress
towards a political solution; thirdly, that it recognizes
that achieving a political solution would contribute to
stability and security in the Sahel region; and, fourthly,

15-120675/6

S/PV.7435

The situation concerning Western Sahara

that it encourages the parties to demonstrate greater
political will in their efforts to find a way to continue the
negotiation process and recognizes that consolidation
of the status quo is unacceptable, as others have also
said this morning.
In that context, we would like to specifically
encourage the parties to abide by the resolution’s
provisions, take them into full account and ensure that
tangible progress is achieved by holding negotiations
without further delay on a referendum on the selfdetermination of the people of Western Sahara.
Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
supports the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara and hopes that the Mission will continue to
play a constructive role in stabilizing the situation in
Western Sahara and assisting in the implementation of
confidence-building measures.
China’s position on the issue of Western Sahara
has been consistent and remains unchanged. Based
on that, we voted in favour of resolution 2218 (2015),
adopted by the Security Council this morning. We
know that some Council members have concerns about
the resolution. When the members of the Council were
holding consultations on the draft resolution, more time
should have been allowed for that, and more patience
should have been shown so as to enable us to listen more
extensively to the various opinions. Allowing more
adequate time for consultations would have enabled us
to seek the greatest possible consensus and obtain the
widest possible support.

6/6

28/04/2015

The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Jordan.
I would first like to thank Mr. Ross and Ms. Bolduc
for their efforts. Jordan voted in favour of resolution 2218
(2015), and we believe that, if it is fully implemented by
the parties concerned, it can lead to a lasting solution
to the issue of Western Sahara, since it includes all the
elements necessary to enable that goal to be achieved.
We would like to emphasize the importance of
cooperation by the parties with the efforts of the
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for Western
Sahara, and with the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara, in order to enable it to
fulfil its aims. Those include enforcing the ceasefire
and conducting de-mining, as well as strengthening
confidence-building measures. The United Nations,
as the only organization recognized by both parties,
remains the only body capable of bringing together the
parties’ positions in order to achieve a just and lasting
solution to the issue, based on the relevant Security
Council resolutions and on respect for the Charter of
the United Nations and international law. It should also
take into account the concerns of the people of Western
Sahara.
We reaffirm that Morocco’s proposal on selfdetermination is a serious one, and we welcome its
efforts to make concrete improvements in the humanrights situation in Western Sahara.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

15-12067
