United Nations

S/PV.6760

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6760th meeting
Wednesday, 25 April 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Rice/Mr. DeLaurentis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
Securing borders against illicit cross-border trafficking and movement
Letter dated 5 April 2012 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2012/195)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-31426 (E)

*1231426*

S/PV.6760

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

terrorist funding, materials related to weapons of mass
destruction, conflict minerals, wildlife and people.
Such illicit flows undermine the sovereignty of States,
destroy communities and individual lives, threaten
peace and security and are rightly the focus of the
Security Council’s close attention.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
Securing borders against illicit cross-border
trafficking and movement
Letter dated 5 April 2012 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2012/195)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Belarus, Brazil, Costa Rica, Cuba, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Jamaica, Japan, Libya,
New Zealand, Norway, the Republic of Korea and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Téte António,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/195, which contains a letter dated
5 April 2012 from the Permanent Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I give him the
floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank the United
States for using its presidency of the Council to draw
attention to the important issue on today’s agenda.
Across the globe, insufficiently protected borders
enable the trafficking of drugs, weapons, contraband,

2

Countering those illicit flows requires action on
many fronts. Strengthening border security is crucial.
Member States are obligated under international law to
secure their borders against illicit flows. But fragile
and vulnerable countries — some of them devastated
by war, others struggling to transform themselves —
often lack the capacity to overcome the conditions that
allow such criminal activity to flourish. The United
Nations is thus hard at work, helping many States to
build that capacity. In Africa, Latin America and the
Caribbean, the Airport Communication Project, known
as AIRCOP, has been set up to strengthen controls at
international airports. Project AIRCOP’s maritime
equivalent is the Global Container Control Programme.
Although more than 500 million maritime containers
move around the world each year and account for
90 per cent of international trade, only 2 per cent are
inspected. Strengthening customs and immigration
systems is essential.
Border strengthening is effective, but not if done
in isolation. We also need to give priority to
establishing public institutions that deliver a sustained
level of security and justice for citizens. Border
security can never come at the expense of migrants’
rights. Nor can it be used to legitimize inhumane
treatment.
The United Nations Task Force on Transnational
Organized Crime and Drug Trafficking, co-chaired by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Department of Political Affairs, is developing
comprehensive approaches. Regional cooperation is
key to addressing both illicit flows and human
trafficking, as are legal tools. I urge Member States to
ratify and implement the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and the
Protocols thereto, as well as the United Nations
Convention against Corruption and the legal
instruments designed to fight terrorism.
Countering illicit flows also requires us to do
more to prevent money laundering. We need systems
that can detect and monitor the enormous flows of

12-31426

S/PV.6760

illicit money generated by cross-border crimes, most of
which is laundered through the global financial system.
Illicit flows are directly linked to terrorism. Our
counter-terrorism strategies rely on States adopting
measures on the cross-border movement of people,
goods and cargo, small arms and light weapons,
nuclear, chemical, biological, radiological and other
potentially deadly materials. We are helping Member
States to strengthen their institutional and legislative
frameworks in that area. The Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force’s Working Group on
Border Management relating to Counter-Terrorism is
compiling
a
comprehensive
compendium
of
international instruments, norms and best practices.
The illicit flows that pose the gravest threat are,
of course, those related to the possible terrorist
acquisition of weapons of mass destruction. Efforts to
address that challenge include the United Nations
Global
Counter-Terrorism
Strategy
and
the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) through the
activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Trafficking in firearms and ammunition also
helps to fuel terrorism, violence and armed conflicts,
while hindering social and economic development. We
are helping Member States to strengthen their
institutional and legislative frameworks in that area by
developing technical guidelines for the safe
management of ammunition and international control
standards for small arms and light weapons.

Thank you again, Madame President, for
addressing the aforementioned matters and working to
improve our work in this crucial area.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to start by
thanking the United States delegation for bringing
today’s important matter to the Security Council for
our discussion. The interest the topic generates is
eloquently demonstrated by the number of speakers
inscribed on the list.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his thought-provoking briefing.
Portugal attaches great importance to the efforts
being developed throughout the United Nations system
to respond to requests for assistance by States in areas
of national concern related to the ever more
sophisticated and often interconnected threats and
challenges posed by illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement of materials, funds and goods, as well as
human beings.

There are no quick solutions to illicit flows.
There is only a long-term process that requires the
sustained commitment of all. Our watchtowers must be
accompanied by the watchwords: information,
intelligence, data collection and analysis. It is an area
where the United Nations, with its ability to provide
objective and balanced information, can play a key
role. We will continue to identify new threats and bring
them to the attention of the Security Council, so that
the international community can respond.

Those areas of concern include the need to
protect and secure borders, a need echoed by an
increasing number of requests by States for assistance
in tackling the various forms of illicit cross-border
trafficking and movements, with the aim of countering
and preventing the negative impact of those
phenomena on their national systems and the
unravelling of regional and subregional stability and
security. Indeed, all these types of illicit trafficking and
movements have a tremendous impact on every State,
but in particular on the most fragile ones, debilitating
their efforts towards institution-building, peace,
stability, the rule of law and sustained development.
This is where the United Nations, in its efforts to
promote and coordinate the international community
assistance, has a crucial role to play.

As the Council knows, prevention is one of my
priorities. Preventing illicit flows is beneficial to
countries, communities and individuals. It is important
for security, development and human rights. In six
months, I will return to the Council with a report
providing a comprehensive assessment of the United
Nations work to help Member States counter illicit
flows.

In November last year, under the Portuguese
presidency, the Council organized a briefing on new
challenges to international peace and security (see
S/PV.6668). It was evident then, as it is evident now,
that the Council cannot disregard its role in conflict
prevention and has to increase its awareness of new
realities that are increasingly challenging or have the
potential to threat peace and security. We suggested

12-31426

3

S/PV.6760

then that the Council could establish a kind of
observatory tool — an informal working group of
Council members — to monitor these issues on its
horizon and to review information derived from reports
of the Secretary-General, which could serve as the
foundation for concerted, articulated, prompt and
effective action of the international community. We
think the Council should give this further thought.
Today’s debate follows, in our view, a similar
logic. We believe also that there is clearly here a role
for the Security Council to play. The Council cannot
simply turn a blind eye to the impact of illicit
trafficking and movements across borders in the
destabilization of States and regions and their impact
on peace processes and on fuelling conflicts — not to
mention its links with international terrorism, namely,
through its financing. These are concerns that the
Council should keep on its horizon, and we should be
prepared to act whenever necessary and at the request
of the affected countries or region, to which falls the
primary responsibility. However, these are issues that
the Council should not deal with alone.
Indeed, for the United Nations, helping States to
secure their borders through technical assistance is
already a well-established task, as reflected in a wide
range of activities carried out and programmed by a
large number of its bodies and organs, both within the
orbit of the General Assembly and in the sphere of the
Security Council. As in other segments of its activity,
however, we believe that the United Nations may and
should improve its performance in this area — on the
one hand, by improving the effectiveness and
operational coordination of its internal efforts to assist
States and regions in need, and, on the other, by
enhancing its coordination with relevant non-United
Nations partners and bodies.
The identification of areas of existing overlaps
and gaps seems to be a logical step in order to further
improve the adequacy and effectiveness of the efforts
being carried out. That is why we appreciate and
welcome this debate and its anticipated outcome,
particularly in respect to the invitation made to the
Secretary-General to submit, in six months, a report
providing a comprehensive survey and assessment of
the United Nations work to address Member States’
requests for assistance in countering and preventing
illicit cross-border trafficking and movement through
their respective borders.

4

We believe that this report will provide a very
valuable basis for the work of the Security Council, the
General Assembly and all other relevant United
Nations organs and bodies, with which, we believe, it
should be shared, opening the way for better
coordinated and more effective assistance strategies
and plans of action. We also believe that improving the
coherence of action between Headquarters-based
bodies and the United Nations structures in the field,
distinctively tailored to each specific context and
situation, and pursuing consistent preventive
approaches could be of great value to this endeavour.
As we said at the open debate in November, it is
our duty to deepen our knowledge of these phenomena
so as to ensure that they do not turn into conflicts. As
the main body responsible for maintaining peace and
security, the Council must be ready to shoulder its
responsibilities.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
believe that today’s debate on securing borders against
illicit cross-border trafficking and movement and how
cross-border crime and its manifestations can
exacerbate situations under the Council’s consideration
is taking place at a very timely moment. The SecretaryGeneral made some very pointed comments on the
implications of such activities and the involvement of
the United Nations.
Managing, securing and protecting borders is a
sovereign prerogative of States. We believe it
necessary to strike a balance between control measures
to maintain secure borders and facilitating the
movement of persons, funds and legitimate goods. This
discussion should lead us to deepen the cooperation
between the Security Council and other bodies of the
United Nations system concerning an issue that, by its
very nature and global scope, requires concerted and
coordinated action of the various organs and bodies of
the United Nations system in development of the
principles of the Charter and the framework of its
respective responsibilities and mandates.
Illicit trafficking in nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons and their delivery systems, as well
as the movement of terrorists and their funds across
borders, are recognized as threats to international peace
and security. Moreover, in specific contexts, the
Council has discussed different manifestations of
organized crime that contribute to the deterioration of
situations that are already fragile. These complex

12-31426

S/PV.6760

criminal activities transcend the trafficking and crossborder dimensions and require a comprehensive and
balanced approach that addresses all their aspects.
The international community must combat such
criminal activities with unwavering resolve. That is
why it is a priority to adopt, in the context of the
Organization, a binding instrument to improve control
of the trade in small arms and light weapons,
explosives and related materials, and the marking and
registration of munitions in order, and to prohibit their
transfer to armed non-State actors. The illicit crossborder traffic in weapons is probably one of the factors
with the greatest impact on national and international
security, and further exacerbates violent situations.
We must acknowledge that effective compliance
with obligations arising from the Council’s decisions
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter depends not
solely on political will, but also on the tools available
to Member States. That is why, on the basis of an
assessment
that
emphasizes
cooperation
and
coordination, we should focus our efforts on improving
the efficiency of binding decisions taken by the
Council to strengthen the capacities, institutions and
normative frameworks of Member States.
In exercising sovereign power to manage and
control their borders, States have the responsibility to
fully meet their international obligations. In that
context, Colombia welcomes the creation of an
inventory of actions and initiatives that have been
taken by the Organization at the request of States in
order to strengthen its capacities in this area.
The criminal manifestations under consideration
today are also regulated by specialized international
treaties, in conformity with a broad and comprehensive
legislative framework that offers the legal tools
adequate to combating them. Similarly, agreements
reached in the context of the General Assembly
recognize overall concepts that are broadly accepted
within the Organization and allow the development of
inclusive and balanced strategies. The Organization as
a whole must focus its efforts on providing the
assistance requested by States towards achieving
comprehensive compliance with the obligations that
arise from these agreements.
It is also necessary to adopt efficient mechanisms
and measures to strengthen international cooperation
and coordination among States to combat the various
manifestations of the crimes under consideration. It is

12-31426

therefore a priority to strengthen border controls
through the allocation of technological and financial
resources, to establish effective legal cooperation
agreements, and to exchange information.
My country believes that these challenges should
be addressed holistically and in respect for the balance
between measures to strengthen security and avoiding
obstacles to social and economic development. While
we understand the need to protect ourselves from the
dangers posed by what has been referred to as illicit
cross-border trafficking and movement, Colombia’s
laws and Constitution consider borders primarily as
zones of integration wherein economic, social,
scientific, technological and cultural development
should be promoted. As such, they emphasize the
strengthening of systems for cross-border customs
cooperation, as well as of networks for the sharing of
information among law-enforcement authorities.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, on behalf of my delegation, I should like to
thank the delegation of the United States for its
initiative in organizing this important debate on
securing borders against illicit cross-border trafficking
and movement. I should also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his detailed briefing. The theme
chosen by your delegation, Madam President, involves
the entire international community. We appreciate the
perspective from which your delegation has chosen to
holistically take up the issue of securing borders in the
face of various cross-border challenges that pose a
threat to international peace and security. This debate
also provides an opportunity for all delegations
participating today to undertake a broad and
constructive exchange of views on this important issue.
The United Nations was established to ensure the
maintenance of international peace and security. In line
with their respective competencies, the problems posed
by illicit cross-border trafficking and movement have
been addressed by various bodies through conventions,
protocols, mechanisms, action plans and sanctions
regimes. Today there is no doubt that the work of the
United Nations, along with the steps taken by Member
States at the national, regional, subregional and
interregional basis, has made it possible to better
secure our borders.
We must acknowledge, however, that in this new
era of globalization the various networks involved in
illicit cross-border trafficking and movement have

5

S/PV.6760

unfortunately been able to benefit from the growing
interconnectedness of our world and to evade our
collective efforts to combat them. The increasing
fluidity at the international level has made it possible
for those various networks — whether they are
associated with trafficking in weapons, natural and
mineral resources, drugs or human beings — to link up
in non-transparent ways and set up mutually supporting
alliances that sometimes involve terrorist networks,
armed groups and separatist movements.
That state of affairs is especially worrying in that
such interconnectedness is not just a mere potential
threat, but a reality in various regions of the world. It is
unfortunately a reality on the African continent. The
Sahelo-Saharan and Atlantic coastal regions have been
especially affected, as has the Gulf of Guinea. The
recent developments in the Sahel must be the focus of
our attention, as they illustrate the impact that the
tangle of networks involved in illicit cross-border
trafficking and movement could have on the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the countries of
those regions, as well as on international peace and
security.
Combating this threat must first and foremost be
a concern for Member States, which must in a
sovereign manner identify and take the necessary
appropriate measures to secure their borders while
observing their international obligations. Given the
nature of this cross-border challenge, our efforts must
also be both collective and effective.
Securing borders also entails heightened dialogue
and cooperation at the bilateral level, as well as the
subregional, inter-regional and international levels, on
the basis of the principles of solidarity and shared
responsibility to address the underlying causes that
make possible the continuation and development of
illicit cross-border trafficking and movement. The goal
should be to provide a concrete, tailored and
sustainable response.
The issue of assistance is also crucial. In that
regard, it is essential that the international community
demonstrate greater solidarity by providing effective
support to States that desire such assistance in
strengthening their capacities to secure their borders,
all the while respecting their national sovereignty. It is
also important to support those States in their efforts to
combat the various types of cross-border movement by
putting an end to the safe havens enjoyed by networks.

6

To that end, the United Nations and the various
existing cooperation and coordination mechanisms
have a key role to play.
The Kingdom of Morocco has always been an
active member of the international community in
combating this scourge. We have constantly called
attention to the danger posed by the growing
interconnectedness of illicit cross-border trafficking
and movement in our region. It is in that spirit that
Morocco hosted the launching of important
international initiatives, in particular the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the African
Initiative for the Atlantic, which aim to provide a
coordinated and concerted response to illicit crossborder trafficking and movement and to facilitate
cooperation and the exchange of best practices.
Morocco has also organized numerous events
dealing with various aspects of the phenomenon we are
addressing today. I should also like to take this
opportunity to inform the members of the Council that,
before the end of this year, Morocco will host the
holding of the second meeting of the regional
ministerial conference on border security in North
African and Sahel countries.
We should all continue to work together to
combat illicit cross-border trafficking and movement
and the various networks involved, as well as to ensure
that the legal instruments and mechanisms that have
been established are able to respond to the evolving
nature and scope of the dangers they pose. The United
Nations, its Member States and the various
organizations concerned should coordinate their efforts
and demonstrate genuine political will to continue,
update and adapt the international norms and the
mechanisms that have been established in order to face
this phenomenon.
In conclusion, my delegation takes note of the
proposal to request the Secretary-General to prepare a
report on illicit cross-border trafficking and movement.
We hope that the report will contribute to the
Organization’s efforts to provide a collective response
that can help us to effectively overcome the challenges
we face.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing this open debate. We have taken note of the
concept paper (S/2012/195, annex) prepared by your
delegation to guide our deliberations, for which we are

12-31426

S/PV.6760

also grateful. We also express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his clear introductory statement.
As you are aware, Madam President, although our
delegation did not object during your initial
consultations to the holding of a debate on the general
topic of illicit cross-border trafficking and movement,
the discussions leading up to today’s meeting turned
out to be quite lively. I would like to explain the basis
for our own concerns, as seen from our national
perspective.
Most of our concerns stem from whether
emphasis should be placed on securing borders or on
illicit trafficking. With regard to the former, our
concern is simply that securing borders against the
illicit movement of goods, services, financial flows and
persons can be defended on its own right; however, it
always poses the risk of hampering licit movements,
thereby causing more harm than good. With regard to
the latter, we wonder about how one is to distinguish
between illicit and licit movements — and the grey
areas in between — and about how one is to
differentiate between various types of movement,
taking into account that dealing with, for instance,
narcotics trafficking is quite different from human
trafficking or dealing in stolen cultural artifacts, not to
mention the cross-border movement of persons.
Moreover, not all illicit cross-border activities
pose an actual threat to international peace and
security, although some certainly have that potential.
Furthermore, however we approach the scourge of
illicit trafficking, whether under the purview of the
Security Council or, in more general terms, within the
overall context of the United Nations system, we
should be motivated by the idea of promoting
cooperation between Member States on such matters.
However, by emphasizing controls and regulations, we
run the risk, perhaps unintentionally, of encouraging a
more defensive approach on the part of sovereign
States, with an every-man-for-himself mentality, which
would be contrary to the purposes and principles of the
Organization.
Besides such comments of a conceptual nature,
we also have some more specific observations to make,
mostly of a more positive nature.
First, we believe that this discussion can
contribute to our efforts to prevent conflicts with a
view to maintaining international peace and security
and strengthen our responses to emerging threats and

12-31426

challenges. Like terrorism, the phenomena of
transnational organized crime and illicit trafficking in
arms, goods and persons are shared responsibilities; in
order to prevent and combat them, we must work
collectively. Moreover, we need to secure our borders
and combat illicit trafficking and movement in order to
uphold the rule of law at the national and international
levels.
Secondly, a wide range of existing strategies and
initiatives to address these issues has been developed at
the national, regional and international levels, which
makes it more difficult to identify synergies and
similarities. That can be attributed not only to the
particular nature of each issue, or to the fact that each
is discussed in separate expert forums, but also to the
fact that each topic is governed by its own legislative
and treaty frameworks. That is additional justification
for strengthening international cooperation and for
providing technical assistance, particularly to promote
and facilitate the implementation of the relevant
international conventions and protocols.
Thirdly, distinct strategies are required to address
specific threats posed by different types of illicit
trafficking and movement, including appropriate
strategies designed to reduce the demand and supply of
illicit drugs. In effect, we need to address the
underlying causes of that phenomenon and to take
actions designed to reduce the market for illegal drugs
as well as the profits from their sale. Unless the
underlying issues are addressed, the problem will
simply be displaced, or else it will be replaced by
another illicit activity. Governments must therefore
strengthen the rule of law in their countries in order to
develop social antibodies to fight organized crime and
eventually break the cycle of crime and
underdevelopment.
Fourthly, strengthening the capacity of the United
Nations to assist Member States to secure their borders
against illicit trafficking and movement is only one
aspect, albeit an important one, in the wider arsenal of
measures to address this issue. While recognizing that
the United Nations has a role to play in helping the
States concerned, which should be carried out within
existing mandates, upon the request of Member States,
with full respect for their sovereignty and under
national ownership. Moreover, adequate resources are
also needed to ensure that sustainable efforts yield
significant results.

7

S/PV.6760

Fifthly, many parts of the United Nations system,
including most visibly the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Development
Programme, the Department of Economic and Social
Affairs, the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development and the regional commissions, are either
directly or indirectly involved in supporting countries
in the effort to combat the illicit trafficking of goods,
services and people. There is a case to be made in that
regard for greater coherence and coordination within
the system.
Finally, the Security Council should continue to
strengthen its mechanisms under resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004), which specifically address the
implementation
of
counter-terrorism
and
non-proliferation obligations, since they also concern
cross-border control and management.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
let me join others in thanking you, Madam President,
for organizing this open debate on the threats to
international peace and security posed by illicit crossborder trafficking and movement. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Trafficking by non-State actors in nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons, their means of
delivery and related materials, and the movement of
terrorists and their funds challenge international peace
and security. Moreover, there are situations where
international peace and security is exacerbated by
illicit cross-border trafficking in arms and drug
trafficking. In such cases, Security Council
pronouncements have invariably
listed those
exacerbations and sought to control them.
At the same time, there are a number of United
Nations bodies and agencies that have their identified
and Charter-mandated areas of specialization in
connection with illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement. It is important that the Council respects the
mandates of other organs of the United Nations and its
specialized bodies.
Of late, there has been a concerted push to bring
several global issues onto the Council’s agenda under
the pretext of their affecting international peace and
security. That needs to be avoided. The Charter
provides for a clear division of responsibility between
the General Assembly, the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council and other specialized

8

bodies. We must respect that separation of functions in
letter and spirit.
General norm-setting must necessarily belong to
relevant organs and agencies of the United Nations.
The Security Council should step in only where there is
threat to international peace and security, and in the
context of specific situations, such as in conflict and
post-conflict situations, and under sanctions regimes
established pursuant to resolutions 1540 (2004), 1373
(2001) and 1267 (1999), under Chapter VII of the
Charter.
The United Nations has played a seminal role in
the capacity-building of Member States. States need
assistance to fulfil their international commitments, to
strengthen their internal institutions, including those
dealing with law and order, and to secure their borders.
Such an exercise must always be demand-driven and
led by Member States. We commend the efforts and
commitment of the relevant United Nations agencies in
developing the capacities of countries in conflict and
post-conflict situations. Commitment to the capacitybuilding of States in different sectors requires greater
financial and technological support, and we should be
willing to provide the same to them.
However, the connected issue is how the relevant
United Nations agencies can help interested Member
States secure their borders against illicit cross-border
trafficking and movement. The first fundamental
principle in that regard is respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the State seeking assistance.
Secondly, donors and the relevant United Nations
agencies must respect the prerogative of the Member
State concerned in securing its own borders. Thirdly,
assistance in capacity-building must be provided only
upon request and as mutually agreed.
The challenges we are discussing today are global
in nature, and their interlinkages make them even more
complex. They call for strong collaborative action,
involving all Member States working together in a
manner that is legitimate and appropriate.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The theme of today’s meeting is directly
related to the growing and ever-diversifying challenges
and threats from terrorism, drug trafficking and crossborder organized crime. Porous borders are one factor
encouraging the illicit trafficking of weapons and drugs
and the movement of terrorists and their financial
resources. Many types of illicit cross-border trafficking

12-31426

S/PV.6760

genuinely and seriously undermine the efforts of the
Council to maintain international peace and security.
Particular attention should be paid to the
sanctions regimes imposed by the Council and the ad
hoc regimes established under its relevant counterterrorist resolutions, in particular resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004), where for us, the priority
areas are illicit trafficking of drugs, weapons, weapons
of mass destruction and their components and the
movement of terrorists and their financial resources.
It is a secret to no one that there are problems in
terms of compliance with these regimes. The
destructive impact of Afghan drug trafficking, which
has merged with terrorism, has long grown beyond the
borders of that specific region. We view Afghan drug
trafficking as a threat to international peace and
stability. We advocate a comprehensive approach to
countering this threat, including the range of tools
available to the Security Council to curb the financial
flows that fuel drug trafficking and to place drug lords
on the relevant Security Council sanctions lists.
Important measures have been put in place in
terms of implementing Security Council resolution
1817 (2008) in order to counter the smuggling into
Afghanistan of the chemical precursors used to
manufacture drugs. There needs to be greater
involvement on the part of the international security
forces in Afghanistan in efforts to eradicate drug crops
and drug laboratories in that country. The outcomes of
the third Ministerial Conference of the Paris Pact, held
in Vienna in 16 February, provides us the necessary
platform for comprehensive efforts to curb Afghan
drug flows.
Another example is the spread of Libyan
weapons. There is a real threat that those weapons
could fall into the hands of terrorists. In that
connection, Russia initiated resolution 2017 (2011),
which sends the necessary signal and sets out the
relevant framework for efforts to counter that new
threat.
The critical problem of piracy in Somalia also
persists. The sanctions regime against that country,
which for an extended period has had no border-control
regime, has long been in effect. However, Somali
pirates freely receive and have available to them
sophisticated weaponry, boats, Global Positioning
System navigation devices and other equipment
necessary for their criminal activities.

12-31426

Specifically for such situations, it would be
useful to have an overview of the problems concerning
the control of borders, illicit trafficking and
movements across them. It is important, when
considering cases of illicit cross-border movement and
trafficking, that the Security Council act strictly within
the framework of its mandate to maintain international
peace and security, that it not encroach upon the
purview of other international organizations or bodies,
and that it avoid engaging in revamping the existing
international system of cooperation in the area of
border protection.
The current draft presidential statement, based on
the outcome of today’s meeting of the Council,
requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
comprehensive assessment of United Nations activities
in assisting States to counter various types of illicit
cross-border trafficking and the movement of terrorists
and their finances. We believe that it is important that
the report reflect the priority areas I have addressed
and that it take into account the measures that have
already been clearly taken by the Security Council,
which remain in effect.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): The choice
of the theme of securing borders against illicit crossborder trafficking is of great interest to Member States,
especially those of us in the West Africa subregion,
because that issue goes to the heart of the matter
discussed by the Security Council last February with
regard to our region. My country would therefore like
very much to thank the United States for having
proposed this subject to be considered by the Council.
The quality and speed of means of transport, the
development of information and communications
technologies, as well as the policies promoting the
formation of groups in the subregion, have today
facilitated the free movement of persons and goods
across borders, thereby creating enormous difficulties
in controlling borders. Thanks to the ease of inter-State
transport and the loosening of border controls, we have
seen the flourishing of all kinds of illicit trafficking.
That is due to the fact that borders, especially in
developing countries, generally remain quite porous
and those countries do not have modern means for
controlling their borders. Insufficiently controlled
borders give rise to an environment in which we see a
proliferation of spontaneous contextual practices that
have no legal status within those States.

9

S/PV.6760

For those reasons, borders have become
completely lawless spaces in some of our countries,
where all types of activities flourish, including
trafficking in weapons, drugs and natural resources, as
well as trafficking in human beings, illegal migration,
illicit trafficking in goods, corruption, moneylaundering and terrorist activities — all of which can
jeopardize the peace, security and the stability of
States.
It is therefore no exaggeration to say that border
zones obey a logic that goes well beyond the
sovereignty of States. Criminal groups moving across
borders are well equipped and quick to adapt to new
situations or relocate their operations in order to avoid
detection. They can take over entire regions of a
country where Governments lack the technical means
needed to counter such groups. They make substantial
profits from their activities, which often flourish to the
detriment of vulnerable persons, such as the victims of
human trafficking, migrants and child soldiers.
The activities of such groups have led to an
increased feeling of insecurity, felt by other countries
as well, and they raise the issue of the management of
borders and the subsequent matter of relations with
neighbouring States.
International legal instruments, such as the 2003
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its related protocols, on the
trafficking of persons and the illicit trafficking of
migrants, the United Nations Programme of Action on
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects and the United Nations Convention
against Corruption, have all sought to address the need
to counter those new threats to peace and security.
Nevertheless, the threat posed by factors linked to
securing our borders and combating illicit movements
is greater than ever, even greater than when those legal
instruments came into effect. This is why the quest for
appropriate responses to new transnational threats
should be a priority for the international community.
Securing borders and combating illicit trafficking
and cross-border movement require human, material
and financial means, which are quite significant and
often beyond the reach of many States individually.
Many States do not have an effective means of
providing surveillance and control of borders. An
overall integrated and holistic approach on the part of
the international community will make it possible to

10

meet the challenges and insecurity generated by illicit
border trafficking. The value added of such an
approach lies in working in a coherent way at the
global, regional and transregional levels to fight threats
that State mechanisms are unable to counter, and in
adapting our responses to challenges in the field.
The threats posed by illicit cross-border
trafficking and organized crime to their sovereignty,
stability and security have led the States of West Africa
to take measures to reduce the risks arising from our
porous borders. At the subregional level, in addition to
the four-State agreement among Benin, Ghana, Nigeria
and Togo to fight transborder crime, in 2009 my
country and Ghana signed a memorandum of
understanding between our security, law enforcement,
police, customs and immigration services to fight
transnational organized crime. Moreover, the Heads of
State and Government in the Co-Prosperity Alliance
Zone, comprised of those same four countries, also
hold regular consultations on combating the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
Also at the subregional level, with the help of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
we have developed a cross-cutting multilateral strategy
based on shared responsibility, called the UNODC
Regional Programme for West Africa 2010-2014.
At the national level, Togo has responded to the
issue with various measures. Among them are the
creation of our central anti-drug and anti-moneylaundering office and a national narcotics laboratory,
which help the national police and customs in their
respective duties. Moreover, our integrated national
plan includes several steps undertaken with the
technical and financial assistance of development
partners. Those have led to the establishment in
February 2011 of an integrated container control unit in
the port city of Lomé, and a national financial data
centre at the Lomé international airport.
Despite those initiatives, and given the weak
operational capacity of the States of the West Africa
subregion, funding and capacity-building for national
agencies are necessary and require the ongoing support
of the international community. Now is an opportune
time to express our gratitude to the United Nations,
especially the UNODC, which has consistently helped
to strengthen the capacities of national institutions.
Given the magnitude of the problem, Togo hopes
that the Secretary-General will study the issue and

12-31426

S/PV.6760

propose approaches and solutions to bolster existing
mechanisms.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing.
With increasing globalization, the links and
exchanges among countries have grown ever closer as
the global movement of materials and people
accelerates. At the same time, the problem of illicit
cross-border trafficking and movement, exemplified by
arms proliferation, drug trafficking and the spread of
terrorism, is ever more serious. Lately, arms
proliferation in West Africa and the Sahel region and
the turbulence in Mali have raised widespread concern.
Granted, arms proliferation in the region has its own
history, but recent regional conflicts have aggravated it.
I wish to take this opportunity to emphasize three
points
related
to
strengthening
international
cooperation in fighting illicit cross-border trafficking
and movement.
First, border management falls within the
sovereignty of Member States. National Governments
shoulder the primary responsibility for strengthening
their border and customs control and for preventing
and fighting all types of illicit cross-border trafficking
and movement. We hope that countries, in accordance
with relevant United Nations and Security Council
resolutions, will fulfil their obligations under relevant
international conventions and international law,
improve
domestic
legislation,
strengthen
interdepartmental coordination and cooperation,
increase law enforcement capabilities and take
practical steps to strengthen border management.
Secondly, we support international cooperation in
fighting illicit cross-border trafficking and movement.
Such cooperation should focus on assisting countries in
need of capacity-building. In the meantime, countries
differ from one another in their border management
practices. While providing assistance, the international
community should fully respect the national
circumstances, desires and choices of countries
receiving aid, adhere to the principles and purposes of
the United Nations Charter, and respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Member States.
Thirdly, it is essential to bring into full play the
advantages of the various United Nations agencies so
as to create synergy. In assisting Member States to

12-31426

strengthen their border management capacities, it is
advisable to fully take advantage of existing United
Nations agencies, including, for instance, by
formulating best practices. The various United Nations
agencies should, in accordance with their respective
terms of reference and specialties, properly allocate
tasks and strengthen their coordination. The Security
Council has the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. It should therefore
focus its attention on illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement that threaten international peace and
security, and avoid duplication of labour and disrupting
the functions of other United Nations bodies.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): We welcome the initiative
of the United States to streamline United Nations
action on illicit trafficking and movement of persons
and goods in areas where there is overlap, and we
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing. We agree
that there is a need to discuss efficient structures for
assisting States in dealing with widespread illicit crossborder trafficking and movement of goods, funds and
individuals, which can pose or exacerbate threats to
peace and security. In that regard, we would like to
stress that the Council has already repeatedly addressed
threats to international peace and security posed by
cross-cutting issues such as drug trafficking, organized
crime and human trafficking.
In our view, it is important to bear in mind that
open borders in themselves should not be seen as
threats. Interconnectedness and the free legal
movement of goods and people are things to aspire to,
not to condemn. However, they need to be balanced
with effectively fighting some very real threats posed
by illicit transfers, which can be exacerbated by poorly
managed borders. We would therefore commend an
assessment of United Nations capacities as an essential
step towards identifying possible fields of overlap and
room for improvement. We believe that the SecretaryGeneral would be well placed to undertake such a task.
I would like to make a few brief observations.
First, we should bear in mind that there is a limit to
streamlining. Nuclear materials, weapons, dual-use
goods, drugs and people crossing borders each require
different approaches and means of cooperation. We
would also like to stress that streamlining should not
lead to decreasing the efficient implementation of
sanctions in any way. On the contrary, we see further
improvement in the implementation of sanctions as an
essential contribution to securing borders.

11

S/PV.6760

Secondly, illicit trafficking and movement of
goods, funds and individuals do not necessarily
constitute a threat to international peace and security.
In many cases they are adequately dealt with by
national law enforcement authorities. However, illicit
trafficking and movement can have an impact on
national and international security when issues such as
terrorism or arms proliferation are at stake. Organized
crime, drug traffickers and traffickers in human beings
obviously also benefit from inadequately managed
borders. The United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime therefore rightly
addresses the improvement of border management
structures.
Thirdly, when combating illicit trafficking and
the movement of goods, funds and individuals, States
face a number of challenges resulting from the overall
goal of maintaining free global trade, on the one hand,
and responding to safety and security needs on the
other. For example, long borders require high numbers
of personnel and highly developed risk assessments.
Border protection needs qualified and well-equipped
personnel. It is in the nature of illicit trafficking and
movement to seek to overcome existing borderprotection mechanisms. Therefore, reliable and
sustainable organizations are necessary that, besides
many other challenges, are resistant to corruption.
Looking at United Nations efforts to help
Member States tackle those challenges, we would like
to stress the importance of capacity-building and
institution-building. Those elements are key to
enabling functioning State institutions to adequately
differentiate among the various goods and persons
crossing their borders. With regard to capacitybuilding, I would like to mention that Germany has
supported a number of projects, such as providing
technical aid in the framework of a customs data
project.
Also,
in
peacekeeping
operations,
the
reconstruction of border control capacities should be
given particular attention where appropriate at an early
stage. In that regard, it might be worthwhile to explore
how United Nations police could assist in enhancing
such capacities by providing support for the early
reconstruction and capacity-building of border
protection entities. In that regard, Germany supports
the African Union Border Programme, aimed at the
demarcation of borders, cross-border cooperation and
capacity development.

12

Last but not least, national border-management
efforts should be embedded in close international
cooperation with neighbouring States as well as
regional and international organizations. In the case of
the Schengen Area in Europe, regarding the movement
of persons and goods inside the single European
market, there are generally no internal border controls.
Border control, monitoring and security are not
primarily ensured by each sovereign State member,
individually, but through regional cooperation.
The draft presidential statement that the Council
will adopt today also rightly stresses the important role
of regional organizations and underlines the need for
regional strategies and United Nations support for
regional cooperation.
Germany has for a long time been committed to a
comprehensive approach to curb the illicit trade of
small arms and light weapons and to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. For
several years now, Germany has been a strong
supporter of projects of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) aimed at capacity-building
in the security sector. I would also like to mention our
support for the UNODC Global Container Control
Programme, aimed at ensuring effective control of
container cargo in some West African countries in
order to suppress and prevent drug trafficking.
Within the European Union (EU) framework, we
contribute to the EU Sahel strategy, which addresses
both development and security issues and aims at
strengthening regional cooperation.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Allow me to begin
by thanking the United States presidency for convening
this important open debate on threats to international
peace and security and securing borders against illicit
cross-border trafficking and movement. We also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Azerbaijan joins the position of the Non-Aligned
Movement on the issue reflected in the letter and
annexes that will be circulated as a document of the
Security Council (S/2012/257).
Illicit cross-border trafficking in weapons of mass
destruction, their means of delivery and related
materials; trafficking in arms, drugs, human beings and
conflict minerals; and the cross-border movement of
terrorists, organized criminal groups and their funds
have an impact on international peace and security and

12-31426

S/PV.6760

the potential to undermine the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, jeopardize domestic and
regional stability and economic development and fuel
conflicts. While each of those phenomena separately
constitutes a broad matter for discussion, and has been
extensively dealt with by the United Nations, today we
are focusing on the border aspects and on how to better
secure our borders against illicit cross-border
trafficking and movement.
As a critical pillar of national security, border
protection is a matter of national sovereign authority
and the responsibility of States. Through better
protection of their borders against threats to national
security, States prevent the cross-border spillover of
illicit trafficking and movement from inside and
outside of their territories and thereby contribute to
international peace and security.
Illicit cross-border trafficking and movement
involves a network of actors in different countries.
Such a network often spreads its zone of operation
beyond the boundaries of just one region and becomes
transnational, linking up local actors with a much
broader web of players in other regions who take
advantage of malfunctioning border management
systems and other factors existing in a country in order
to establish and enhance their operations.
At the same time, securing borders against illicit
trafficking and movement does not imply toughened
border crossing procedures, which may create serious
impediments to legal cross-border activities. States
must therefore ensure that strong national border
control, management and export control systems are in
place that will effectively prevent illicit cross-border
activities while promoting the free and secure
movement of persons, goods, services and investments
across borders.
It is also obvious that, in a globalized world,
developing and maintaining cooperation among
neighbouring States on border-related issues at the
political, executive and operational levels is of
paramount importance. In fact, such cooperation only
adds to the effectiveness of national border-control and
management systems. However, cooperation among
States will not be possible without due regard for the
basic norms and principles of international law,
namely, respect for each other’s territorial integrity and
sovereignty, the inviolability of internationally

12-31426

recognized borders and
neighbourly relations.

the

principle

of

good

Weak border control and management systems
are among the main factors conducive to the spread of
illicit cross-border trafficking and movement.
International organizations, including United Nations
entities and the World Customs Organization, as well
as regional organizations, have initiated various
projects and programmes on improving the border
control and management capacities of States. While
welcoming such initiatives, and in certain instances
becoming a beneficiary State, we nevertheless want to
emphasize that the relevant projects and programmes
must not be based on the one-size-fits-all approach.
There are some situations where certain border-related
initiatives have been designed with total disregard for
the national security concerns and border priorities of a
beneficiary State.
Instead, such initiatives must be tailored to
address the individual needs of States, upon their
request and with their involvement, and take into full
account the security situation of a State and its
surrounding political geography. It is also absolutely
necessary that those organizations exert the maximum
effort to avoid duplication with other existing
initiatives.
The sensitive geographic location of Azerbaijan
makes it vulnerable to transborder threats such as
international terrorism; illegal migration; transnational
organized crime; arms, drugs and human trafficking
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The existence of those threats requires devoting
particular attention to the security of our borders. At
the same time, border management and export controls
are important components of critical energy
infrastructure protection. Azerbaijan is therefore doing
its utmost, at the national level and through close
cooperation with our neighbours and international
partners within our bilateral security programmes, as
well as with international organizations, to maintain
comprehensive
national
border
control
and
management, as well as export control systems.
Despite such efforts, Azerbaijan is unable to
exercise control over a considerable part of its State
border owing to the continued military occupation of
its territories. The lack of sovereign control by the
legitimate authorities of Azerbaijan over those borders
creates favourable conditions for illicit cross-border

13

S/PV.6760

trafficking and movement in and beyond those
territories.
Azerbaijan looks forward to a report by the
Secretary-General on a survey of United Nations
assistance to Member States to counter illicit crossborder trafficking and movement. At the same time,
any survey and assessment should, in our view, be
confined to the activities of United Nations entities and
should avoid providing an assessment of the borderrelated needs and capabilities of individual Member
States in an attempt to justify the relevance of certain
programmes.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for having organized this
debate, which provides the Council with the
opportunity to examine how the United Nations system
can better help States to secure their borders against
illicit trafficking and flows. I associate myself with the
statement to be made shortly by the head of the
European Union delegation.
Illicit cross-border trafficking and flows
encompass various phenomena. Some of them certainly
constitute direct threats to international peace and
security, for example, the trafficking of weapons of
mass destruction-related goods and technologies
related to. Others can indirectly harm regional and
international stability and security. I am thinking, for
example, of a phenomenon that we see in a number of
crises that the Council has been called on to address.
Money stemming from the trafficking of natural
resources fuels the illicit trade in weapons, which, in
turn, increases regional instability.
When the consequences of such cross-border
flows and trafficking threaten international peace and
security, the Council has the responsibility to address
those issues. The Council has already fully taken into
account that growing threat in a number of specific
areas, such as the fight against terrorism with
resolution 1373 (2001) and the fight against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the
prevention of terrorism by means of weapons of mass
destruction with resolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent
resolutions. That is also a key element in the
effectiveness of sanctions decided by the Council.
Moreover, in February 2010, the Council, in
adopting presidential statement S/PRST/2012/4,
acknowledged the increasing danger posed by crossborder threats. At last, it is increasingly taking note of

14

the regional dimension, as it did on West Africa and the
Sahel in February by noting the threat to international
peace and security posed by transnational organized
crime (see S/PV.6717).
The approach that we are taking today is to
consider the issue of illicit trafficking and flows from
the perspective of borders, which are crossing points
for such trafficking. Here, it is not a matter of having a
theoretical debate on the various phenomena
encompassed by the notion of illicit trafficking and
flows, but rather of trying to provide concrete
responses on the ground.
States have the key responsibility for border
control. However, we know that criminal networks
often adapt more rapidly than State structures to the
opportunities provided by globalization. States
sometimes do not have the necessary capacities to
effectively monitor their borders and to combat illicit
trafficking; hence, the importance of responding
through international cooperation and the need for
States to have the necessary capacities in order to be
able to implement their international obligations with
regard to border control. In that regard, efforts to better
help those States requesting assistance in that area can
be made.
In order to address such illicit flows, many
strategies and mechanisms to assist States that need
such assistance are already in place. We commend
ongoing projects that make it possible to tackle such
flows at the regional level. As an example, I would like
to cite the Economic Community of West African
States Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons.
Strengthening cooperation among States is important;
hence, France’s initiative in 2011 — in the context of
its presidency of the Group of Eight — to address the
fight against cross-border cocaine trafficking.
Moreover, I would like to recall that, within the
European Union, mechanisms exist to combat threats
related to smuggling and the trafficking of goods and
persons.
As the Secretary-General mentioned, there are
many United Nations structures, be they institutions,
programmes or bodies of the Security Council,
currently cooperating with States to help them to
counter such phenomena. The United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, in particular, plays a key role in
such issues, especially within the context of its
regional programme for West Africa.

12-31426

S/PV.6760

The tasks undertaken by the various United
Nations structures often have much in common, such
as assessing the position of States and providing
technical assistance, and may overlap. Even when they
focus on specific areas, they can provide effective
external assistance. For example, when a State benefits
from a technical assistance programme to counter
proliferation and to combat terrorism relating to
weapons of mass destruction under the 1540
Committee, or when it strengthens export control
mechanisms or its customs system for that purpose, a
State more generally further secures its borders, which
helps it to further counter other kinds of trafficking.
Thus, there are many areas for possible synergies.
International peace and security can only benefit
from more efforts to prevent illicit trafficking and
flows. There are many international and regional
initiatives. It therefore seems particularly timely that
the Council is today requesting the United Nations to
assess its work on State support in that regard. In our
view, such an assessment should be in the form of
specific recommendations aimed at increasing
consistency and effectiveness, while drawing the
greatest benefit from the initiatives of other
international and regional organizations that play a role
in that area.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): At the outset, allow
me to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
debate on issues related to illicit cross-border
trafficking and the movement of goods, funds and
individuals. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his statement earlier today. We align ourselves with the
letter dated 24 April 2012, contained in document
S/2012/257, from the Chair of the Coordinating Bureau
of the Non-Aligned Movement, addressed to the
President of the Council.

exacerbated by the crisis in Libya. The region has
become awash with illicit weapons and other illicit
goods, which has threatened the peace and security of
several States in the region, including Mali and
Guinea-Bissau. Such illicit trafficking and movements
could constitute challenges to international peace and
security and go to the very heart of each State’s
territorial integrity and sovereign responsibility to
enact the necessary relevant legislation and related
Government regulations and administrative measures
and to set up or constantly improve implementation
structures and systems. In that context, South Africa
wishes to highlight the centrality of the principles of
the sovereign equality of States, territorial integrity and
non-interference in the internal affairs of Member
States.
Those principles are key to addressing the
challenges posed by the illicit cross-border trafficking
and movement of goods, funds and individuals, as that
involves the maintenance of effective national border
controls and the effective management by each
individual State of its financial architecture.
However, not all States can address those issues
without assistance from cooperating partners and the
relevant organizations. There are many States that
could benefit from assistance and cooperation in
building their capacities to address those challenges
and threats, and, in doing so, all States are entitled to
seek and receive the relevant cooperation and
assistance, on voluntary basis, upon their request and
subject to whichever bilateral terms or arrangements
they may agree to.

South Africa remains deeply concerned about the
challenges and threats posed by the illicit cross-border
trade in conventional arms, the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery, transnational organized crime, the movement
of terrorists and their funds, drug trafficking, and
trafficking in conflict materials, minerals and persons.
The illicit cross-border movement of goods, funds and
materials has the potential to create regional instability.

South Africa believes that a report containing an
assessment of how the United Nations can play a better
role in such cooperation and assistance efforts may
contribute to the ability of States to deal with those
challenges. Such a report submitted by the SecretaryGeneral should take a holistic and integral approach
and have a system-wide focus. My delegation believes
that such an assessment could help improve the
assistance efforts made by the United Nations and play
an important role in assisting all States in setting up
and implementing effective border controls, export
controls and financial management systems and
processes that could address those challenges.

We have seen recent instability in West Africa
and the Sahel brought about by the challenges posed by
weak structural border-management controls and

South Africa believes, however, that in the
implementation of assistance efforts, State sovereignty
and the mandates of the relevant organs of the United

12-31426

15

S/PV.6760

Nations should be respected. Based on such an
assessment, different organs of the United Nations
could take up matters raised in such a report in line
with their relevant mandates. In addition, my
delegation is of the view that the Security Council,
which has primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, as set out in
Article 24 of the Charter, may then take up issues that
are relevant and fall within its mandate.
In conclusion, let me say that we are pleased to
note that there is wide interest in this debate from the
broader membership of the United Nations. This is
testimony to the importance attached to this issue by
all States Members of the Organization.
South Africa urges the Secretary-General, in
preparing the report that is envisaged in the
presidential statement that we intend to adopt, to take
into account all views expressed by Member States.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
you, Madam President, for having initiated this
discussion on strengthening the capacity of the United
Nations to assist Member States in securing their
borders against illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement. I should also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing, which set out what the United
Nations system is doing to address these issues and the
challenges which it faces.
In this age of globalization, it is increasingly
important to ensure that borders are managed
effectively. The threats all of us face from the illicit
movement of goods and people are real and are felt on
both a national and a global scale. The benefits of an
interconnected world and developments in technology
are many, but they are also available to those who seek
to cause harm. The international community needs to
work collectively to identify and tackle those threats in
a coordinated way. At the same time, it needs to ensure
that through effective border management and the
facilitation of legitimate flows of people and trade, the
global economy is given space and encouragement to
grow and develop. I believe that it is possible to
balance both of those goals.
Control over borders is one of the attributes of
sovereignty, and it is obviously a matter for individual
States to decide how best to defend their own. But
there are many parallels between different systems, and
we can learn from one another. Maintaining a secure
border involves detection, interruption, disruption and

16

prevention as far upstream in the process as possible. It
is about making sure that the right people are in the
right place at the right time, with the right information.
Living on a proud collection of islands at the
north-western edge of Europe, we have long
recognized that our borders cannot effectively be
secured in isolation. As well as a strong visa regime,
robust information technology systems and a
professional border force, the United Kingdom’s
border controls rely heavily on collaborative working
partnerships to target illicit flows — partnerships
which we have developed with other countries, the
European Union, the United Nations and other
organizations. The United Kingdom is looking to build
on those partnerships, using an intelligence-led,
multidisciplinary approach to identify and target key
threats and to increase our sharing of best practices.
It is clear that the work of the Security Council in
the maintenance of international peace and security
often includes the need to take measures to address
illicit flows across borders. These can involve the array
of restrictive measures put in place in specific country
regimes, for example, arms embargoes and targeted
asset freezes. But they also include more wide-ranging
thematic measures aimed at addressing global threats
from terrorism or weapons of mass destruction.
The Council also needs to look at evolving
threats and challenges such as the narcotics trade,
people trafficking and transnational organized crime,
as it has done in relevant situations in the past.
In ensuring the implementation of any sanctions
measures it has imposed, the Council has created
mechanisms to facilitate and assist. These range from
standing bodies such as the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate to the countryspecific panels or groups of experts that assist
sanctions committees in their work.
Madam President, looking at the concept note
(S/2012/195) that you circulated for this debate, it is
clear that there is a host of other United Nations
entities and agencies that are active in this field. Better
coordination of all United Nations bodies involved in
the fight against illicit flows, working in partnership
with the European Union and other partner
organizations, can only bring benefits.
room

A lot of good work is going on, but there is also
for review and constructive assessment.

12-31426

S/PV.6760

Dissatisfaction is normally a concomitant of ambition,
so it is right that the Council will, in the presidential
statement that we will adopt shortly, set out the need
for an ambitious report which surveys the United
Nations system and thereby provides the Council with
assessments on the basis of which we can consider
further steps to improve United Nations assistance to
Member States in this area.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): At the outset, we would
like to associate ourselves with the letter (S/2012/257)
sent to the Security Council by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt on behalf of the Member
States of the Non-Aligned Movement regarding the
theme of this open debate. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
The United Nations Charter creates a clear
division of work among its various organs. The
allocation of certain powers to the Security Council
was duly contextualized in both substance and scope.
Accordingly, while all Member States agree to
implement Article 25 of the Charter, it is with the clear
understanding that the functions and powers of the
Security Council are confined strictly to Article 24 of
the Charter.
Accordingly, we believe that the Security
Council, which acts on behalf of Member States, must
fully observe all Charter provisions, as well as all
General Assembly resolutions, which clarify its
relationship with the General Assembly and other
principal organs. Similarly, no action by the Security
Council should undermine the United Nations Charter
or the relevant multilateral instruments or international
organizations established in this regard, or the role of
the General Assembly.
Securing borders falls within the sovereign
purview of Member States. This core function of State
sovereignty cannot be arrogated by any external or
international institution. Only a sovereign State itself
can decide how to protect its borders, fortify their
security and ensure that the movement of goods and
people across its borders does not pose a threat to it or
to other States.
The issue of border security should become a
concern of the Security Council only in those specific
situations which pose a threat to international peace
and security. Conceptually, it is almost impossible to
lump all kinds of cross-border trafficking and
movement under the rubric of some single term or

12-31426

concept. The mutual cooperation of States in the fight
against illicit cross-border trafficking and movement
can be achieved only through a coherent and
coordinated approach that respects relevant mandates
and accepts the basic principles of sovereign equality,
territorial integrity and non-interference in the internal
affairs of States.
Pakistan acknowledges the well-meaning efforts
of the United States to bring to the fore an important
aspect of United Nations mechanisms’ existing
capacities to assist the efforts of Member States in
addressing illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement. Like many of our Security Council
colleagues, we believe that an overall assessment of the
United Nations capacities, including possible overlaps
and needed overhauling, must be addressed by the
General Assembly and relevant United Nations bodies
that deal with the corresponding cross-cutting issues in
a holistic fashion. We stand ready to cooperate and
address this issue in its broader framework within the
General Assembly setting. Within the Security Council
framework, this exercise has to be restricted to those
issues and threats that are addressed by the Security
Council, in accordance with its mandate.
We therefore look forward to a report of the
Secretary-General that would provide a comprehensive
assessment of the United Nations relevant work to help
Member States counter illicit cross-border trafficking
and movement that have been addressed by the
Security Council as threats and challenges to
international peace and security in specific contexts
and situations. It is our considered view that, in order
to have a well-rounded assessment, the views of
Member States on this subject would provide needed
clarity and practical solutions. Similarly, the report
must follow the logic of the treaty obligations of
Member States under various instruments and should
not try to influence the organizational aspect of various
venues of discussion on border security.
Pakistan has taken strenuous and substantive
steps to ensure that a comprehensive border control
regime is in place that is in accordance with Pakistan’s
international obligations. We are also committed to
working together with the international community to
address the comprehensive issues involving illegal
cross-border trafficking and movement, with a view to
effectively constraining the spread of transnational
threats. In this regard, the importance of addressing the
root causes of such illegal cross-border trafficking and

17

S/PV.6760

movement, including the factors affecting supply and
demand, cannot be overemphasized.
The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States
of America.
I would like to begin by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his important statement and for his
participation in today’s open event. I wish to thank
Council colleagues as well for their thoughtful
contributions to today’s event and the preparations for
it.
In our interconnected world, our system of
collective security is only as strong as the weakest
links in the chain. One of those weak links today is the
poorly secured borders that are exploited for the illicit
transfer of arms and drugs; of materiel for nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons; of terrorists and their
funds; of conflict minerals; and even of human beings,
a modern-day form of slavery. Such illicit transfers
across borders increasingly undermine the sovereignty
and internal stability of Member States and can
threaten international peace and security. The dangers
posed by these transfers are not limited to fragile or
particularly vulnerable States. They affect us all.
The Security Council has often addressed these
transfers individually, in specific regional contexts. For
example, we have examined how illicit arms transfers
have exacerbated instability in the Sahel and fuelled
long-standing conflict in Somalia and in the
Democratic Republic of Congo. We have seen how
arms smuggling from Iran, in violation of United
Nations sanctions, exacerbates conflict in the Middle
East and supports terrorist groups worldwide. We have
also discussed how drug trafficking has directly
contributed to internal disorder in Guinea-Bissau.
These are just a few examples.
The Security Council has been involved in the
question of illicit trafficking and movement for a long
time, but we have tended to look at each trafficked item
in isolation from the common feature they share — the
vulnerabilities at poorly secured borders that are too
easily exploited by nefarious networks.
States already understand very well how
important it is to control their borders and often ask for
international assistance in doing so. States recognize
their self-interest in protecting their territory and
people from these interrelated phenomena that threaten

18

their sovereignty, corrode governing institutions and
undermine internal security. States also have
international obligations, including those derived from
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter and
including United Nations sanctions, that require them
to intercept or control contraband.
There
are
already
significant
bilateral,
multilateral and regional efforts under way to help
States defend their borders, and these efforts should be
supported and encouraged. Today, however, we focus
on the United Nations operational capacity. We believe
that the United Nations system could improve its help
to States to secure their borders and to put in place
related intelligence and law enforcement cooperation,
customs standards and administrative and legal
frameworks. That is why we have convened this debate
today.
Many elements of the United Nations system, as
well as national, regional and other multilateral
organizations, are already doing excellent work to
assist States in protecting their borders and in
implementing their relevant international obligations.
In response to requests from Member States,
organizations as diverse as INTERPOL, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the World
Customs Organization, United Nations peacekeeping
missions and the International Atomic Energy Agency
provide such assistance.
Also engaged in this work are a number of bodies
created by the Security Council, such as the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate and our
sanctions committees and their expert panels. The
United States fully supports all these efforts. We are
also committed to helping fund efforts by the United
Nations Counterterrorism Implementation Task Force
Working Group on Border Management to enhance
international, regional and national policy and practice
relating to border management in the context of
countering terrorism.
These bodies are all doing important work, but
because they are so narrowly focused on specific
threats, they may be unaware of overlapping efforts or
miss opportunities to pool knowledge and expertise.
After all, these different bodies are often evaluating the
same State institutions and legislative frameworks,
providing similar technical advice and appealing to the
same pool of donors for assistance. Put simply, they are

12-31426

S/PV.6760

all working on different aspects of the same problem —
how to help States that want it and need it to better
secure and control the flow of illicit goods across their
borders. Surely there is scope to streamline and
strengthen the United Nations capacity to help States
secure their borders, while realizing efficiencies in the
process.
The Security Council can make an important
contribution to this effort, but it is vital that the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and others be fully engaged as well. This complex,
cross-cutting challenge cannot be tackled effectively
by any single body alone. Many United Nations actors
play a role in these capacity-building efforts, and it is
logical that they work better together as one United
Nations system to assist Member States. We therefore
welcome the Security Council’s request to the
Secretary-General to provide a diagnostic assessment
of these efforts. The Security Council needs a birds-eye
view of them across the United Nations system. The
United States hopes that the Security-General’s report
will also offer any proposals, as appropriate, for
improvements.
By helping Member States to secure their
borders, the Council can respond to and, we hope, help
prevent these evolving threats to international peace
and security. With this goal in mind, we look forward
to revisiting this issue in six months and to taking
effective action.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:
“The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility
for
the
maintenance
of
international peace and security, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations.
“The Security Council acknowledges the
evolving challenges and threats to international
peace and security, including armed conflicts,
terrorism, proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and small arms and light weapons,
transnational organized crime, piracy, drugs and
human trafficking. The Council has addressed,
when appropriate, related to these challenges and
threats, illicit cross-border trafficking in arms,

12-31426

drug trafficking, trafficking by non-State actors in
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, their
means of delivery and related materials,
trafficking in conflict minerals and the movement
of terrorists and their funds in violation of United
Nations sanctions regimes imposed by the
Security Council in accordance with Chapter VII
of the United Nations Charter and other decisions
taken under Chapter VII, in particular resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) as well as its other
relevant decisions (hereinafter — illicit crossborder trafficking and movement). The Council is
concerned that such illicit cross-border trafficking
and movement contributes to these challenges and
threats. The Council recognizes that such illicit
cross-border trafficking and movement often
involves cross-cutting issues, many of which are
considered by the General Assembly and other
United Nations organs and bodies.
“The Council notes relevant international
conventions such as the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972
Protocol, the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances of 1971, the United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime of 2000 and the Protocols
thereto, the United Nations Convention against
Corruption of 2003 and the relevant international
conventions and protocols related to terrorism.
The Security Council recalls the United Nations
Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons as well as the international tracing
instrument and the United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons.
“The Security Council reaffirms the benefits
of transborder communication, international
exchange and international migration. The
Security Council notes, however, that the various
challenges and threats to international peace and
security posed by illicit cross-border trafficking
and movement have increased as the world has
become more interconnected. The Security
Council notes that, in a globalized society,
organized criminal groups and networks, better
equipped
with
new
information
and
communication technologies, are becoming more
diversified and connected in their illicit

19

S/PV.6760

operations, which in some cases may aggravate
threats to international security.
“The Security Council reaffirms that
securing their borders is the sovereign
prerogative of Member States and, in this context,
reaffirms its commitment to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter,
including the principles of sovereign equality and
territorial integrity. The Security Council calls on
all Member States to improve border management
to effectively constrain the spread of
transnational threats. The Security Council
reaffirms that Member States shall refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State, and shall also give the
United Nations every assistance in any action it
takes in accordance with the United Nations
Charter, and shall refrain from giving assistance
to any State against which the United Nations is
taking preventive or enforcement action.
“The Security Council acknowledges that
distinct strategies are required to address threats
posed by illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement. Nevertheless, the Council observes
that illicit cross-border trafficking and movement
are often facilitated by organized criminal groups
and networks. The Council further notes that such
illicit cross-border trafficking and movement,
which in some cases exploits similar
vulnerabilities experienced by Member States in
securing their borders, can be addressed by
improving Member States’ abilities to secure their
borders.
The
Security
Council
further
acknowledges the importance of adopting a
comprehensive and balanced approach, as
necessary, to tackle the conditions conducive to
facilitating illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement, including demand and supply factors,
and underlines the importance of international
cooperation in this regard.
“The Security Council calls on Member
States to fully comply with relevant obligations
under applicable international law, including
human rights and international refugee and
humanitarian law, relating to securing their
borders against illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement, including obligations stemming from
relevant resolutions of the Security Council

20

adopted under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter. The Security Council calls on all
Member States to fully respect and implement all
of their relevant international obligations in this
regard.
“The Security Council encourages Member
States and relevant organizations to enhance
cooperation and strategies, as appropriate, to
combat such illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement.
“The Security Council encourages Member
States, as well as international organizations and
relevant regional and subregional organizations,
within existing mandates, as appropriate, to
enhance efforts to assist Member States to build
the capacity to secure their borders against illicit
cross-border trafficking and movement, upon
request and by mutual agreement, in accordance
with international law. The Security Council
commends the substantial efforts already under
way in this field.
“The Security Council observes that several
United Nations entities, including subsidiary
organs of the Security Council, already offer such
assistance. The Security Council acknowledges
the importance of coherent, system-wide United
Nations action in order to offer coordinated
responses to transnational threats, including
through the use of best practices and exchange of
positive experiences from relevant initiatives
elsewhere, such as the Paris Pact initiative.
“The Security Council invites the SecretaryGeneral to submit in six months a report
providing
a
comprehensive
survey
and
assessment of the United Nations relevant work
to help Member States counter illicit cross-border
trafficking and movement, as defined in the
second paragraph above.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/16.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes, in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their text in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

12-31426

S/PV.6760

I now give the floor to the representative of
Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Let me begin by thanking
you, Madam President, for your able stewardship of the
Security Council this month and for holding this very
important debate.
For the people of Israel, this is not an abstract
discussion. Day after day, trafficked arms explode in
our cities. Day after day, our citizens live with the
threat of growing terrorist networks and the States that
support them.
It was just over a year ago that a ship named MV
Victoria set sail on the Mediterranean from the port of
Latakia in Syria. From the outside, it looked like an
ordinary cargo vessel, but the MV Victoria was being
used for a mission very different from any job given to
the post office or Federal Express. Among a cargo of
lentils and cotton, three containers were concealed in
the MV Victoria’s hull. They held 40 tons of Iranian
weaponry — not just guns and TNT, but sophisticated
missiles and other weapons normally held only by
modern militaries. Intelligence showed that Iran
intended to transfer those weapons to terrorists in
Gaza.
Fortunately, Israeli forces intercepted the MV
Victoria before its cargo could reach its intended
destination. Yet the weapon containers on the MV
Victoria held an important reminder for the Security
Council. Iran and its ally the Al-Assad regime have
absolutely zero regard for the basic norms and laws of
the international community. They systematically
violate resolution 1860 (2009), and many others,
transferring sophisticated weapons to terrorists in
Gaza, Lebanon and well beyond. The consequences of
their illegal smuggling activity can be measured in the
blood of many innocent civilians and the spread of
instability throughout our region. Each Iranian rocket
is armed with a warhead that could cause a political
earthquake well beyond Israel’s borders.
In his report to the Council last October
(S/2011/648), the Secretary-General noted that
Hizbullah — a terrorist organization inside the
Lebanese State — had reached almost the capacities of
a regular army. Hizbullah carries Iranian arms, is
trained by Iranian forces, is funded by Iranian
petrodollars and acts as a proxy force for the Iranian
regime from the hills of South Lebanon to the streets of
Bangkok. It is the time for the Council to hold

12-31426

accountable those United Nations Member States that
arm, train and fund terrorists. The international
community’s failure to act today will only initiate a
bigger nightmare tomorrow.
The issue of illicit trafficking and the
infrastructure that supports it is not merely an Israeli or
Middle Eastern or African problem. It is a global
problem. Illicit smuggling is made possible by an
increasingly connected network of smuggling rings,
transnational criminals and terrorists. Such groups are
working together around the world as never before.
Terrorists understand that if you can smuggle narcotics
into a European capital, you can do the same with an
anti-aircraft missile. They understand that lawless
environments are fertile ground for radicalization, and
they recognize that selling drugs can pay for bombs.
Hizbullah’s activities offer a disturbing example
of this trend. That terrorist organization has established
itself as a major player in the global narcotics market,
operating a network that extends from West Africa to
the Middle East to Latin America. It uses that global
network to fund its terrorist activities and provide the
logistical support needed to carry them out. The
Hizbullah network shows how a gap in one nation’s
counter-terrorism capabilities is a weak link that can be
exploited with potentially devastating consequences for
the rest of the world. It is clear that instability in one
country can mean catastrophe in another.
Israel continues to share its unique expertise with
others in the global fight against these networks. We
are closely engaged in counter-terrorism capacitybuilding initiatives with a number of States and
regional organizations in Africa, South America and
Asia. Those collaborative efforts cover a wide range of
issues, from terrorist financing to aviation security, and
from money-laundering to border protection.
Among all the issues related to illicit trafficking,
there is no greater threat than the spread of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs). I have already described
Iran’s behaviour without nuclear weapons. We can only
imagine how that regime would behave with them, and
who they would share them with. The proliferation of
WMDs is also great cause for concern in Syria, where
instability threatens to give terrorist groups like
Hizbullah the keys to the Al-Assad regime’s stockpile
of weapons. That includes long-range missiles, as well
as biological and chemical weapons. As the regime of
our region’s most dangerous ophthalmologist stands on

21

S/PV.6760

the brink of collapse, the international community must
keep a very close eye on his collection of very
dangerous weapons.
While the Victoria remains held in port, other
smuggling ships are streaming across the high seas
with cargoes full of rockets and explosives. One of
those rockets could spark the next major conflict. One
of those weapons could be used in the next mass
casualty terror attack. One of those bombs could be a
nuclear bomb. We cannot allow those who want the
Victoria to succeed to be victorious. Preventing such
weapons from reaching their destination is our
collective obligation. Terrorists and their backers
depend on divisions in the international community to
keep their operations afloat. No nation is free from
responsibility, and no nation can escape the
consequences of inaction.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank the United States for
having organized this open debate. I also express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his briefing.
The wide range of problems related to illicit
cross-border trafficking and movement has a grave
impact on people throughout the world, in developing
and developed countries alike. Their consequences are
widespread and cross-cutting, affecting human rights,
public security and sustainable development. It is not
clear, however, that the most appropriate and effective
way of addressing all the different manifestations of
illicit cross-border activities is by putting them into the
same category, as they may have different root causes
and implications for peace and security, and thus may
require different remedies.
We would argue, therefore, that the diverse
problems related to cross-border flows require a caseby-case approach, taking due account of the specific
nature of each situation. We may well find that not
every incidence of illicit cross-border trafficking poses
a threat to international peace and security. It follows
that not every kind of trafficking is best dealt with
within the Council’s purview. Human trafficking, in
particular, does not seem to belong there. The same
may apply to other forms, such as drug trafficking,
which may or may not pose such a threat.
In those cases where trafficking does constitute a
threat to peace and security, the Council may have a

22

role to play, in accordance with the Charter. Even then,
it must take into account the specific characteristics of
each situation and the need to cooperate with other
relevant bodies. More often than not, the Council’s role
should be to focus on encouraging greater coordination
of existing initiatives on the ground, as well as on
strengthening the capacity of national authorities so
that they may better fulfil their responsibilities.
International efforts to curb trafficking depend
greatly on enhancing domestic capacities to fight the
problem. Coordinating action within the United
Nations family is especially important for finding the
best ways to help States tackle these challenges. The
multiplicity of cooperation tools available should allow
assistance to be effectively tailored to the problems
faced by each country. Regional and South-South
cooperation are also important in helping States
improve border protection, as they allow for an
exchange of information among countries with similar
experiences.
Sustained attention to underlying causes is also
critical to addressing illicit cross-border trafficking.
Such causes often include weak State institutions, lack
of development and social and economic exclusion.
The latter is usually a key factor in creating conditions
conducive to illicit border trafficking and movement.
Reducing poverty and generating opportunity,
especially for young people, must therefore be part of
any strategy against trafficking.
On the normative side, we must ensure that each
form of illicit trafficking is addressed in the context of
its own specificity. In the area of cooperation, we must
strengthen the capacity, coherence and coordination of
the United Nations system to assist States according to
their specific needs. By combining efforts on those two
fronts, the international community can address current
challenges more effectively and prevent them from
becoming actual threats to international peace and
security.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the
delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I am speaking on behalf of
the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Iceland and Serbia; the country of the Stabilisation and

12-31426

S/PV.6760

Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
We welcome the initiative of the United States to
discuss strengthening the capacity of the United
Nations to assist Member States in securing their
borders against the illicit trafficking and movement of
materials, funds and goods, as well as human beings.
We should all aim for better coordination of all the
United Nations bodies that contribute to the fight
against such illicit cross-border trafficking and
movements.
As we all know, in the context of globalization
borders cannot now be perceived as barriers. The
fluidity of circulation of goods, funds and people is of
great importance to trade, economic prosperity and
human development. Facilitating that, without reducing
security, is therefore important for all trade, financial
and cultural flows. At the same time, international
terrorism and organized crime have increasingly
exploited globalization and technological progress to
facilitate the development of illicit trafficking and
movements, generating illegitimate gains and seriously
undermining through corruption and violence the
stability and development of States and regions,
creating the vicious cycle of an environment conducive
to such illicit activities.
For the European Union and its member States,
border management is a priority area of action to
address and prevent such threats and challenges.
Integrated border management, linking migration
management tools as well as control of the movement
of goods and funds, underpinned by an intelligence-led
and multidisciplinary approach, is part of the European
Union’s comprehensive panoply of weapons in the
fight against ever more sophisticated and often
interconnected forms and groups of international
organized crime and terrorist groups and activities.
The European Union is addressing the threats
related to the smuggling and trafficking of goods and
persons at borders by applying the Global Approach to
Migration and Mobility. The role of the European
Agency for the Management of Operational
Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member
States of the European Union has recently been
strengthened to allow it, for example, to share personal
information with the European Police Office (Europol)

12-31426

and other European agencies on those suspected of
cross-border crimes and to cooperate more closely with
the suspects’ countries of origin and transit.
All those efforts are supported by relevant
legislation and coherent policies, in particular in the
area of the control of illicit movement of goods, funds
and persons, transport security, maritime surveillance
and international cooperation. EU structures such as
Europol, Eurojust, the European Arrest Warrant, the
joint investigation teams and police and customs
cooperation provide us with efficient mechanisms to
better tackle terrorism and organized crime.
Support for relevant United Nations international
legal instruments and United Nations programmes of
technical assistance, as provided by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, for example, should help
to further augment international cooperation aimed at
addressing such global threats and challenges.
The fight against illicit cross-border trafficking
and movements requires international cooperation, the
sharing of best practices and standards and the
exchange of information and intelligence in order to
develop a comprehensive picture of threats and to
facilitate a coordinated approach. Ensuring the proper
implementation of sanctions regimes, for which
effective border management is also relevant, is
important.
Integrated border management is only one
element, but a key one, in the global effort to ensure
greater effectiveness on the part of the international
community in fighting illicit cross-border trafficking
and movement. Where efficient tools already
developed by organizations such as Interpol, the World
Customs Organization, the International Maritime
Organization and EU agencies are in place, they should
be systematically used instead of being applied as ad
hoc solutions, which may negatively impact long-term
sustainability and ownership of United Nations
assistance. Numerous United Nations agencies are
directly or indirectly involved in those domains, with
different scopes and mandates, and their enhanced
coordination is foreseen.
We wish to assure the Council of our appreciation
of the importance of today’s topic. The European
Union and its member States provide political,
technical and financial assistance to United Nations
agencies and other partners in numerous regions of the
world. We would therefore welcome and stand ready to

23

S/PV.6760

assist the proposed diagnostic assessment by the
Secretariat in order to focus our efforts in the most
effective way possible.

organized crime threat assessment for East Asia and the
Pacific, to complement and build on the global
assessment by UNODC in 2010.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.

Australia wants to contribute to regional solutions
in other parts of the world too. We have been working
with the African Union on a series of transnational
crime guides to respond to the acute challenges in the
Sahel and Maghreb. We are working with the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) to
enhance border control capabilities. This week, we are
conducting a workshop with the East African
Community to enhance efforts on anti-money
laundering and terrorist financing. We support a
growing role for the United Nations in responding to
regional needs, bolstering the capacities of regional
and subregional organizations to develop regional
solutions and mobilizing international support for those
solutions.

Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate. It is clear
from our discussion today that many are concerned
about the profound and pervasive impact that illicit
trafficking can have on security. It is ironic that the
very factors that should underpin peace, security and
development — namely, the free movement of goods,
services, people and finances — are being exploited by
transnational criminal networks, proliferators and
terrorists to undermine international peace, security
and development.
Illicit trafficking takes many forms that are often
viewed as separate phenomena. In truth, those criminal
activities can often feed off and reinforce each other.
Illicit trafficking thrives on and perpetuates organized
crime, corruption, weak governance, poverty,
unemployment and regional instability. I will focus my
comments today on four areas that we believe must be
part of the solution. First is the role of regions and
regional organizations. Prosperity and security,
including border security, begin with regional
partnerships.
In our region, the Asia-Pacific region, it is
regional initiatives and institutions that have forged
consensus on the application of global standards and
norms. Australia has prioritized the establishment of
such institutions as the Asia/Pacific Group on Money
Laundering and the Bali Process on People Smuggling,
Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational
Crime, which we co-chair with Indonesia, because they
have a real impact on the ground.
But what has characterized the Asia-Pacific
response is the dynamism of its established regional
organizations, which have adapted their mandates to
tackle the threat to regional and economic security
posed by illicit trafficking. The Association of
Southeast Asian Nations Regional Forum, for example,
has established work plans for both transnational crime
and terrorism. In the Asia-Pacific region, an effective
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
will continue to play a vital role in addressing
transnational threats. Australia, together with New
Zealand, is funding the first regional transnational

24

The second important area is capacity-building.
The United Nations has a role to play in identifying
capacity gaps and coordinating the delivery of
technical assistance to build the capacity of border
protection and law enforcement agencies. We strongly
support the Security Council’s model set by the
adoption of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),
which separately established norms prohibiting illicit
trafficking and, importantly, created frameworks for
technical assistance to implement those norms.
Similarly, while the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects is essentially a political agreement, we see it
foremost as a platform for technical assistance. Based
on that view, we provide bilateral and regional
assistance to countries in the Pacific, Africa and
Caribbean to strengthen controls against movements of
illicit small arms.
Likewise, a strong and robust arms trade treaty
(ATT), which includes small arms and ammunition,
must provide capacity-building mechanisms. We will
strongly support such provisions at the ATT conference
in July.
The United Nations should continue to facilitate
assistance through mechanisms that are simple and
coordinated. Improving access to capacity-building
should be a key aim of the Secretary-General’s
assessment on the work of the United Nations to
counter illicit trafficking.

12-31426

S/PV.6760

For us to be effective in tackling illicit
trafficking, we need to focus on prevention, based on
sound analysis. Resolution 1540 (2004) was
groundbreaking. Controversial at the time of its
adoption, the resolution has actually been very
effective in preventing proliferation and building
capacity. We need to think strategically about other
preventive measures.
We also need to incorporate measures to address
illicit trafficking into United Nations political missions
and peacebuilding activities. UNODC and CTED
expertise should be drawn on to support mission
planning and analytical work for the Security Council,
where relevant.
Finally, the United Nations and Member States
need to consider illicit trafficking and border
protection in the context of broader rule of law and
development objectives. Efforts to secure borders will
not on their own stem illicit trafficking, and must be
pursued hand in hand with strategies to tackle demand,
programmes to build institutions and strengthen
governance, and efforts to address the underlying
socio-economic factors such as poverty and
unemployment.
It is vital that the United Nations ensure that its
disparate programmes are integrated, efficient and
consistent in norm setting. The establishment of the
United Nations System Task Force on Transnational
Organized Crime and Drug Trafficking is a step in the
right direction. We welcome the Council’s presidential
statement (S/PRST/2012/16) and look forward to the
report of the Secretary-General.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s open debate.
Allow me also to express my appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his statement on the important
issue before us.
Indonesia subscribes to the letter (S/2012/257)
submitted by the delegation of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement on today’s open Security
Council debate. In that context, Indonesia is of the
view that close cooperation and coordination among all
principal organs of the United Nations is essential to
effectively addressing existing, new and emerging
threats and challenges.

12-31426

Indonesia supports the United Nations efforts
within existing mandates and together with other
international stakeholders to assist countries,
particularly countries that lack capacities and
resources, to improve the border security in those
countries upon request. Securing borders is the
responsibility of the relevant national authorities, but
this responsibility is fulfilled effectively when there are
adequate capacities and necessary instruments
available to Governments.
It is important to also stress that the strengthening
of capacities against illicit flows needs to be
considered in a comprehensive manner in which there
is sustained support for achieving overall political,
economic and social betterment. A prospering and
aware society with robust and accountable governance
structures will be in a better position to implement
strong controls over its territorial borders and take full
responsibility for the issues concerned.
Transnational illicit flows of materials, goods and
people are age-old phenomena, but globalization and
technological improvements have enabled issues as
terrorism, weapons of mass destruction and organized
crime to manifest themselves as serious global
challenges. Indeed, illicit flows and State legitimacy
and security are closely linked.
Non-State actors, such as transnational crime
groups, terrorist networks and insurgents, exploit gaps
in border security. They tend to thrive in conditions of
conflict, poverty, and political instability, undermining
the State’s legitimacy and security. On the other hand,
the weakening of a State’s writ and its security
apparatus presents opportunities to those non-State
actors to enhance their nefarious activities. The
international community, in accordance with
international law, should help countries in need to
strengthen their national systems, and they must
undertake vigilant border management.
Indonesia fully recognizes the importance of
securing borders against the illegal cross-border
movement of people, including terrorists and criminals;
as well as goods, including small arms and light
weapons,
ammunition,
explosives,
chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear material; and other
illicit materials, such as drugs. In this regard,
Indonesia, through a variety of measures, including
surveillance, patrols, physical barriers, joint control
operations, information exchange, intelligence and

25

S/PV.6760

engagement with border communities on control and
policing, is carrying out border management.
Indonesia has adopted numerous laws and
regulations to prevent and detect the movement of
illicit materials and related crimes. A new law on
immigration was enacted in May 2011. We expanded
our border control management system and
strengthened a web-based enhanced system that
includes biometrics capture at 27 of our air and sea
ports. We pursue the prevention of illegal cross-border
movements of people and goods also through
international instruments. In 2009, Indonesia ratified
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, along with its two Protocols to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, and against the
Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air. We are
also very satisfied with our cooperation with Australia
through the mechanism of the Bali Process.
Indonesia is also taking measures to prevent the
illicit traffic in drugs and psychotropic substances and
their precursors. We established a multi-stakeholder
national narcotics body in 2009 and have ratified all
three anti-drug conventions under the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime.
Terrorist movement across borders is indeed a
serious matter that should be addressed. Weak State
border management will be a source of exploitation by
terrorist networks. Indonesia realizes that cooperation
at the international level is needed if States are to
overcome such exploitation. To that extent, Indonesia
continues to strengthen its cooperation on countering
terrorism at every level — bilateral, regional and
multilateral. In the multilateral forums, Indonesia has
always played an active and important role through the
United Nations system and related mechanisms.
Indonesia is also proud to have ratified seven
international instruments related to the prevention of
terrorism, as a gesture of seriousness and commitment
to combating terrorism.
At the regional level, we are deeply engaged in
combating terrorism with other countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), and
ratified, among others, the ASEAN Treaty on Mutual
Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters in 2008, which
streamlines legal cooperation on countering terrorism
and its financing.

26

In closing, I would like to reiterate that, in order
to develop appropriate border security, a combination
of wide range of measures is needed. But the most
effective approach is one that is undertaken on the
basis of cooperation among the neighbouring countries.
Consistent cooperation and coordination among
neighbours reinforce individual national control
systems and help establish an environment conducive
to taking effective action on each side of the border.
The President: I give
representative of Argentina.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the opportunity to address the
Security Council. We also wish to thank the delegation
of the United States for having convened this most
timely and important debate on the threats posed to
international peace and security by illicit flows across
unsecured borders. The statement on this topic made by
the Secretary-General early in this debate was highly
relevant.
In several decisions, the Council has urged States
to take measures and to cooperate in defending their
borders against trafficking in drugs, weapons, persons,
the movements of terrorists and their financial assets,
and other threats to State sovereignty. Since these
threats are often interlinked, a holistic approach would
seem to be the most appropriate to developing adequate
responses at the national, regional and international
levels. Such a holistic approach should not and cannot
ignore the unique features of certain threats. Moreover,
these threats do not always go hand in hand. For
example, while terrorism is often financed by other
criminal activities, in other crimes terrorism is not
necessarily part of the equation.
It is necessary to acknowledge that border control
is the primary responsibility of each State through the
coordinated action of the various agencies with
jurisdiction in the matter. Nevertheless, Argentina
believes that it is critical to continue strengthening the
cooperation
mechanisms
among
neighbouring
countries so that control can be ensured through the
adoption of legislation and the building of national
capacities to identify possible solutions to the
challenges regarding borders.
At the national level, in late 2010 the Ministry of
Security was created in my country with the objective
of strengthening security and prevention mechanisms,
with specific and exclusive jurisdiction in the

12-31426

S/PV.6760

prevention and fight against terrorism and transnational
organized crime.

consider development issues in its decisions regarding
peace and security.

At the regional level, Argentina cooperates
closely with members of the Southern Cone Common
Market (MERCOSUR) and associate member States
through the harmonization of national legislation on
the control of firearms, ammunition and explosives and
policy coordination in the field. It also cooperates with
the other countries of the region in strengthening their
national capacities to enable full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Cooperation is also carried out
with the security forces of neighbouring countries,
instrumentalized
through
bilateral
cooperation
agreements between gendarmeries and coast guards,
and the development of integrated information systems
such as that being developed with Brazil on trafficking
in persons, to be implemented in 2012.

In addition, border security should not come at
the expense of, or be used as an excuse to, impede or
prevent the exercise of basic human rights such as the
rights of migrants, as the Secretary-General mentioned
this morning. We do not believe that security should
come about at the expense of the rule of law, nor do we
accept the idea that human rights violations should be
permissible under certain circumstances.

In our common border region, a joint command
made up of police and security forces from Argentina,
Brazil and Paraguay has been operating in our common
border region since 1996 and is playing an important
role in efforts to combat illicit trafficking in weapons
and ammunition, all form of smuggling, drug
trafficking, kidnapping, money laundering and illegal
trafficking in persons. It also constantly monitors data
on the activities of international terrorism and related
crimes.
Those initiatives illustrate an early awareness on
the part of Argentina and its MERCOSUR partners as
to the need for greater cooperation and coordination to
secure their borders and defend themselves against
illicit flows.
Although strengthening border security is
essential to effectively combat illicit flows, we
understand that under certain conditions low levels of
development in one or more countries can provide an
appropriate context for non-traditional threats to peace
and security, such as, among others, terrorism, illicit
trafficking in weapons, drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime — as has recently
become evident in the Sahel.
It is clear to everyone that it is not the task of the
Council to assume responsibilities falling to other
structures of the system, such as the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council or the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. Instead, the heart of the
matter lies in thinking about how the Council should

12-31426

Argentina awaits the assessment of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of the United Nations with regard
to assistance to States in securing their borders against
illicit flows. We also look forward to the convening of
a broad and transparent dialogue among the entire
membership to discuss the Secretary-General’s
findings and to continue to consider the issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): First of all, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for choosing this important
theme for today’s open debate at the Security Council.
We cannot avoid discussing securing borders
against illicit flows if we are to maintain international
peace and security, because the illicit cross-border flow
of materials, funds, goods and people causes instability
in our societies at both the national and international
levels. Securing borders is a cross-cutting issue that
encompasses
organized
crime,
terrorism
and
proliferation.
Every sovereign State has the primary
responsibility for securing its borders, as well as
responsibility not only for inflows but also for outflows
from it. While such individual effort is necessary for
diligent border control, it alone is not sufficient. To
secure borders from illicit flows, we, the international
community as a whole, need to take a holistic and
synergistic approach to our efforts. In that regard, we
highly value the active roles of the United Nations and
its bodies — such as the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), the various sanctions
committees, including the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, INTERPOL and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime — in
helping States act in a coordinated manner.

27

S/PV.6760

Although the traditional scope of our efforts to
control illicit flows is centred on land borders, we have
been witnessing rapid expansion in the field. We must
begin to recognize that efforts to control illicit flows
have to include the sea and the air as well. As a nation
bordered on all sides by the sea, Japan has vital
interests in securing sea borders to block illicit flows.
In addition, although it has no physical boundaries,
cyberspace is a frontier that urgently requires greater
attention in terms of illegal transactions, transfers of
technology and classified information that may be
usurped for purposes of organized crime, terrorism and
proliferation.
Our success in the fight against illicit flows
depends upon how we can best close loopholes that
allow such flows. To that end, we need coordinated
efforts, at both the international and the national levels.
In that regard, we would like to encourage States that
have not done so to ratify the relevant conventions, as
well as to urge States to fully implement their
obligations, including those under Security Council
resolutions.
We also believe that combating the transfer and
transport of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs),
missiles and related materials contributes to the
improvement of the security of the entire international
community. The Proliferation Security Initiative is an
international effort to halt WMD proliferation. Japan
has actively participated in activities of the Initiative,
including by hosting several of its maritime
interdiction exercises. Japan has also conducted
outreach activities for non-participating countries,
particularly in Asia, to enhance the inclusiveness of
international non-proliferation efforts.
At the national level, securing borders involves
complex coordination of multiple entities, such as
customs, immigration and law enforcement bodies.
Since they have their own authorities and jurisdictions,
even in a country with sophisticated systems it is
difficult to make such coordination function in an
effective way. Each State needs determination to
achieve active coordination. For its part, Japan has
operated strict border control in order to prevent illegal
inflows and outflows, by means of a crossorganizational and multilayered response that relies on
cooperation between our relevant ministries and
agencies, the training of personnel and outreach to
exporters.

28

In addition, we recognize that there is an urgent
need to improve the capacities and awareness of
developing countries to further coordinate our efforts
to fight against illicit flows. Every year, Japan holds
the Asian Export Control Seminar in Tokyo to deepen
understanding of the importance of export control and
to exchange views and information in the region,
recently with the active participation of sanctions
committees, including the 1540 Committee.
Japan has also implemented various programmes
aimed at assisting developing countries in building
their capacities in the areas of immigration control, air
and sea port control and customs. Those programmes
include organizing a series of seminars, dispatching
experts from Japan, organizing training programmes in
the respective countries and providing equipment, such
as X-ray inspection tools.
Securing borders extends to people, goods and
funds, each of which is covered by its own relevant
Government agencies. What is critically important is to
connect the distinct bodies responsible for different
aspects of border security into a cohesive and
comprehensive strategy, and to close any gaps or
loopholes. Although we need to avoid any duplication
and to continue our discussion on more efficient ways
to tackle the issue, we believe that, in some cases, it is
beneficial to address the threats generated by illicit
flows with a multilayered approach, without being
afraid of superimposing our efforts.
Finally, the spread of globalization is making
border security more urgent than ever before. Once
again, I thank you, Madam President, for your
leadership in drawing our attention to this important
issue in a very timely manner. Japan will continue to
proactively contribute to ensure that every border is
secured from illicit flows that could pose serious
threats to international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba endorses the letter (S/2012/257) addressed by the
representative of Egypt to the President of the Security
Council on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Addressing organized crime and illicit acts is an
important matter for the Organization. Member States
coordinate actions in the General Assembly and in
other organs and specialized agencies of the United

12-31426

S/PV.6760

Nations system, as well as through relevant
international treaties to combat and eradicate scourges
such as drug trafficking and the traffic in human
beings, the illicit trade in nuclear material, terrorism
and the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
One of the common traits of all those efforts is the
universal, or near majority, participation of Member
States, which means that the issue before the Council
today — securing borders against illicit flows —
exceeds the functions and powers of the Security
Council as set forth in Article 24 of the Charter. Yet
again, the Council is encroaching upon the functions of
other key organs of the Organization.
The General Assembly is in the midst of a
discussion on reforming the United Nations. It has
adopted a number of resolutions and decisions in that
regard, including agreements at the highest level. It is
also involved in other conversations on the global
struggle against terrorism and the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons, combating the drug trade, and
addressing human trafficking.
The so-called illicit movement described in the
concept paper distributed by the rotating presidency of
the Council (S/2012/195, annex) in the context of this
meeting requires coordinated action by all Member
States, including the possibility of participating in
decision-making. If the goal is to maximize
coordination among existing structures and to avoid
embarking on duplicate actions, the General Assembly
needs to be in charge.
Neither nuclear proliferation nor the illicit trade
in its component parts can be eradicated without the
total elimination of nuclear weapons. Some permanent
members of the Council are opposed to adopting
immediate measures that would establish a time frame
for the total elimination of the 23,000 nuclear weapons
that still exist. Terrorism cannot be successfully
addressed while it is promoted and utilized as a form of
statecraft. The drug trade cannot be successfully
combated without taking forceful and decisive action
in the markets that consume them. The illicit arms
trade cannot be eradicated so long as acts of imperialist
aggression are being employed to topple Governments,
or without prohibiting transfers to non-State actors.
In order to strengthen border security against
illicit actions, there undoubtedly needs to be decisive
action on the part of States. Governments have the
primary responsibility for that task.

12-31426

Cuba has been subjected to a war consisting of
illicit acts for more than 50 years. As a result of
terrorist actions, 3,478 people have died and 2,099
have been physically affected. Thousands of weapons
and explosives were illegally introduced in Cuba in
order to overthrow the Government, and were used to
murder innocent people. Cuba is subjected to an
adjustment law that stimulates illegal emigration for
political ends, with no regard for the means utilized by
those involved, who have at times resorted to violence.
Eleven million Cubans suffer from the economic
and financial blockade that has for 20 consecutive
years been rejected by the Member States of the
General Assembly. In what constitutes an extreme
expression of savagery and disrespect for the basic
principles of civilized coexistence, the leader of the
Cuban Revolution, Fidel Castro, has been the object of
more than 600 attempts against his life. In order to
remain within the established time limit, I will not
belabour the point with further examples. Moreover,
abundant information on these facts is available in the
official archives of one of the permanent members of
this Council, most of it accessible on the Internet. Cuba
has provided the Council’s Counter-Terrorism
Committee with abundant information that is also
available to the general public.
If we truly seek to combat illicit international
activities, hypocrisy and double standards must cease.
Let all countries unite in genuine cooperation on the
basis of the principles and purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations. Cuba will continue to adhere to
those principles and to its obligations under the
relevant international treaties and agreements. We are
ready to cooperate in that spirit with all other Member
States, without exception.
Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation to you,
Madam President, for organizing this meaningful open
debate on securing borders against illicit flows. My
appreciation also goes to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Ban Ki-moon, for his thorough and
insightful briefing.
The illicit flow of materials, funds and goods, as
well as of people, poses grave concerns to international
peace and security. In an effort to circumvent tighter
national measures and international frameworks
against them, those engaged in illicit flows from
smuggling, trafficking, brokering, trans-shipment and

29

S/PV.6760

re-export have grown smarter and have developed
more complicated techniques, even engaging in
cyberspace activities.
By contrast, national and international measures
to counter them remain static and outdated, and lack
the necessary coordination among Member States and
international organizations. I believe that if proper
measures are not taken to close those loopholes, that
trend will pose an ever-growing threat to international
efforts to maintain and foster global peace and security.
Today’s thematic meeting is therefore a timely
occasion to accomplish that while simultaneously
taking stock of current actions throughout the
Organization, with a view towards streamlining and
elevating the United Nations toolkit for addressing
such a significant problem.
States have the first and primary responsibility to
impose domestic measures with respect to securing
their borders against illicit flows of every kind. In the
same manner, it is also an international obligation; a
number of Security Council resolutions and
international regulations call upon Member States to
establish the necessary measures to fully respect and
implement their international obligations in that regard,
moving forward to better control illegal activities.
Moreover, as illicit flows continue to cross
borders and to occur at the margins of extra-territorial
jurisdictions, close regional and international
cooperation,
including
information-sharing and
assistance in capacity-building, are badly needed. The
Republic of Korea has redoubled its jurisdictional
efforts and is determined to contribute to international
action to prevent and combat illicit transnational flows.
To that end, the Republic of Korea and Australia,
submitted a draft resolution, entitled “Preventing and
combating illicit brokering activities”, to the First
Committee at the sixty-third session of the General
Assembly; the draft was ultimately adopted by the
Assembly as resolution 63/67. It encourages States to
establish appropriate national laws and to engage in
international cooperation to prevent and combat illicit
brokering.
I believe the resolution has facilitated discussions
within the United Nations framework on the issue of
illicit flows, resulting in Member States establishing
domestic institutions to enforce their international
obligations. The resolution was re-adopted by an

30

overwhelming majority of Member States at the sixtyfifth General Assembly in 2010 (resolution 65/75).
Furthermore, with its well-advanced Internetbased infrastructure, the Republic of Korea has
effectively implemented its customs and export
controls. Particularly, with respect to non-proliferation,
I would like to draw your attention to our “yes-trade”
programme, a database and one-stop verification
system for dual-use and contraband materials. Yestrade provides self-classification and classification
services for strategic items, and a one-stop service for
acquiring an export license, should that be deemed
strategic.
Since its launch in 2005, the Korean Government
has not only implemented its export control system
successfully with that online system, but the Republic
of Korea has also presented its merits to countries
interested in the system in relevant forums.
In addition, given the new threats of illicit flows
in cyberspace, the Republic of Korea, as a leading
information technology powerhouse, has proven its
active participation in international cooperation and
collaboration for cybersecurity.
Our participation includes joining the work of the
Group of Government Experts on Information Security
and hosting seminars on cybersecurity within the
framework of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
and Association of Southeast Asian Nations Regional
Forum. We are also running train-the-trainer
programmes for law enforcement officials in
developing countries to support their capacity-building,
on which we place high importance. In order to further
contribute to enhancing global efforts to address
cybersecurity issues, including illicit flows on the
Internet, the Korean Government will host the
Conference on Cyberspace in 2013, succeeding the
United Kingdom and Hungary.
I hold high expectations for the diagnostic
assessment to be prepared by the Secretary-General on
options and recommendations to help States with
regard to their illicit flows problems. I look forward to
hearing those recommendations, and I would like to
reassure you of our firm commitment and willingness
to closely engage in the issue in the coming future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.

12-31426

S/PV.6760

Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation appreciates the convening of this
debate, as well as the draft presidential statement that
was distributed. We also appreciate the SecurityGeneral’s report presented during this meeting.

And that is why we want to emphasize integrated
strategies that take into account aspects related to
development and promote opportunities for young
people, institutional strengthening, education and
prevention.

Illicit cross-border trafficking is a subject of
concern for Costa Rica, which we are approaching in
an integrated and holistic manner while preserving
respect for human rights and the rule of law.

Such strategies are part of our country’s national
approach to those issues, and they have led to some
success. Such an approach should also be taken in the
context of international cooperation to deal with the
problem. Costa Rica, like the rest of the Central
American region, is part of a transit route between the
supplying countries and the largest consumer countries.
That is a huge challenge for our region.

Human trafficking, illicit trafficking of weapons,
drug trafficking, illegal trafficking of minerals,
trafficking of organs and money-laundering all have
three common denominators: their relationship with
organized transnational crime, the use of local criminal
groups and their potential destabilizing effect for States.
Therefore, this debate should be based on a basic
principle: the defence of borders against illicit flows
does not start with nor end at those borders. The
success of that defence is related to institutional
capacity and the level of legislative, legal, technical,
police and financial capability achieved by States. But
it is also essential to develop effective strategies for
regional and global cooperation, as well as to promote
the contribution on the part of international
organizations to providing capacity-building and the
coordination of efforts among countries. And that
would include the United Nations with all of its
relevant bodies, which play a key role.
Organized crime, and drug trafficking specifically,
not only affects international peace and security, it also
undermines economic and social development and
distorts public investment in developing countries,
which have to use their scarce resources to combat such
crimes, resources that would be better used in health,
education and social well-being.
In their enthusiasm to control markets, traffickers
bring in weapons, recruit people to distribute them and
attempt to generate corruption. By paying their recruits
with drugs, they stimulate a domestic market that
undermines safety, security and public health.
Moreover, money-laundering can be a factor in
monetary and economic distortion. In other words, its
impact is not just limited to nor can it be approached
simply by means of stricter controls.
We need substantive improvement in those areas
of course, but, to do just that without looking at the
broader scope might end up being counterproductive.

12-31426

For a number of years, we have had an agreement
in place for joint patrolling with United States
authorities, as well as a cooperation agreement against
trafficking in drugs and psychotropic substances in the
Caribbean region, in which a number of countries
participate and of which we are a depository. Both of
these are examples of good international cooperation.
However, it is necessary to increase our patrolling
capacity in the maritime area, to improve detection
capacity in ports on a large scale and to provide
technical support for efforts to detect land-based
trafficking of weapons and drugs, which have an
enormous impact on transit countries.
Since July 2011, Costa Rica has been working to
combat activities on the part of criminal groups by
focusing on Central American security. On 16 May
2012, in the context of the General Assembly, there
will be an open general debate on the matter.
Central America needs decisive and coordinated
support from the various bodies of the United Nations
in order to develop the potential of what the United
Nations is already providing to the region.
We believe that one of the outcomes of today’s
discussion and that of 16 May, as well as the various
presidential statements and resolutions of the Security
Council, will be more consistent and integrated action
on the part of the United Nations system, including the
Security Council, to combat those scourges.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I
intend, with the concurrence of Members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

31
