S/PRST/2005/33

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 July 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5228th meeting of the Security Council, held on 18 July 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The responsibility
of the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace and security:
HIV/AIDS and international peacekeeping operations”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the full
implementation of resolution 1308 (2000). The Council also recalls the United
Nations General Assembly Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS of June
2001.
“The Security Council welcomes the collaboration between DPKO and
UNAIDS and its co-sponsors to address HIV/AIDS awareness among
peacekeeping personnel, both uniformed and civilian. The Council commends
UNAIDS for developing, in cooperation with interested States, national
programmes to address HIV/AIDS among their uniformed personnel. The
Council recognizes the significant number of direct and indirect beneficiaries
of the programmes worldwide.
“The Security Council recognizes that men and women in the uniformed
services are vital elements in the fight against HIV/AIDS. The Council
welcomes the efforts by Member States, including through existing national
programmes, DPKO, UNAIDS and other stakeholders, to counter the spread of
the disease. The Council encourages Member States, in the preparation of their
personnel for participation in peacekeeping operations, to employ best
practices in HIV/AIDS education, prevention, awareness, countering stigma
and discrimination, voluntary confidential counselling and testing, and care
and treatment.
“The Security Council recognizes that United Nations peacekeeping
personnel can be important contributors to the response to HIV/AIDS,
particularly for vulnerable communities in post-conflict environments. The
Council welcomes the action taken by the Secretary-General and the United
Nations peacekeeping missions to integrate HIV/AIDS awareness in their
mandated activities and outreach projects for vulnerable communities, and
urges them to pay particular attention to the gender dimensions of HIV/AIDS.
In this context, the Council encourages further cooperation between DPKO
and UNAIDS and its co-sponsors, non-governmental organizations and civil
society, bilateral and multilateral donors and national Governments.
05-42689 (E) 180705

*0542689*

S/PRST/2005/33

“The Security Council recognizes that significant progress has been
made in implementation of resolution 1308 (2000) but that many challenges
remain. The Council expresses its readiness to further promote and support the
implementation of this resolution. In order to maintain and consolidate
momentum, the Council welcomes regular briefings, as needed, by DPKO and
UNAIDS on the progress made, as a measure to strengthen commitment and
accountability at the highest levels and ensure sustained monitoring and
evaluation of the impact of programmes. The Council reaffirms its intention to
contribute, within its competence, to the attainment of the relevant objectives
in the declaration adopted at the twenty-sixth special session of the General
Assembly in carrying out the Council’s work, in particular in its follow-up to
resolution 1308 (2000).”

2
