S/PV.9108

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9108

th meeting
Tuesday, 9 August 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Jun/Geng Shuang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Kvalheim
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Ms. Jacobs
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Fifteenth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in
support of Member States in countering the threat (S/2022/576)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-45508 (E)
*2245508*

S/PV.9108

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

States in countering the threat, as mandated by
resolution 2610 (2021).

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Fifteenth report of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to
international peace and security and the range
of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat (S/2022/576)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, UnderSecretary-General, United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism; Mr. Weixiong Chen, Acting Executive
Director, Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate; and Mr. Martin Ewi, Senior Researcher,
Institute for Security Studies.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/576, which contains the fifteenth
report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed
by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat.
I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov.
Mr. Voronkov: As we approach the International
Day of Remembrance of and Tribute to the Victims
of Terrorism on 21 August, allow me to start by
expressing my heartfelt condolences to the Government
and the people of States Members that have suffered
from terrorist attacks. Regrettably, the scourge of
terrorism remains a significant threat, affecting
the lives of innocent civilians across the globe. My
personal thoughts and sympathies go to the survivors
and the bereaved.
I thank the Security Council for the opportunity
to present the fifteenth report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/576) on the threat posed by Da’esh
to international peace and security and the range
of United Nations efforts in support of Member
2/22

09/08/2022

It seems as though, every time I appear before
the Council to present the Secretary-General’s report,
something big happens just prior to my appearance.
This time it is the death of Al-Zawahiri. This past
winter (see S/PV.8963), it was the Da’esh attack in
Al-Hasakah, and, in August 2021 (see S/PV.8839), it
was the Taliban takeover in Afghanistan.
I am pleased that Mr. Chen, Acting Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, is joining me to present the report (see
S/2022/547) that our office prepared jointly with the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
under the leadership of Mr. Edmund Fitton-Brown.
Following the completion of his term, I wish to
express my sincere appreciation for Mr Fitton-Brown’s
dedicated service and constructive collaboration with
my Office over the past five years.
Despite its territorial defeat and subsequent losses
among its leaders, Da’esh has continued to pose a
threat to international peace and security that has
been rising ever since the onset of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. Da’esh and its affiliates continue to
exploit conflict dynamics, governance fragilities and
inequality to incite, plan and organize terrorist attacks.
Its members continue to exploit pandemic-related
restrictions and misuse digital spaces to intensify their
efforts to recruit sympathizers and attract resources.
The group has also significantly increased the
use of unmanned aerial systems in the past year,
including those reported in northern Iraq. Da’esh has
managed to do so partially by resorting to a largely
decentralized internal structure, which is mentioned in
the present report thanks to the information provided
by Member States to the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team. That structure is centred
around a so-called general directorate of provinces
and associated offices and seeks to manage terrorist
operations and finances across the globe. Such offices
operate not only in Iraq and Syria but also outside the
core conflict zone, with the most active ones being
reported in Afghanistan, Somalia and the Lake Chad
basin. Through that structure, Da’esh leadership incites
followers to carry out attacks and retains the ability to
direct and maintain control over the flow of funds to
affiliates worldwide.
22-45508

09/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

While the existence of such structures may not
be surprising, it provides a worrisome reminder
that Da’esh has long-term goals and aspirations.
Better understanding and continued monitoring of
that structure are indispensable for countering and
preventing the threat posed by Da’esh. Strengthened
international and regional cooperation, including
through information-sharing mechanisms, remain
crucial in that regard.
The threat posed by Da’esh and its affiliates remains
higher in societies affected by conflict. The border
between Iraq and Syria remains highly vulnerable, with
up to 10,000 fighters estimated to be operating in the
area. From there, the group launched a global campaign
of enhanced operational activity in April to avenge
senior leaders killed in counter-terrorism operations.
In Afghanistan, the number of attacks claimed by
or attributed to the local Da’esh affiliate has decreased.
However, the number has increased considerably since
the Taliban took control last year. Its presence has
expanded to the north-eastern and eastern parts of
the country.
In Africa, the situation has deteriorated further
since the Secretary-General’s previous report
(S/2022/576), with the expansion of Da’esh in Central,
South and West Africa. From Uganda, a Da’esh affiliate
has widened its area of operations into the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, while another affiliated group,
after being knocked out by military action last year, has
intensified small-scale attacks in Mozambique’s Cabo
Delgado province. That expansion also affects countries
that had until recently largely been spared from attacks,
such as littoral countries in the Gulf of Guinea.
The potential impact of climate-related challenges
and global food insecurity are of particular concern
in West Africa, notably in the Sahel, where they may
exacerbate fragilities and further fuel local conflict
dynamics that could catalyse the spread of terrorism
and violent extremism conducive to terrorism.
Although their active presence and activity are
observed mostly in societies affected by violent
conflict, Da’esh and its affiliates also seek to inspire
or direct attacks in non-conflict zones to incite fear
and project strength. In Europe, Da’esh has called on
sympathizers to carry out attacks by exploiting the
easing of pandemic-related restrictions and the conflict
in Ukraine.

S/PV.9108

Despite the persistent threat, joint efforts by
Member States continue to yield positive results. Da’esh
and its affiliates have continued to suffer significant
losses in leadership, including the loss of the Da’esh
leader in February, as noted in my previous briefing (see
S/PV.8963). Moreover, while the Da’esh leadership still
manages between $25 million and $50 million in assets,
that amount is significantly less than the estimates of
three years ago. The diversity of sources, both licit
and illicit, that are used by Da’esh to finance terrorist
activities and exert control over affiliated groups
and fighters, underlines the importance of sustained
efforts to counter the financing of terrorism. In that
regard, I am most pleased that the Financial Action
Task Force and the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant joined the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact in April this year.
I also welcome the Government of Iraq’s
repatriation of more than 2,500 Iraqi nationals who had
been stranded in camps and other facilities in the northeast of Syria, as well as the repatriations by Tajikistan
and France last month of, respectively, 146 women and
51 children. However, I remain deeply concerned about
the fact that the limited progress achieved so far in
repatriating foreign terrorist fighters and their family
members from those camps is far overshadowed by
the number of individuals still facing a precarious and
deteriorating situation.
Tens of thousands of individuals, including
more than 27,000 children from Iraq and some 60
other countries, remain subject to enormous security
challenges and humanitarian hardship, which are further
compounded by recent reports of increased violence,
including dozens of assassinations. Those individuals,
many of whom are children who did not choose to be
there, also remain deprived of basic rights and are at the
very real risk of radicalization and recruitment.
It is imperative that Member States urgently
consider the long-lasting implications of not taking
prompt action to address that dangerous situation. I
reiterate the Secretary-General’s repeated calls for
Member States to further their efforts in facilitating
the safe, voluntary and dignified repatriation of all
individuals who remain stuck in those camps and other
facilities. My Office, together with UNICEF, lead
the Global Framework for United Nations Support on
Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq Third Country National

22-455083/22

S/PV.9108

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Returnees, made up of 15 entities organized to support
Member States’ efforts regarding the accountability,
protection, rehabilitation and reintegration of nationals
returned from Syria and Iraq. We would welcome
contributions to the multi-partner trust fund that allows
that work to go forward.
The persistent threat posed by Da’esh, as well as
the magnitude of the challenges it presents, underlines
the importance of non-military measures to counter
terrorism and address its consequences. Resolving the
conflicts in which Da’esh and its Al-Qaida forebearer
thrive is necessary for creating the conditions to bring
about their defeat. However, if we are to rid ourselves of
that scourge, we must also address the vulnerabilities,
societal grievances and inequality exploited by the
group in the first place, and promote and protect human
rights and the rule of law.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Voronkov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chen.
Mr. Chen (spoke in Chinese): Allow me to begin
by thanking the Security Council for the opportunity
to brief its members on the fifteenth report of the
Secretary-General on the threat posed by Da’esh and
the efforts of the United Nations to assist Member
States in countering the threat (S/2022/576).
I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov for his overview of the report, as well as both
the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team for their
invaluable collaboration in preparing the report.

09/08/2022

act as a further catalyst for the spread of terrorism and
violent extremism conducive to terrorism.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) has continued to implement its
mandate in accordance with resolution 2617 (2021),
while supporting Member States in their implementation
of the relevant Council resolutions. Following two
years of virtual and hybrid assessment formats due to
the coronavirus disease pandemic, CTED was able to
resume its on-site assessment visits on behalf of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee this year.
We have also continued to analyse emerging issues,
trends and developments and issued several analytical
and research products in that regard. Those included
a report synthesizing our extensive consultations with
African civil society organizations on key trends and
developments in relation to Da’esh in Africa; a study
on the interrelationship between counter-terrorism
frameworks and international humanitarian law; a
joint report with the International Peace Institute on
the relationship between masculinities and violent
extremism conducive to terrorism; and, most recently,
a study of the links between the exploitation, trade and
trafficking of natural resources and terrorism financing.
CTED, in close coordination and cooperation with
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and
other key partners, has also worked to support a range
of capacity-building activities based on the CounterTerrorism Committee’s recommendations.

The threat posed by Da’esh and its affiliates remains
both global and evolving. Despite its recent leadership
losses, Da’esh continues to take advantage of conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism to recruit as
well as to organize and execute complex attacks. The
exploitation of conflict-related fragilities remains at
the heart of that strategy, notably in Iraq, the Syrian
Arab Republic and across the African continent. The
situation in Africa, notably in West and Central Africa
and in Mozambique, has become more concerning.

Enhanced
multilateralism,
international
cooperation and global solidarity are the only way
to counter a global terrorist threat such as Da’esh.
A comprehensive, coordinated, whole-of-United
Nations approach remains crucial to developing and
implementing effective counter-terrorism measures.
Those strategies and measures must be tailored, ageand gender-sensitive and human-rights compliant.
CTED remains committed to assisting the Council,
the Committee and Member States in those efforts
while accelerating cooperation and collaboration
with stakeholders.

Terrorism does not exist in a vacuum. We face a range
of overlapping global challenges that risk complicating
our counter-terrorism responses and exacerbating
the threat posed by Da’esh and other terrorist groups.
As referenced by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2022/576), the connected global food crisis could

In conclusion, I would like to inform the Council
of the forthcoming special meeting of the CounterTerrorism Committee on the use of emerging
technologies for counter-terrorism purposes, to be
held from 28 to 30 October in New Delhi and Mumbai,
India. It is my hope that the event will serve as a forum

4/22

22-45508

09/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.9108

to further enhance and strengthen our multilateral and
multidimensional counter-terrorism efforts.

Democratic Republic of the Congo and Mozambique
into human slaughterhouses.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Chen
for his briefing.

As it stands, none of the five geopolitical regions
as defined by the African Union has been spared. The
use of local affiliates remains the most successful
Da’esh model in Africa. But what are the factors that
have made Da’esh so successful in Africa? There are
several factors responsible but, for the sake of time, I
will highlight just a few.

I am very pleased to note that the Secretariat is able
to accommodate a briefing in Chinese.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ewi.
Mr. Ewi: I thank you very much, Mr. President,,
for this opportunity to address the Security Council on
such an important issue as the threat posed by Da’esh to
the international community. On behalf of the Institute
for Security Studies, one of the leading think tanks on
human security in Africa, I wish to congratulate you
and your Government on your dynamic leadership of
the Council.
I also join you and other members of the Council
in congratulating the Secretary-General on an excellent
report (S/2022/576), presented by the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Counter-Terrorism. We generally agree with
the analysis contained in the report, which has truly
highlighted some of the vexing issues on the continuous
threat posed by Da’esh to the international community.
I would, however, like to use the next several
minutes of my time to step outside of the frame of the
report to offer some perspectives on why the threat
posed by Da’esh to Africa is growing day by day and
why the continent is not only a hub, but could also well
be the future of the caliphate.
The presence of the Islamic State in Africa today
is deep and concerning. The group has expanded its
influence beyond measure. At least 20 countries in
Africa have directly experienced Islamic State activity.
More than 20 others are being used for logistics and
to mobilize funds and other resources. There are
now regional hubs, which have become corridors of
instability in Africa.
The Lake Chad basin continues to serve as the
group’s biggest area of operations; the Sahel, particularly
the Liptako-Gourma region, has become ungovernable;
and Somalia remains the hotspot for the Horn of Africa.
There have been recent attempts to take over Uganda
and destabilize the country — although they failed, the
threat posed by Da’esh through its affiliate, the Allied
Democratic Forces, remains serious. Islamic State
Central Africa Province has turned some regions of the

The first is the presence of natural resources.
Terrorism in Africa is more or less a battle over
Africa’s natural resources. That is clearly evident in the
strategic locations of terrorist groups in Africa. Da’esh
is no exception: those groups are located at borderlands
whereby countries intersect and mostly where natural
resources can be found. The Secretary-General’s report
has highlighted the sources of funding for Da’esh. What
we are seeing in Africa is that those groups practically
have self-financing capabilities, either through the
direct extraction of natural resources — especially
through illicit artisanal gold mining — or through the
use of extensive networks.
I would like to cite a recent report published in May
in South Africa by investigative journalists. The report
details some of the informal methods and networks
used to mobilize huge sums of money. It describes how
more than 6 billion rands — about $400 million — was
mobilized through a range of methods, including the use
of spaza shops and the hawala system in South Africa
to finance Da’esh groups in Mozambique, Kenya, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and elsewhere.
The lingering grievances about global injustices
and the lack of political will to deal with the Palestinian
problem remains a rallying cry for many young people
in Africa. It is the main source of radicalization and
why many young people join the Islamic State. Despite
the tendency of Western scholars to dismiss the role
of poverty, our studies in Africa show irrefutable
empirical evidence that many of the young people who
have joined Da’esh and other terror groups in Africa
have done so because of poverty and unemployment.
Da’esh has exploited poor communities for recruitment
and support.
The third factor, which serves to highlight
this point, is the ability of Da’esh to work with
other terror and criminal groups on the continent.
We are seeing something that rarely happens
elsewhere — collaboration, especially joint operations

22-455085/22

S/PV.9108

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

between Da’esh and Al-Qaida. The splintering of terror
groups that we saw in the post-9/11 era is now being
replaced with alliances, amalgamation and regrouping
of terror groups, irrespective of their ideological creed.
The coming together of Al-Qaida groups under the
umbrella of Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam waal-Muslimin in
2017 marked a new era for jihadist terrorism in Africa.
Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam waal-Muslimin has been able to
team up with Da’esh groups, such as the Islamic State in
the Greater Sahara, to carry out some of the largest and
most gruesome terror attacks in West Africa and the
Sahel. The concentration of those attacks in Burkina
Faso and Mali illustrate the impact on governance.
Boko Haram or the Islamic State West Africa Province
has demonstrated the potency of such nexus or crossfertilization schemes of terror organizations in Africa.
The group has benefited enormously, both materially
and financially, and in terms of recruitment through
support and operational collaboration with herders,
bandits, kidnappers and artisanal miners.
The fourth factor is the inconsistency in State
responses, or what I call international double standards.
That is seen in the upstream-downstream effect. After
the declaration of the caliphate in Syria and Iraq, the
international community mounted what was referred to
as the Global Coalition against Da’esh. Terrorism was
driven out from upstream to downstream in Africa. The
continent bore the brunt of the activities taking place
upstream in Syria and Iraq, but no similar coalition was
mounted to defeat Da’esh in Africa or to deal with the
threat downstream. In other words, Africa was left to
bear the consequences of those who were fleeing Syria
and finding safe haven on the continent.
The fifth factor is related to the ailing war on
terrorism in Africa. These days, we no longer hear
about conferences or new initiatives taken by African
countries to fight terrorism, even at the level of the
African Union, where such efforts are declining. The
momentum that was generated by 9/11 with regard to
the fight against terrorism is rapidly declining.
The sixth factor is an approach taken by African
countries in response to terrorism, which I refer to as
the ostrich approach. It is particularly true in cases of
early warning regarding terrorism. In many countries,
when terrorism erupts, there is a tendency to ignore it,
to not recognize it, to not call it terrorism and to claim
that there is nothing happening. We have also seen that
even if countries say that something is happening, they
6/22

09/08/2022

tend to believe that it is a threat that can be eliminated
by local means.
But we have all seen the fallacy of the ostrich
approach. The lack of early response to early warning
about terrorism in Africa is one of the factors that
continues to nourish Da’esh and Al-Qaida. Sovereignty
is used to shield the threat until it incubates and becomes
uncontrollable. Once the threat gets out of hand, the
international community is then called upon to help.
We are seeing this phenomenon play out in Benin and
Togo, which are the latest coastal countries in Africa to
experience concentrated attacks carried out by Da’esh
and other terror groups. We also saw this phenomenon
in Mozambique when terrorism erupted. We saw it in
Nigeria, in Cameroon and many other countries, where
the threat was misdiagnosed and the responses were
also inadequate.
The seventh factor is the overwhelming reliance on
narrow-minded militaristic strategies that are not wellequipped. The multiplicity of peace support operations
to fight terrorism in Somalia, the Lake Chad basin,
the Sahel and now in Mozambique have yet to show
concrete results. These strategies have produced untold
human suffering and human rights abuses. They also
lack the resources and funding they need in order to do
effective work. There is a need for military and security
strategies, but they must be part of a broader strategy
that addresses the root causes of terrorism, especially
the political, economic, social and ideological roots of
the phenomenon. The marginalization of civil society
means that there is no one to speak to those in the
communities and no one to hold States accountable.
The eighth factor is the divorce between the fight
against transnational organized crime and counterterrorism in Africa. Despite the increasing linkages and
convergence between terrorism and organized crime,
those who are fighting them in Africa do not speak to
one another. The lack of a political centre for counterterrorism in Africa has led to fragmented and disjointed
responses. In the past, the Organization of African
Unity provided a political centre for the anti-colonial
struggle, which ultimately was won. We need a similar
political centre in the fight against terrorism.
What can the Security Council do? I want to
conclude by highlighting that, to defeat Da’esh in
Africa, the strategy must extend beyond the group
and include its alliances with Al-Qaida and the nexus
22-45508

09/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

with other criminal groups, including bandits, herders,
gangs and various organized crime groups.
The Council can mobilize support for counterterrorism in Africa, particularly equipment and funds
for the many ongoing peace support operations in
various regions.
The Council would need to be closer and more
involved. There is a feeling in Africa that the Security
Council, in New York, is too far away. As a result,
many Council decisions are not implemented. I believe
that situations like the one that escalated in Cabo
Delgado merited a visit of the Council to Mozambique
to show solidarity and enforce international law. The
absence of the Council means that even sanctions are
not implemented. Most blacklisted terrorists do not
know that they are blacklisted because, apart from the
Council, no one else tells them anything. The Council
must find a way to ensure that the resolutions that it
adopts are communicated to those concerned on the
ground, particularly at the community level.
I also believe that the solution lies at the
community level, where terrorists obtain support by
manipulating the people. The Council must therefore
work closely with the African Union and regional
economic communities to provide the political centre
and generate the necessary momentum for revitalizing
the fight against terrorism on the continent.
In conclusion, I believe that the Council can do more
to mobilize support for civil society in Africa so that it
can be the interlocutors between the Council and the
people. To this end, the Council may wish to consider
convening a meeting with civil society organizations
to empower them and strengthen their role in the
implementation of Security Council resolutions.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Ewi for his briefing. We appreciate his analysis
and the information provided, as well as the practical
recommendations set forth in his remarks. I believe
that all that information is of great value to the Security
Council’s work.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Thank you, Mr. President, for hosting today’s meeting.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Acting
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate Chen and Mr. Ewi for their

S/PV.9108

briefings. The United States also thanks SecretaryGeneral Guterres for the combined efforts of the United
Nations system and other international organizations
that contributed to his useful report (S/2022/576) and
to today’s briefing.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
and others continue to take advantage of conflict,
governance failure, political turmoil, socioeconomic
inequalities and grievances to attract followers and
resources as well as to incite and organize terrorist
attacks. The international community must augment
the efforts of vulnerable populations to reject these
appeals to violent extremism.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the human
tragedy resulting from ISIS’ so-called caliphate includes
the tens of thousands of foreign nationals, mostly women
and children, currently residing in displaced persons
camps. The situation is an unacceptable humanitarian
human rights and security crisis.
The repatriation of foreign terrorist fighters and
their associated family members and their subsequent
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration, as
appropriate, is the best way to hold individuals
accountable for their crimes. Repatriation also prevents
further radicalization to violent extremism and
uncontrolled movements of foreign terrorist fighters
and their associated family members.
We applaud the efforts of Iraq and other States
Members of the United Nations that have repatriated
nationals over the last six months. We urge Member
States to utilize or contribute to the Global Framework
for United Nations Support on Syrian Arab Republic
and Iraq Third Country National Returnees. The
United States remains ready to support Member States
that wish to bring their nationals home.
We are also concerned about the increasing terrorist
threat across various areas of Africa outlined in the
Secretary-General’s assessment. ISIS and Al-Qaida
affiliates continue to exploit Africa’s long-simmering
conflicts to bolster their illicit activities, providing
themselves with heightened lethality. ISIS West Africa
merits particular focus as the group that has become
the largest and one of the most lethal ISIS affiliates
outside the core region. The United States continues to
provide its African partners critical counter-terrorism
assistance to disrupt and degrade ISIS and Al-Qaida
affiliates, underscoring that capable law-enforcement

22-455087/22

S/PV.9108

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

09/08/2022

and broader security-service responses are essential to
preventing and countering terrorism.

efforts form part of a broader political strategy, one that
responds to this context.

As the Secretary General’s report highlights, it
is critical that the international community extend
the fight to deny safe haven for Al-Qaida and its
affiliates to include Afghanistan. As Secretary Blinken
recently noted, by hosting and sheltering the leader of
Al-Qaida, Ayman Al-Zawahiri, in Kabul, the Taliban
grossly violated the Doha agreement and their repeated
assurances to the world that they would not allow
Afghan territory to be used by terrorists to threaten the
security of other countries. In addition to Al-Qaida,
ISIS-Khorasan remains a threat and continues to
orchestrate sophisticated attacks that target civilians,
including vulnerable ethnic and religious minorities.

The international community must therefore
pay close attention to the potential effects of the
current geopolitical climate on underlying drivers of
radicalization. Russia’s war against Ukraine, following
the devastation already wrought by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, has further destabilized global
supply chains, exacerbating inflation, energy shortages
and food insecurity. This is fertile ground for ISIL to
further spread its hateful ideology.

Finally, as the Secretary General’s report
correctly notes, effective counter-terrorism requires
an understanding of power structures and gendered
practices in society. Therefore, references to gender
in Council documents related to counter-terrorism are
critically important.
The Secretary General’s report provides a stark
reminder of the evolving ISIS threat and summons all of
us to more collaborative, balanced efforts in countering
that threat. Moving forward, we must utilize the report
to inform what actions we can take to ensure that the
Secretary-General’s next report on ISIS reflects the fact
that our collective pressure is having a greater impact
on the group.
Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov, Acting Executive Director Chen and
Mr. Ewi for their informative briefings today.
We remain concerned that the threat from the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its affiliates
remains high, particularly in conflict zones and that
this negative trend continues despite the significant
leadership attrition that the group has suffered in recent
months. While the group remains territorially defeated
in Syria and Iraq, it retains the ability to conduct attacks
in that region, and its presence elsewhere continues to
grow, particularly in Afghanistan and across Africa.
As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/576)
reminds us yet again, ISIL sustains itself by deliberately
exploiting a range of vulnerabilities, including armed
conflict, political instability, economic inequality and
human rights abuses, in order to radicalize and attract
recruits. Accordingly, it is crucial that counter-terrorism
8/22

Norway takes note of the United Nations support
to the counter-terrorism efforts of Member States,
as outlined in the Secretary General’s report, and we
commend the Organization for its comprehensive work
in this area, guided by the four pillars of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
However, the report also highlights the need for a
more robust monitoring and evaluation framework to
better assess the impact of United Nations counterterrorism activities on the ground. Indeed, there is a
tonal discrepancy between the concern that the report
details about the current threat posed by ISIL and the
confidence with which it describes the United Nations
capacity-building measures. A clearer analytical
connection between the two is necessary to ensure
coherence and demonstrate impact.
To be effective, the counter-terrorism efforts of
both Member States and the United Nations should be
guided by a preventative, whole-of-society approach
that is conflict-sensitive, gender-responsive and
human rights-compliant. It is only through such a
strategy that addresses the root causes of terrorism in
a comprehensive and integrated manner that we will be
successful in building true resilience and in defeating
ISIL once and for all.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I, in turn,
would like to pay tribute to the victims of terrorism as we
approach the International Day of Remembrance. I also
thank the briefers, and I commend the coordinated work
by the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, which is
essential to ensuring the effectiveness of the United
Nations response to terrorism. The involvement of civil
society is also essential, and I welcome Mr. Martin
Ewi’s contribution and his concrete proposals.
22-45508

09/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/576) is
clear. The threat from Da’esh is constantly increasing,
particularly in Afghanistan and on the African
continent. To eliminate that threat, we should maintain
intense pressure on the ground militarily. We are
determined to wage that battle alongside our regional
and international partners within the Global Coalition
against Da’esh and within the international coalition for
the Sahel. Of course, our response cannot be only in
terms of security. We must address the root causes of
extremism and terrorism. That means a credible, viable
and inclusive political solution in Syria, in line with the
provisions of resolution 2254 (2015), and, in Iraq, the
country’s stabilization and reconstruction.
In Afghanistan, the recent neutralization of the
Al-Qaida leader is a success for the fight against
terrorism. It is also a confirmation of fears repeatedly
expressed in this Chamber for more than a year. The
Taliban continue to provide refuge and support to
terrorist groups, in particular Al-Qaida, thereby
betraying the commitments that they made to the
international community and which the Security
Council recalled in resolution 2593 (2021).
On the African continent, we are concerned about
the expanding activities of the Allied Democratic
Forces in Central Africa. France encourages the Office
of Counter-Terrorism to continue its assistance efforts
to strengthen State capacities, particularly in the
Great Lakes region. To combat the terrorist threat in
Cabo Delgado in Mozambique, France is committed,
within the European Union Military Training Mission,
to supporting the Mozambican armed forces. The
European Union is considering additional support
measures for Rwanda and the Southern African
Development Community efforts to stabilize the region.
In West Africa, France supports the International
Counterterrorism Academy, which has been operating
in Côte d’Ivoire since 2019. Nearly 940 trainees
from 26 African countries have already been trained
since 2019. France has invested €24 million since the
donor conference of 12 July; more than €15 million is
expected to be added in support of that training. We call
on all Member States and the relevant United Nations
agencies to support that institution.
Given the terrorist threat, our commitment is based
on three priorities.
The first priority is the fight against the financing
of terrorism. Given the strong capacity for innovation

S/PV.9108

of such groups and emerging forms of financing, such
as cryptoassets and neobanks, we must be reactive to
adapt the framework of our collective action. We call
on all States to implement resolution 2462 (2019) and
on the United Nations to support capacity-building in
that area.
The second priority is to combat the misuse of the
Internet by terrorist groups, which use it to disseminate
their propaganda. France continues to strengthen the
national, European and international responses, in
conjunction with the private sector. We just adopted
into national law rules that were drawn up with our
European partners to enable the rapid removal of
terrorist content from the Internet. We are also pleased
that the Christchurch Appeal, which we launched with
New Zealand, has so far brought together more than
55 States, the European Commission, two international
organizations and 14 companies. We will meet in
September to discuss the progress made and to study
new avenues of action for that Appeal.
Furthermore, we must strengthen the fight against
impunity for the crimes committed by Da’esh. In that
spirit, together with Sweden, we formed a team to
investigate the crimes committed against the Yezidi
population in Syria and Iraq. We take this opportunity
to reiterate our support for the work of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism. Terrorists must be tried as
close as possible to where their crimes were committed,
where evidence of their actions can be found and where
victims can be granted reparation for the harm done to
them. We also support the work of the Global Survivors
Fund, established by Dr. Mukwege and Nadia Murad.
In conclusion, I would like to recall the importance
that the fight against terrorism be carried out in
compliance with international humanitarian law,
refugee law and human rights.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): At the outset, I would like
to thank the delegation of China for organizing this
briefing on threats to international peace and security
caused by terrorist acts. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2022/576) on the subject, and we
thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov
and Acting Executive Director Weixiong Chen for
the depth and clarity of their briefings. We also thank

22-455089/22

S/PV.9108

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Mr. Martin Ewi for his perspectives from a civilsociety background.
The report that we received and information
available to us confirm a surge in the incidence of
terrorism by 17 per cent in 2021, particularly in Africa,
Central and South Asia and the Levant. We are also
concerned about the evolution of the Sahel as the
epicentre of terrorism and the shift of focus of foreign
terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State, towards the
region. That has been accompanied by the creation
of affiliations with local terrorist groups, which now
threaten even coastal West Africa.
As highlighted by the Secretary-General’s report
and re-echoed by the 2022 Global Terrorism Index,
terrorism remains a serious threat, with sub-Saharan
Africa alone accounting for 48 per cent of the total
global deaths from the menace. Disturbingly, four of the
nine countries with the largest incidence of deaths from
terrorism were also in sub-Saharan Africa, namely, the
Niger, Mali, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Burkina Faso.

09/08/2022

Taking into account the dynamics of the threat
posed to international peace and security by terrorism,
we would make the following four points.
First, there is an urgent need for a reconceptualization
of how the Security Council perceives the threat posed
to international peace and security by terrorism. While,
in the past, coordinated law enforcement action had
proved adequate in countering terrorist organizations,
today the scope and operations of terrorist groups
require global actions that are intelligence-led and
kinetic, balanced by a focus on sustainable peace. Law
enforcement operations alone are no longer effective.
The case for complimentary military capabilities
against terrorist groups is clear, when one looks at
conflict settings where national capacity for counterterrorism has proven itself to be ineffectual, such as,
for example, in Somalia, northern Mozambique, the
Sahel, north-east Nigeria and the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

We recall the landmark resolution 1373 (2001), on
counter-terrorism, which signalled the commitment
to a global approach to addressing the menace of
terrorism. While some progress has been made since
the establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
through the legal, operational and institutional
responses developed to counter the threat of terrorism,
considerable gaps still remain to be covered. That
remains the case especially in response to terrorism in
new situations, such as in Africa.

The effects of terrorism are not national but global,
and its planning, financing and organization transcend
national borders. It is therefore important that, while
taking into account the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, the Council find better ways of interlocking
its decisions with regional efforts at countering
terrorism in the field. One consideration would be for
the Council to act in a unified manner whenever it deals
with terrorist organizations and act against all terrorist
groups, without discrimination. There is no such
thing as good or bad terrorists; rather all terrorists are
bad. And we must condemn terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.

As terrorist groups have lost ground in other parts
of the world, they have made common cause with local
groups in Africa, taking advantage of insecurities
caused by climate change, including the displacement
of whole communities, religious tensions, weak
development resilience, the spillover of militants and
arms from conflicts and the absence of State presence
in large areas of regions, to radicalize and recruit
vulnerable individuals. As their territorial gains have
expanded, so have their ambitions. As their networks
have become more agile and globally connected,
with an adapted leadership and disparate operational
structures, it has become increasingly difficult to
counter those terrorist organizations. The attendant
impact on national economies and governance and the
humanitarian impact on local populations should be of
great concern to the world.

Secondly, in considering the ascendancy of terrorist
threats in regions where conflicts are on the rise and
the global networks that they operate, the Council
must extend support for intraregional and crossregional intelligence-sharing efforts to counter crossborder collaboration by terrorist groups. We urge the
Council to therefore transition support for home-grown
counter-terrorism mechanisms, such as the African
Union’s normative frameworks for preventing and
combating terrorism, as well as the counter-terrorism
strategy of Economic Community of West African
States, the Accra Initiative and ongoing efforts to
deploy regional counter-insurgency forces against
terrorist and extremist groups. We are well aware of the
stretched capacity of peacekeeping and must embrace
the effective complementarity that regional forces can
offer in addressing the threats caused by terrorist acts.

10/22

22-45508

09/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Such support should also be anchored on technical
assistance for enhancing the national capacities
of developing countries, including in the area of
emerging technologies. In that regard, we encourage
the continuing cooperation and capacity-building
support of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, regional groups and friendly countries for
Member States that have a need to strengthen their
security and counter-terrorism strategies.
Thirdly, while we note the interplay between
terrorist financing and transnational organized crime,
we also note the continuing financing of terrorist
groups by foreign elements. In that context, we reiterate
the declaration of the sixteenth Extraordinary Session
of the Assembly of the African Union, held in Malabo,
calling, “upon all external actors to cease their support
to terrorist groups in the Continent.”
In strengthening the fight against local and
external financing of terrorism, we urge for genuine
partnerships with regional institutions, such as the
Intergovernmental Action Group against MoneyLaundering in West Africa, which have been established
to help fight against money-laundering in the region and
break the links between the means and the capability to
commit terrorist acts.
Sustaining and enhancing such regional initiatives
is critical to help curtail the increasing use of
cryptocurrency as a means of choice for financing
terrorist activities. We also welcome the call for greater
attention to be paid to the growing link between
terrorists on land and pirates at sea, particularly in the
Gulf of Guinea, as we work collaboratively to dry out
their sources of funding and check any expansion of
their operations. In that regard, in line with resolution
2634 (2022), on maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea,
we look forward to the report of the Secretary-General
in October and hope that the report, when released, will
help identify ways to address the threat.
Fourthly, there is the need to promote a
multidimensional and proactive approach to preventing
and combating terrorism, including by empowering
youth, reinforcing peace education and dedicating
greater attention to, and investment in, addressing the
root causes of terrorism, especially the governance and
development deficits, as well as the improvement of the
socioeconomic conditions of the people.

S/PV.9108

As the coronavirus disease pandemic and the
ongoing aggression against Ukraine have degraded
the fiscal capacity of many developing countries to
address the growing demands of their populations, it is
important that global support be enhanced to undercut
the ideologies of violent extremist groups that exploit
long-standing vulnerabilities. We urge appropriate
global responses, such as debt cancellation and the
restructuring of debt repayment, to enable the countries
concerned to build back better and adequately overcome
their security challenges.
In conclusion, it is important to underscore that
terrorism constitutes an attack not only on innocent
lives. It represents a full onslaught on our shared values
and sense of justice and the inherent rights and dignity
of every person. Terrorism, in essence, is an affront
to humankind, and no country is immune. I therefore
reiterate Ghana’s commitment to the objective of
enhancing all available tools for counter-terrorism at
the multilateral and regional levels and welcome efforts
to effectively harness a robust response in a manner
that helps to counter that menace.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov of the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism, Mr. Weixiong Chen of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and Mr. Martin Ewi for their informative contributions,
which provide us with an update on the operational
activities carried out by Da’esh in an international
context characterized by many global challenges.
We are deeply concerned about the scope of the
terrorist threat, especially in Africa. In launching their
terrorist activities by all means possible, including
through the use of the Internet, in every corner of the
world, especially in conflict areas, terrorist groups,
including Da’esh, are primarily trying to destabilize
nations by creating a climate of fear. My country’s
position on this issue is unequivocal: Gabon opposes
all terrorist ideologies and acts in all their forms. It is
self-evident that no cause, ideology or religion can be
used to justify appalling terrorist acts.
Gabon welcomes the joint efforts that have
weakened the Da’esh movement. However, my country
regrets that, since the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2022/576), the threat posed by the
terrorist group and its affiliates remains high. There is
a fear that the myriad challenges exacerbated by the
impact of the coronavirus disease, which has plunged

22-4550811/22

S/PV.9108

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

09/08/2022

many countries into economic recession, will weaken
our ability to confront this scourge.

creating an environment conducive to the emergence of
terrorist networks.

In that regard, the Secretary-General’s report
notes the correlation between the structural difficulties
that certain countries are undergoing, particularly
in Africa, in the security, social and economic areas
and the gradual and dangerous increase in Da’esh’s
influence and activities. We must also be wary that
Da’esh will try to take advantage of the current cracks
in the international order to further entrench itself and
spread its influence, above all wherever it can find
fertile ground, including in conflict areas.

An effective fight against terrorism requires a
holistic approach and an appropriate way to address
the socioeconomic challenges facing the States
affected, along with particular attention to issues of
social justice and the improvement of living standards
for their populations. That approach requires greater
international solidarity. It is also important to
strengthen the fight against transnational trafficking,
which is used to finance terrorism. It is clear that given
the proven links between the financing of terrorism and
organized crime that can be seen in the various forms
of illicit trade conducted by terrorist organizations,
the international community should maintain and
strengthen its efforts to combat such trafficking.

What continues to amaze us is the movement’s
ability to remain active and reinvent itself, including
through its ability to channel considerable sums of
money through criminal networks, thereby enabling
it to carry out its recruitment efforts and contemplate
realizing its sinister goals. In that regard, Da’esh’s
ability to obtain and deploy sensitive and highly lethal
weapons is concerning. Effectively combating terrorism
demands a peaceful world order and international
solidarity. That is a fundamental requirement.
For, while the terrorist threat remains global,
the fact is that terrorist groups will continue to act
opportunistically and try to establish themselves
in visibly fragile regions. The counter-terrorism
architecture must remain dynamic and matched by
exemplary international cooperation, especially in the
area of information-sharing. It is imperative to continue
working towards strengthening and improving the
effectiveness of the international response through the
broadened and more effective application of existing
international tools in compliance with the norms
established to combat terrorism, of which there are many
and which are regularly updated as the threat evolves.
As we are aware that, in combating terrorism, it
takes only one weak link to weaken the international
response as a whole, we must also strengthen the
capacities of, and technical assistance to, the most
vulnerable States. While the lack of commitment
may be owing to insufficient political will, it also
depends to a large extent on the financial, human and
technical means available to States. The link between
development and terrorism continues to be extremely
relevant today, especially in fragile States, which are
often facing political and security crises, poverty and
the absence of prospects for young people, thereby
12/22

The issue of the return and resettlement of foreign
fighters represents a new terrorism risk and is a real
source of concern in Africa. It is fuelled by the capacity
of terrorist organizations to organize attacks from afar,
outside the areas where they are based.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
country’s support for the mandates of the various
counter-terrorism bodies. We also welcome the spirit
of unity demonstrated by the Council in the fight
against terrorism. We must continue to build on our
achievements and not allow divergent views to make
us lose sight of the ultimate goal, which is eliminating
the terrorist threat in whatever form it may take and
wherever it may be in the world, especially in Africa,
where the threat is looming with renewed urgency.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank the Chinese presidency for organizing today’s
timely briefing. I also want to thank Mr. Voronkov,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Counter-Terrorism,
Mr. Chen, Acting Executive Director of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, and
Mr. Ewi, Senior Researcher at the Institute for Security
Studies, for their detailed and comprehensive briefings.
On one hand, the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/576) shows that the threat of terrorism is higher
in conflict-affected settings, reminding us that terrorism
and armed conflict mutually reinforce each other.
That overlap can be addressed only by comprehensive
strategies, which must take into account the root causes
of both conflict and the radicalization that is conducive
to terrorism. On the other hand, the report illustrates
how terrorist groups may seek to resort to attacks
22-45508

09/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

outside conflict zones, with a view to attracting greater
attention and support. To fight terrorism effectively, we
must also understand why some people are vulnerable
to terrorist ideology.
The situation of foreign terrorist fighters and their
family members in detention camps in the Syrian Arab
Republic remains worrisome. The humanitarian and
human rights implications affect international security,
hinder deradicalization initiatives and risk feeding into
terrorist narratives. Respect for international human
rights, international humanitarian law and refugee law
constitutes not only a legal and moral obligation but
is the core of any strategy that aspires to succeed in
combating terrorism. Radicalization in prisons and
prison-based recruitment are key drivers of the threat,
and precarious detention conditions only compound
such tragic situations. The prospect of safe, voluntary
and dignified repatriation for such individuals,
particularly women and children, may save them from
violent extremism. The fate of children in the families
of foreign terrorist fighters is particularly worrying.
They are victims, not criminals, and the spectre of
statelessness only worsens their vulnerability.
Social
exclusion,
youth
unemployment,
xenophobia, discrimination and prejudice lie at the
heart of terrorism. It is not a surprise, then, that the
report cites examples of how Da’esh manages to swell
its ranks by offering better pay to people in need.
Terrorist narratives are more likely to attract people
who feel alienated and dispossessed and are looking for
a sense of purpose and means of survival. Furthermore,
as the Secretary-General pointed out, food insecurity
may exacerbate existing fragilities and catalyse the
spread of terrorism and violent extremism conducive
to terrorism. It is therefore imperative that counterterrorism activities address social, humanitarian and
security concerns simultaneously. The United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy provides important
guidance in that respect. Providing support for the
survivors of terrorism and their families must also be at
the centre of any counter-terrorism policy. Brazil looks
forward to the Global Congress of Victims of Terrorism,
scheduled to take place in September. The international
community must take advantage of this opportunity to
evaluate how to provide better assistance to the victims
of terrorism, uphold their rights and fulfil their needs.
It should be emphasized that any counter-terrorism
action must be carried out within the strict limits of
international law, including the Charter of the United

S/PV.9108

Nations, international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and international refugee law.
When the rule of law does not prevail, distrust of
institutions prospers. Violent extremism conducive
to terrorism may find a friendly environment when
counter-terrorism fails in its ultimate goal of protecting
people’s lives and fundamental rights. Despite all of the
Security Council resolutions with binding obligations
on counter-terrorism, there is still no agreement on the
exact parameters of what constitutes terrorism. I want
to reiterate that the Security Council should not let a
lack of clarity on issues with criminal repercussions
be the norm in its work, nor should it circumvent due
process when designating new terrorist individuals or
entities. It is of paramount importance that decisions
on listing terrorist individuals and entities be based on
solid evidence.
Brazil is adamant in its condemnation of terrorism
in all its forms and is alarmed by the continuing threat
posed by Da’esh and its affiliates. Our Constitution
enshrines the repudiation of terrorism as a guiding
principle of our foreign policy. The international
community must not waver in its resolve to counter
terrorism, in the light of the undeniably serious risks
that it entails for the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Acting
Executive Director Chen for their valuable briefings. I
also thank Mr. Ewi for his insights.
Despite the gains made in the elimination of the
leadership of Da’esh, the transnational threat that the
group and its affiliates pose to international peace
and security is still growing, as the most recent report
of the Secretary-General states (S/2022/576). That
underscores the continued need for the Global Coalition
Against Da’esh to maintain pressure on the terrorist
group and ensure its enduring defeat.
It is also important to remain cognizant of the
terrorist threat that goes beyond Da’esh. Our fight
against Al-Qaida remains a global priority, and as the
organization enters a leadership vacuum following
the death of Ayman Al-Zawahiri, it is vital that the
international community maintain its momentum
in the fight. It is critical that the Security Council
consider pragmatic measures to effectively address
the transnational threat posed by terrorist groups
around the world. Bearing that in mind, the United

22-4550813/22

S/PV.9108

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Arab Emirates would like to emphasize the following
key points.
First, technology has the potential to considerably
improve the quality of people’s lives. However, it can
also be a double-edged sword. Its rapid evolution and
wide commercial availability challenge Member States’
efforts to prevent its misuse by terrorist groups. Still,
emerging technologies have tremendous potential to aid
in efforts to prevent, counter and address terrorism. For
instance, we have seen the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh employ artificial intelligence to analyse
massive amounts of data in support of the prosecution
of Da’esh members.
As underlined in the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral, Da’esh has been able to substantially increase
its use of remotely piloted aircraft systems acquired
through a variety of means, including front companies
and the conversion of commercial drones to lethal use.
It is imperative that the international community take
serious steps to address the acquisition of drones and
their components by terrorist groups, including Da’esh,
Al-Shabaab and the Houthis. Key gaps in the existing
international framework must also be identified and
addressed, while being mindful of the essential role
that autonomous and remotely operated systems play in
counter-terrorism efforts.
Secondly, we would like to take this opportunity
to focus on the exploitation of Islam by terrorist groups
to justify their acts of violence and hate through selfproclaimed Islamic appellations. We must not permit
Da’esh and other groups to hijack a religion of tolerance
and give credence to their pretences. I want to reiterate
that there is nothing Islamic about terrorism. We
therefore call on Member States and the United Nations
system to put an end to the use of the words “Islamic
State” in their references to Da’esh and to apply the
same principles to prevent the exploitation of religion
by other terrorist groups.
Thirdly, as an urgent priority, the Council should
focus on preventing the emergence of the next generation
of terrorists and extremists. As an example, at Al-Hol
camp more than 25,000 children are potentially at
risk of radicalization. Genuine efforts must be made
to give those children hope for a more peaceful and
prosperous future. In that regard, we appreciate the
important work carried out by the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism
14/22

09/08/2022

Committee Executive Directorate and other relevant
United Nations entities in support of gender-responsive
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration measures
that also address the specific needs of children.
Finally, it is essential that the Council use all its
available tools and instruments in addressing the
gaps and emerging challenges in the current counterterrorism architecture. That includes considering
practical measures against all individuals, groups
or entities involved in or associated with terrorist
activities. Terrorism anywhere affects the security of
everyone, everywhere. We must leverage the current
momentum and double down on efforts to eliminate
Da’esh and its affiliates and other terrorist groups. The
international community must seize this opportunity
and act now.
Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Acting
Executive Director Chen and Mr. Ewi for their
informative briefings.
We remain indebted to the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team, the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate for their important
work in analysing the ever-changing terrorist threat. We
heard today how Da’esh continues to pose a significant
threat to global stability. Counter-terrorism pressure
has constrained the group over the past few years, but
the gains have been vulnerable and uneven, with the
group still able to expand in sub-Saharan Africa in
particular, as Mr. Ewi outlined today. Recent events in
Afghanistan have demonstrated the very real security
challenges that we face. Da’esh-Khorasan continues
to target innocent Afghans, particularly minority
communities, while Al-Qaida has caused the suffering
of thousands. We all have a shared interest in using
every lever at our disposal to counter Al-Qaida, Da’esh
and other terrorist groups in Afghanistan.
Despite its territorial defeat and the recent successful
operations against its leadership, Da’esh remain a
serious threat in Iraq and Syria, its strategic heartland.
That demonstrates the continuing importance of the
Global Coalition against Da’esh and the need to work
together to ensure Da’esh’s lasting global defeat. The
United Kingdom hosts the Global Coalition’s counterDa’esh communications cell, which is tackling Da’esh’s
propaganda and its destructive and hateful messages.
In the month in which we mark the eighth anniversary
22-45508

09/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

of Da’esh’s crimes against the Yazidi community,
the United Kingdom also underlines its support for
the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh and
for international efforts to bring the perpetrators of
Da’esh violence to justice.
We continue to support the fight against Da’esh as
it expands to new theatres. As we heard today, Da’esh’s
African affiliates continue to grow and account for an
ever-increasing proportion of the violence for which
Da’esh claims responsibility. Interconnectivity between
branches also represents a worrying trend and amplifies
the threat that they pose. Da’esh is opportunistic
and will continue to take advantage of pre-existing
grievances and target those most susceptible to joining
their cause — the young, the marginalized and the
disenfranchised. Hard security interventions will
therefore only take us so far. We must work to build
resilience within communities and in partnership with
civil society against terrorist propaganda and other
influencing efforts.
Finally, when countering terrorism, we must all
ensure that we protect and promote human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law through a
gender-sensitive approach if our collective efforts are
to be truly effective.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank the Chinese presidency
for convening this meeting. I also thank UnderSecretary-General Voronkov and Acting Executive
Director Chen for their briefings, as well as Mr. Ewi for
his insights, perspectives and recommendations.
We commend the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) and the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact for
their collaborative efforts in compiling the fifteenth
report on the threat posed to international peace and
security by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(S/2022/576). We also commend the continued efforts
of the United Nations counter-terrorism entities in
supporting Member States in countering the threat of
terrorism globally.
The ongoing military campaigns and other
strategies to weaken the operational capabilities of
Da’esh’s core, as well as its affiliates and networks
globally, have shown that they can be effective.
However, the group has shown the ability to adapt and

S/PV.9108

remain resilient by spreading its violent networks across
the world, especially on the African continent. Kenya
is particularly concerned about the fact that Da’esh
continues to diversify its revenue streams, enabling it to
sustainably recruit and radicalize, spread and manage
networks, finance foreign fighters and plan and execute
complex attacks in several regions of the continent. In
the Sahel and in parts of West and Central Africa, the
group seeks to exploit fragilities and conflict situations
to expand its territory, thereby threatening the security
of the region. In the Horn of Africa, the Al-Qaida
affiliate terrorist group Al-Shabaab, based in Somalia,
remains dominant in its transnational activities. Several
countries, including my own, Kenya, have suffered the
senseless atrocities of that terrorist group. Al-Shabaab’s
recent brazen attack in south-east Ethiopia shows its
opportunistic determination to continue spreading its
dangerous ideology across borders.
We are also deeply disturbed by the spate of violence
inflicted by Da’esh and its affiliates on aid workers and
security agencies, as well horrifying atrocities against
innocent civilians. Against that backdrop, I would like
to highlight five measures that we consider necessary
to the efforts to counter the threat posed by Da’esh to
international peace and security in Africa and globally.
First, there is a need for a surge in capacitybuilding initiatives and sustained collaboration in
order to address the conditions conducive to the uptick
in terrorism and violent extremism. Such initiatives
should be based on especially designed counterterrorism programmes that support the specific needs
of countries, particularly those in conflict or emerging
from it. Our priority in that regard should be to bolster
State institutions, including on border management and
law enforcement, with a view to enhancing resilience to
terrorist activities and taking back territory controlled
by terrorist groups.
Secondly, we encourage incorporating vulnerable
groups and victims of terrorism in the fight against
the scourge. That will enhance the effectiveness of
reintegration tools such as psychological counselling,
training programmes and the provision of skills
needed to ensure the successful self-employment of
former combatants.
Thirdly, there is a need for enhanced counterterrorism partnerships and collaboration between
UNOCT regional offices and the countries of the region
through counter-terrorism narratives and sustained

22-4550815/22

S/PV.9108

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

engagement in implementing programmes and projects
that mitigate against the spread of the threat.
Fourthly, terrorist groups continue to engage in
illegal taxation and ransom of, and illegal trade in,
natural resources and contraband in order to build
revenue bases. We call for strengthened cooperation,
particularly among the States of the region, to roll out
strategies that seek to disrupt and combat cross-border
illicit financial flows that are exploited by terrorist
groups for revenue purposes.
Fifthly, terrorist groups should be clear that there is
a heavy price to pay for their actions. In that regard, the
Security Council must deploy all its counter-terrorism
tools, including sanction regimes on all terrorist groups,
entities and individuals, in equal measure, and avoid
double standards.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Kenya’s unreserved
commitment to the fight against terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir
Voronkov and Mr. Weixiong Chen, Acting Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, for their detailed analysis of the
fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). We also followed the remarks by Mr. Martin
Ewi with interest.
We share many of the assessments contained in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/576) on the threat
posed by ISIL. On our part, we would like to make
several points.
Russia is on the front line of the fight against
terrorism. Having passed through the challenges of
the 1990s, we have accrued vast experience. Some
of the situations we lived through were difficult, but
it gave us an opportunity to successfully counter
contemporary threats. We take our obligations very
seriously, and we intend to keep assisting States in
combating international terrorism, including through
financial contributions to the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and regional specialized mechanisms. We
will continue developing channels of multilateral and
bilateral cooperation, but only with those who truly
intend to fight terrorists and not cozy up to them or
even sponsor them.
16/22

09/08/2022

We need to eliminate the remaining strongholds of
international terrorism in Syria and put an end to the
presence of ISIL and other terrorist groups on Syrian
soil. At the moment, they are entrenched in areas not
controlled by the Syrian Government. As recently
as 4 August, when patrolling the skies above Syria,
crews of Russian Air and Space Forces identified and
eliminated a group of terrorists from Liwa Shuhada
Al-Qaryatayn. That terrorist group is based in the
Al-Tanf area, which is under the control of the United
States military. The withdrawal of American occupying
forces from Syrian territory would mean the swift
and irreversible elimination of the ongoing terrorist
presence in that long-suffering country, as well as that
of terrorists bases in neighbouring States.
In the Council, when discussing the SecretaryGeneral’s reports on threats posed by ISIL, we have
repeatedly raised the need to prevent weapons from
falling into the hands of terrorists. We note that the latest
report provides updates on that matter. In particular, it
says that some terrorist and radical groups have called
on their affiliates to use the events in Ukraine to access
easily available weapons, which are being delivered
unchecked to Kyiv from Western States. In that context,
the report notes the growing threat of attacks from
lone-wolf terrorists in Europe.
We believe that we need to delve into this topic
today. Ukraine is now joining the ranks of Syria, Iraq,
Libya and Afghanistan. Ukraine is receiving a great
many Western weapons, ammunition and dual-use
goods. Back in the day, the flow of Western arms into
Iraq and the use of terrorists for geopolitical purposes
led to the creation of ISIL. Arms deliveries to Libya
caused the terrorist threat to spread across most of
Africa. In Syria, in order to overthrow a legitimate
Government, the West supported and gave weapons
to ideologically motivated terrorists, calling them
moderate freedom fighters.
In the Middle East, North Africa and Afghanistan,
the United States and its satellites fuelled opposition
forces that either quickly became terrorists or started
to maintain close ties with them. In Ukraine, there is
direct support and training for nationalist and neo-Nazi
groups. In addition, just as terrorists use the conflicts
in Afghanistan, the Balkans, Libya, Iraq and Syria to
exchange tactical know-how and reinforce transnational
networks, neo-Nazis and white supremacists are using
Ukraine as a test battlefield. And Western States are
shamelessly enabling this in many ways.
22-45508

09/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

We should also mention double standards. In 2021,
the United States Congress made another attempt to
include the notorious Ukrainian Azov Battalion on its
list of terrorist organizations. Earlier, in 2015, the United
States House of Representatives made amendments to
the draft Department of Defense Appropriations Act
in order to prevent the use of the military budget to
train the Azov Battalion. The Congress designated this
group as a Ukrainian paramilitary neo-Nazi group. In
2018, the House of Representatives voted to ensure that
“none of the funds made available by the Act may be
used to provide arms, training or other assistance to the
Azov Battalion.”
But after Russia started its special military
operation, this bloodthirsty ideological group suddenly
became the heroes of Mariupol, and the geopolitical
gains of the United States authorities prevailed over the
real fight against terrorism and various manifestations
of extremism.
In Russia, the Azov Battalion is listed as a terrorist
organization, and we have many reasons for that.
Members of this group who surrendered to the Russian
side have given information to that end. It is clear that
this is why the Kyiv regime launched a precise strike
targeting its former military elite in a detention facility
in Yelenovka.
There is another parallel between events in the
Middle East, North Africa and Afghanistan and what
is happening in Ukraine. Part of the mercenaries, neoNazis, extremists and white supremacists who rushed to
Ukraine from across the Western world, if they survive,
will gain combat experience and then return to their
countries of origin or third countries, just as foreign
terrorist fighters did after fighting for ISIL. Something
similar happened when the remaining bandits from
Chechnya fled to Europe as political refugees and
then later carried out terrorist acts in the countries
where they were granted asylum. If anyone doubts this
thesis, they can consult the numerous publications of
specialized experts in Western sources.
In conclusion, let me say a few words about
terrorist activity in Afghanistan. We heard American
representatives claim to have eliminated Al-Qaida’s
leader, Ayman Al-Zawahiri. That is remarkable
news, but it has at least two sides. On the one hand, if
confirmed, this is an indisputable success of American
special services. On the other hand, it makes us doubt
the veracity of the ostentatious claims made by the

S/PV.9108

United States Administration approximately one year
ago that the American military had left Afghanistan
after having successfully met their counter-terrorism
objectives. After 20 years of the presence of United
States and NATO forces, the situation in Afghanistan
is teetering on the brink of humanitarian disaster, and
ISIL terrorist attacks continue to multiply.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I also want to thank UnderSecretary-General Voronkov, Acting Executive
Director Chen and Mr. Ewi for their very informative
briefings this morning.
In my remarks, I will focus on the issue at hand. I
think the report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/576)
is unambiguous: the threat to international peace and
security posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and its affiliates continues to rise. ISIL’s
attack on Al-Sina’a prison in Syria earlier this year
provided a stark reminder that the group retains the
capacity to mount high-profile attacks both there and
in Iraq.
We also share the concerns expressed by the
Secretary-General and Mr. Ewi in the Chamber today,
with regard to the deteriorating situation on the African
continent. The Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team’s assessment that two of ISIL’s three
most active regional networks are now located in
Africa is very worrying. I want to thank Mr. Ewi for
his very informative briefing on the rationale for the
growth of ISIL affiliates in Africa. It is something that
we cannot ignore, and the root causes and drivers must
be addressed.
Turning to Afghanistan, the attacks claimed by
ISIL-Khorasan (ISIL-K) continue. There were three
attacks in Kabul over the past week. One of those
attacks killed and wounded women and children at a
Shiite mosque. ISIL-K’s presence in the east and north
of the country has also grown, and the geographical
spread of its activity has widened.
Ireland condemns all attacks perpetrated by ISIL
and its affiliates, including the targeting of women and
children and the Hazara community in Afghanistan.
Key to tackling the global terrorist threat is
addressing its complex, varied and context-specific
drivers. In this regard, we share the Secretary-General’s
concerns that global food insecurity in West Africa,
particularly the Sahel, may exacerbate fragilities
and fuel local conflict dynamics that catalyse the

22-4550817/22

S/PV.9108

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

spread of violent extremism and terrorism. Effective
responses to countering and preventing terrorism
therefore demand comprehensive and whole-of-society
approaches that address underlying grievances that
increase vulnerability to radicalization. Linked to this
preventive approach, we also echo Mr. Ewi’s remarks
with regard to an early-warning system for terrorism
in Africa.
As the Secretary-General points out, respect for
human rights and respect for the rule of law are critical
components of effective counter-terrorism responses.
Too often, however, counter-terrorism measures are
misused to crack down on civil society and repress
human rights and freedoms, which are protected under
international law. And too often, accountability for ISIL
crimes, including sexual and gender-based violence, is
lacking. In this regard, victims and survivors are being
let down.
We commend the efforts of Member States and
the United Nations, in particular those of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, in ensuring that perpetrators of
ISIL’s crimes are brought to justice. Open civic space,
the protection of human rights, the safeguarding of
humanitarian action and effective gender-responsive
counter-terrorism responses are all mutually
reinforcing objectives.
We applaud both the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and Spain for Under-Secretary-General Voronkov’s
initiative in organizing the recent Malaga conference,
the first international conference dedicated to civil
society and human rights in counter-terrorism.
We look forward to action on the many positive
proposals advanced at the conference, including those
recommended by civil society.
We also understand that the Secretary-General is
preparing his report on ways to enhance human rights
and gender considerations in the counter-terrorism
efforts of the United Nations system. Ireland encourages
broad consultation with States Members of the United
Nations, with United Nations Global Compact entities
and with civil society in this regard.
Ireland consistently highlights the importance
of a gender-responsive approach across all aspects
of the Security Council’s agenda, which includes the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
counter-terrorism processes, as well as recognition of
18/22

09/08/2022

the impact of structural gender inequality. We want to
see more consistent and comprehensive evidence as to
how gender considerations inform the United Nations
counter-terrorism work. Ireland looks forward to
further discussion of this issue at the Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s first-ever dedicated briefing on gender
later this year.
We would also like to say to Acting Executive
Director Chen that we particularly welcome the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate with the International Peace Institute in
examining how violent extremist groups exploit notions
of violent masculinities, and we encourage the Council
to give greater attention to this issue.
In concluding, allow me to state once again Ireland’s
resolute commitment to working with everyone
around this table to prevent and counter terrorism in
full and to respect our duties and obligations under
international law.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov and Acting Executive Director Chen
for their briefings and for the work they are doing to
coordinate United Nations efforts in this field. We
also welcome the civil society briefer, in particular for
sharing information on Africa.
We notice from the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/576) that the threat posed by Da’esh and its
affiliates continued to rise in the first half of 2022.
Accordingly, we are concerned about its activities
in Africa.
But Africa is not the only place that is of concern.
Although on many occasions we have expressed the
importance of preventing Afghanistan from becoming
a haven for terrorism, Da’esh and its affiliate networks
are, according to the Secretary-General’s report, quite
active in Afghanistan, which goes against the Doha
agreement. We are deeply worried that Da’esh remains
a persistent threat in Iraq and Syria, with its ability to
organize complex attacks. In addition, radicalization
in prisons, camps and detainee centres remains a
challenge. That is why repatriation is important.
We know that repatriation is a very complex
process. It needs to reflect an understanding of security
considerations, but we also need to learn from one
another and exchange best practices in order to manage
repatriation effectively. It is in the spirit of that that
Albania and other countries in the Western Balkans
22-45508

09/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

have approached this humanitarian problem. Albania
has already repatriated dozens of women and children
from Syrian and Iraqi camps, with the most recent
successful operation taking place just a month ago. We
also echo the Secretary-General’s call in this regard.
At the same time, we should address to a greater
extent the issue of preventing terrorism and countering
the terrorism narrative. We are aware that the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and its affiliates continue
to exploit conflict, governance failure, political turmoil
and socioeconomic inequality to recruit followers and
incite terrorist attacks. We have also seen the impact of
food insecurity on Western Africa, which could lead to
the spread of terrorism.
Given these challenges, we advocate a
comprehensive all-of-society human rights-compliant
and gender-sensitive approach and welcome emphasis
on interreligious and intercultural dialogue as an
effective tool in prevention and in addressing the root
causes of violence and extremism. We believe that it is
critical to counter the use of religion and the narrative of
hatred by terrorist groups. Based on its own historical
experience, Albania believes that the promotion of
peaceful coexistence is key to countering the narrative
that promotes division among people.
The ramifications of violent extremism and the
radicalization that leads to terrorism are global.
That is why we should continue our international
cooperation to counter the financing of terrorism and
prevent terrorist groups from using new technologies
to finance their operations. In that regard, we are
pleased to hear that the Financial Action Task Force has
joined the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact.
In conclusion, Albania reiterates its commitment in
the fight against terrorism and will continue to provide
unconditional support to the United Nations and other
global players in this fight.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Acting Executive Director Chen for their respective
briefings. I also thank Mr. Martin Ewi of the Institute
for Security Studies for his insights.
It is clear from the report of the Secretary-General
under consideration (S/2022/576) that terrorist threats
are on the rise globally. It is our considered conviction
that terrorism in one part of the world is a threat to

S/PV.9108

the peace and security of the entire world. Therefore,
our response to this global challenge should be unified,
coordinated, and most importantly, effective.
India’s immediate neighbourhood has also recently
borne witness to a spate of terror incidents. The series
of attacks at religious places of minority communities,
including the recent attack at the Sikh gurudwara in
Kabul on 18 June, followed by another bomb explosion
near the same gurudwara on 27 July, is alarming, to
say the least. The recent findings of the report of the
Monitoring Team of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011) (see S/2022/419) points to a
significant increase in the presence of Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan (ISIL-K) in Afghanistan
and its capacity to carry out attacks. ISIL-K, with its
base reportedly in Afghanistan, continues to issue
threats of terrorist attacks on other countries. The
linkages between groups listed by the Security Council,
such as Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and Jaish-e-Mohammed,
as well as provocative statements made by other
terrorist groups operating out of Afghanistan pose a
direct threat to the peace and stability of the region.
We therefore need to see concrete progress in ensuring
that such proscribed terrorists, entities and their aliases
do not get any support, tacit or direct, from the terror
sanctuaries, which also are based in the same region.
Given that background, it is puzzling to us that the
Secretary-General’s report chose not to take note of the
activities of the several proscribed groups in that region,
especially those that have repeatedly been targeting
India. The selective filtering of inputs from Member
States is uncalled for. We hope that, in future iterations
of the Secretary-General’s reports, inputs from all
Member States will be treated on an equal footing.
The Secretary-General’s report also outlines the
fact that terrorist groups with linkages to ISIL and
Al-Qaida are gaining in strength in Africa, targeting
civilians, especially women and children, as well as
security forces and United Nations peacekeepers. We
appreciate the efforts of the countries of the region to
take measures to combat that menace, and call upon
the international community and the United Nations to
support those efforts without any caveats.
ISIL’s expansion in Africa deserves the full
attention of the international community to ensure that
that threat is not seen in isolation, as such threats have
the potential to spill over to other parts of the world
as well.

22-4550819/22

S/PV.9108

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Last year, participants may recall that, on the
occasion of the commemoration of the twentieth
anniversary of the dastardly 9/11 attacks, the
External Affairs Minister of India provided a series
of suggestions on jointly combating terrorism (see
S/2021/48). Building on those suggestions, I would like
to offer the following observations.
First, the increasing use of the Internet and social
media platforms to spread terrorist and violent extremist
propaganda has posed challenges to Governments and
the technology industry alike. The continued increase
in the use of new technologies to move and store
funds, including virtual assets, online exchanges and
wallets and privacy coins, and the potential misuse of
dual-use technologies pose the risk that terrorists will
seek to abuse those systems for terrorism financing and
other terror-linked purposes. There is therefore a need
for intense discussions on the subject. I am therefore
pleased to report that India, as Chair of the CounterTerrorism Committee, will host a special session in
Mumbai and Delhi on 28 and 29 October, highlighting
the nature of that threat, Member States’ capacity gaps,
as well as best practices, and exploring a further course
of action to effectively deal with the threat. The highlevel meeting will be in-person, and I invite all Council
colleagues to participate at the meeting. Formal
invitations will be issued by the Chair later this month.
Secondly, we need political will to defeat terrorism.
There can be no justification for terrorist acts, much
less the glorification of terrorists, a tendency that we
have unfortunately seen in recent years in some parts
of the world. There should be no double standards in
dealing with terrorists. We should refrain from labelling
terrorism based on motivations, which will only allow
opportunistic forces to provide justification for certain
terror activities, based on their convenience.
Thirdly, an effective functioning of the sanctions
committees requires them to become more transparent,
accountable and objective. The practice of placing
holds and blocks on listing requests without giving
any justification must end. It is most regrettable
that genuine and evidence-based listing proposals
pertaining to some of the most notorious terrorists in
the world are being placed on hold. Double standards
and continuing politicization have rendered the
credibility of the sanctions regime at an all-time low.
We hope that all the members of the Security Council
can pronounce themselves in one voice, sooner rather
20/22

09/08/2022

than later, when it comes to the collective fight against
international terrorism.
Fourthly, linkages between terrorism and organized
crime need to be addressed. In India, we have had firsthand experience of crime syndicates venturing into
terrorism and, immediately thereafter, receiving State
hospitality in a neighbouring country despite being
listed under the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertaking and
entities. Such hypocrisy needs to be collectively called
out when the threat of terrorism looms large in each of
our countries.
Fifthly, we need to support the capacity-building
efforts of the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism and enhance its autonomy. India has been
supporting those efforts by providing financial support
and resources for the Office’s programmes aimed at
countering terror financing and preventing terrorist
movement. We reiterate our call for providing greater
financial support and adequate resources to the
Office of Counter-Terrorism from the regular United
Nations budget.
India has suffered from the menace of terrorism
for decades and has learned to counter the threat with
resolve and firm determination. We hope that the
international community will stand united in addressing
such a threat to humankind with zero tolerance.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I am grateful for the briefings by the UnderSecretary-General of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), Mr. Voronkov, the Acting
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), Mr. Chen, and Mr. Martin Ewi, of
the Institute for Security Studies.
Mexico notes with particular concern the active
presence of both the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and Al-Qaida in Africa. According to the 2022
Global Terrorism Index, terrorist deaths in the Sahel
have increased tenfold since 2007, making it the new
epicentre of terrorism. That is compounded by other
complex phenomena, such as high population growth,
lack of food and water, climate change and weak rule
of law.
The Index highlights that in 2021, sub-Saharan
Africa accounted for 48 per cent of the world’s total
22-45508

09/08/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

deaths from terrorism. Four of the nine countries with
the largest increases in terrorism deaths were also in
sub-Saharan Africa, namely, Burkina Faso, Mali, the
Niger and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Those numbers are troubling, and they highlight
the growing need to implement measures consistent
with international law, in particular international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
to comprehensively address the threat posed by the
scourge of terrorism. We reiterate that abuses in the
invocation of Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations in order to use force against terrorists are
inadmissible and in violation of international law.
The situation in Afghanistan is also of concern.
In 2021, Afghanistan was the country with the highest
rate of terrorist impact. We reiterate the need for us to
ensure that Afghanistan is not used as a platform or
safe haven for terrorist groups.
All of the foregoing reinforces the importance
of having a more effective preventive approach with
an emphasis on sustainable development and the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which pays special attention to the
protection of women, children and minorities in general.
Rebuilding the social fabric contributes to creating
the necessary conditions to avoid the phenomena of
radicalization, especially within the most vulnerable
groups of society.
In conclusion, we would like to thank the
Secretary-General and the UNOCT and CTED teams
for having, at Mexico’s request, incorporated for the
first time in their report a reference to the role played by
masculinities in terrorist groups and the way in which
terrorist groups and networks interact with society.
As we have repeatedly mentioned, this dimension is
indispensable for adopting more effective approaches
to prevent and counter the violent extremism that leads
to terrorism. We also welcome the joint publication
by CTED and the International Institute for Peace
of a report examining how violent extremists exploit
masculinities and how they interact with State actors,
including counter-terrorism institutions. We hope that
both the Security Council and the General Assembly
will be open to further work on this issue in order to
have a more robust preventive agenda that results in a
truly cross-cutting gender policy, and which has at its
core the protection of human rights as a fundamental
part of the fight against terrorism.

S/PV.9108

The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Acting
Executive Director Weixiong Chen and Mr. Ewi for
their briefings and commend the Office of CounterTerrorism (UNOCT) and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) for their
important efforts aimed at advancing international
counter-terrorism cooperation.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/576) indicates that the current international
counter-terrorism situation remains grave. The Islamic
State continues to launch terrorist attacks in an attempt
to regain influence, and it continues to infiltrate
Africa. Taking advantage of the volatile political
security situation, the intensified economic and social
conflicts, fuelled by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
and other current conditions, fans feelings of grievance
and recruits new members. A large number of foreign
terrorist fighters remain in conflict-affected areas for
extended periods of time, becoming an increasingly
large security risk. We need to take into account the
evolving counter-terrorism situation, sum up and
reflect on the lessons learned and enhance the capacity
of all countries to effectively contain and combat the
global terrorist threat.
China would like to emphasize the following
four points. First, counter-terrorism requires a
comprehensive approach to addressing both the
symptoms and the root causes. Counter-terrorism
efforts should focus on using political, economic,
and judicial means in an integrated manner, working
to eliminate root causes of terrorism and curbing the
ability of terrorist organizations to launch attacks and
recruit new members. International counter-terrorism
cooperation should focus on addressing such challenges
as the misuse by terrorists of the Internet and emerging
technologies, the diversification of terrorism financing
and the convergence of terrorist extremism and
transnational organized crime. It should also support
countries in strengthening information-sharing,
exchange of experiences and judicial cooperation. A
large number of foreign terrorist fighters have remained
in Syria, Iraq and other countries for extended periods
of time, and solutions for their repatriation should be
developed as soon as possible. Attention should be paid
to strengthening youth education and employment and

22-4550821/22

S/PV.9108

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

to preventing the incitement of young people through
violent extremist ideologies.
Secondly, we should vigorously promote counterterrorism capacity-building with a focus on helping
developing countries, especially African countries,
to enhance their counter-terrorism capabilities. The
Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee and
other United Nations counter-terrorism bodies should
optimize resource allocation, consider the needs of each
country, focus their efforts and resources on counterterrorism capacity-building, support developing
countries in improving their counter-terrorism capacity
at the legislative, judicial and law-enforcement levels,
and enhance the effectiveness of preventive actions
against terrorism.
The Secretary-General’s report indicates that two of
the three most dynamic Islamic State networks are based
in Africa. Countries outside the region should adjust
their military deployments in Africa to avoid creating
a security vacuum and strengthen communication and
coordination with African countries to explore ways
under the United Nations framework to overcome
challenges of counter-terrorism operations in logistics
funding and capacity-building.
Thirdly, double standards must be abandoned in
the fight against terrorism. There are no good or bad
terrorists. Counter-terrorism must put aside geopolitical
considerations and ideological biases. All countries have
the obligation to strictly implement the relevant sanctions
against Council-designated terrorist organizations and
individuals. Selective counter-terrorism that condones
or even uses terrorist organizations for geopolitical
gains and the instrumentalization of counter-terrorism
seriously undermines the effectiveness of international
counter-terrorism cooperation.
The international community should pay equal
attention to terrorist attacks everywhere. Since the
sudden withdrawal of foreign forces from Afghanistan,
spillover effects from terrorist forces in the country on
regional security have continued to emerge. Recently,
the successive terrorist attacks launched by the
Islamic State in Afghanistan are a cause for concern.
The international community should continue to pay
attention to and combat the Islamic State, Al-Qaida,
the East Turkestan Islamic Movement and other active
terrorist forces.

22/22

09/08/2022

Fourthly, counter-terrorism actions should comply
with international law and respect the sovereignty of
all countries. China supports international counterterrorism cooperation based on equality and mutual
respect. At the same time, counter-terrorism operations
should be carried out in line with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter. The targeted
elimination of terrorists through armed strikes must not
undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the countries concerned.
The counter-terrorism practice of the international
community over the past two decades has shown
that we cannot rely solely on military means to fight
terrorism. Military intervention in the name of counterterrorism and blatant violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of other countries will only cause
greater disasters, harm innocent civilians and even
provide a breeding ground for the growth and spread of
terrorist forces.
China actively participates in international counterterrorism cooperation through the China-United
Nations Peace and Development Fund. It supports
the UNOCT and CTED in implementing cooperation
projects to help developing countries, especially
African countries, through counter-terrorism training,
provision of counter-terrorism teaching materials and
equipment, and the holding of seminars on cross-border
counter-terrorism cooperation, so as to enhance their
capacity to prevent and combat terrorism. We will
continue to take practical actions and help support
Africa, Central Asia and other front-line countries to
strengthen counter-terrorism capacity-building and
contribute to effectively responding to terrorist threats
and maintaining regional peace and security.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers. If there are no more requests to take the
floor, I would like to reiterate China’s thanks to our
briefers, Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Mr. Chen
and Mr. Ewi, for their important contributions to our
meeting today.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

22-45508
