A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/163
18 February 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 114 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/48/632/Add.2)]
48/163.

International Decade of the World’s Indigenous People

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that one of the purposes of the United Nations, as set
forth in the Charter, is the achievement of international cooperation in
solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or
humanitarian character and in promoting and encouraging respect for human
rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race,
sex, language or religion,
Recalling its resolution 45/164 of 18 December 1990, in which it
proclaimed 1993 the International Year of the World’s Indigenous People, with
a view to strengthening international cooperation for the solution of problems
faced by indigenous people in areas such as human rights, the environment,
development, education and health,
Acknowledging the significance of the Year in raising international
awareness of the contribution of, and problems faced by, indigenous people
throughout the world, and aware of the need to build on the results and
lessons of the Year,
Recognizing the importance of consulting with indigenous people, the
need for financial support from the international community, including support
from within the United Nations system, including the specialized agencies, the
need for a strategic planning framework and the need for adequate coordination
and communication channels,
Expressing its appreciation for the work undertaken by the Coordinator
for the Year, the Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat, the Goodwill
Ambassador, Ms. Rigoberta Menchu, and the Working Group on Indigenous

/...

A/RES/48/163
Page 2

Populations of the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities,
Recognizing the value and the diversity of the cultures and the forms of
social organization of the world’s indigenous people,
Welcoming the report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, 1/ in which the vital role of indigenous people and their
communities in the interrelationship between the natural environment and its
sustainable development is recognized, including their holistic traditional
scientific knowledge of their lands, natural resources and environment,
Recognizing the importance of considering the establishment of a
permanent forum for indigenous people in the framework of an international
decade,
Taking note of the recommendation in the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action, 2/ adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights, held
at Vienna from 14 to 25 June 1993, that the General Assembly should proclaim
an international decade of the world’s indigenous people, which should begin
from 1994 and should include action-oriented programmes to be decided upon in
partnership with indigenous people,
1.
Proclaims the International Decade of the World’s Indigenous
People, commencing on 10 December 1994, the period from 1 January to 9
December 1994 to be set aside for planning for the Decade in partnership with
indigenous people;
2.
Decides that the goal of the Decade should be the strengthening of
international cooperation for the solution of problems faced by indigenous
people in such areas as human rights, the environment, development, education
and health;
3.
Also decides that, beginning in the first year of the Decade, one
day of every year shall be observed as the International Day of Indigenous
People;
4.
Requests the Commission on Human Rights, at its fiftieth session,
to invite the Working Group on Indigenous Populations of the Subcommission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to identify at its
next session an appropriate date for this purpose;
_______________
1/
Report of the United Conference on Environment and Development,
Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and Vol. I/Corr.1,
Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the Conference, vol.
II: Proceedings of the Conference, and vol. III: Statements made by Heads of
State or Government at the Summit Segment of the Conference.
2/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

/...

A/RES/48/163
Page 3

5.
Requests the Secretary-General to appoint the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Human Rights as the Coordinator for the Decade;
6.
Requests the Coordinator to coordinate the programme of activities
for the Decade in full collaboration and consultation with Governments,
competent bodies, the International Labour Organisation and other specialized
agencies of the United Nations system, and indigenous and non-governmental
organizations;
7.
Requests competent United Nations bodies and specialized agencies
to designate focal points for coordination with the Centre for Human Rights of
the Secretariat of activities related to the Decade;
8.
Invites Governments to ensure that activities and objectives for
the Decade are planned and implemented on the basis of full consultation and
collaboration with indigenous people;
9.
Requests specialized agencies, regional commissions and other
organizations of the United Nations system to consider with Governments and in
partnership with indigenous people how they can contribute to the success of
the Decade, and to transmit their recommendations to the Economic and Social
Council;
10.
Appeals to the specialized agencies, regional commissions,
financial and development institutions and other relevant organizations of the
United Nations system to increase their efforts to take into special account
the needs of indigenous people in their budgeting and in their programming;
11.
Invites indigenous organizations and other interested nongovernmental organizations to consider the contributions they can make to the
success of the Decade, with a view to presenting them to the Working Group on
Indigenous Populations;
12.
Requests the Commission on Human Rights to ask the Working Group
on Indigenous Populations to identify possible programmes and projects in
connection with the Decade and to submit them through the Subcommission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to the Commission
for its consideration;
13.
Recommends that adequate human and financial resources be made
available to the Centre for Human Rights in support of its activities related
to indigenous people, within the overall framework of strengthening its
activities envisaged in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action;
14.
Requests the Secretary-General to establish a voluntary fund for
the Decade, and authorizes him to accept and administer voluntary
contributions from Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and other private institutions and individuals for the purpose
of funding projects and programmes during the Decade;
15.
Urges Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to contribute to the voluntary fund for the Decade to be
established by the Secretary-General and invites indigenous organizations to
do likewise;

/...

A/RES/48/163
Page 4

16.
Invites Governments, competent United Nations bodies and
specialized agencies and other intergovernmental institutions, including
financial institutions, to consider providing additional resources to finance
the attachment of suitable staff, including indigenous staff, to the Centre
for Human Rights on a regionally balanced basis;
17.
Encourages Governments to establish national committees or other
more permanent structures involving indigenous representatives to plan
activities for the Decade;
18.
Requests that the meeting to be convened in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 46/128 of 17 December 1991 to review the Year also
consider preparations for the Decade, giving full participation to indigenous
people, particularly with regard to the elaboration of a detailed plan of
action, including an evaluation mechanism, and the establishment of a funding
plan for the Decade, and that the meeting report to the Working Group on
Indigenous Populations;
19.
Urges the competent United Nations organs, programmes and
specialized agencies, in planning activities for the Decade, to examine how
existing programmes and resources might be utilized to benefit indigenous
people more effectively, including through the exploration of ways in which
indigenous perspectives and activities can be included or enhanced;
20.
Requests the Commission on Human Rights at its fiftieth session to
give priority consideration to the establishment of a permanent forum for
indigenous people in the United Nations system;
21.
Requests the Secretary-General to give all the assistance
necessary to ensure the success of the Decade;
22.
Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to it a preliminary
report at its forty-ninth session and a final report at its fiftieth session
on a comprehensive programme of action for the Decade;
23.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-ninth
session an item entitled "Programme of activities of the International Decade
of the World’s Indigenous People".
86th plenary meeting
21 December 1993
