NATIONS

TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 4 DECEMBER 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 15 16) . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . .

Page

Expression of thanks to the two preceding Presidents ; . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . .
Adoption of the agenda , . . . , . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Letter dated 27 November 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/95 13) . . . . . I . . . . . . .

4

S/PV.1516

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a deference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND SIXTEENTH MEETING
HeId in New York on Thursday, 4 December 1969, at 3.00 p.m.
President: Mr. V. J. MWAANGA (Zambia).

justice. The journey may be long, but a start could be made
and the time is now.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

5. Mr. YOST (United States of America): I should like
simply to congratulate you upon your accession to the
Presidency of this Council and to express my appreciation
for the very kind words that you addressed on my behalf. I
am afraid it is too much to hope that you will have the
same good fortune I did in having so quiet a month in the
Council, but I am sure that any problems that come before
us you will deal with with your customary skill, wisdom
and good humour. I particularly appreciated the Christmas
plea which you so appropriately addressed to the nations of
the world and I trust that it will be heeded.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l516)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 27 November 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Senegal addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/95 13).

6. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I wish to add my
congratulations to those of Ambassador Yost. We are so
delighted to see you presiding over our deliberations that
we promise you that we shall make the maximum use of
the Council during the month of December. I should like
also to convey my apologies for not being here at the
opening of the Council. I happened at that particular
moment to be speaking in the General Assembly; no other
excuse would have been adequate for my absence. I hope to
make up for that absence by our subsequent efforts in the
Council. I thank you warmly for the reports which I have
already received in the Assembly of your kind words about
myself.

Expression of thanks to the two preceding Presidents
1. The PRESIDENT: Before we take up the adoption of
the agenda, allow me, on your behalf, and on my own
behalf, to express my gratitude to my two predecessors
who, as President of the Security Council, brought their
experience, wisdom and eminent status to bear on this
Council,
2. During the month of October we saw the Ambassador
of the United Kingdom, Lord Caradon, with all his skill and
leadership tackle important issues for the benefit of this
Council.

7. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr. President, I should like to
express my satisfaction that you are occupying the Chair
this month, and to point out that we are personally all
grateful to your predecessor, Mr. Yost, that he did not call
on us at all during his month of Presidency, when there was
no meeting of the Security Council. That was indeed
convenient to us, both personally and from the official
point of view, as we were all busy in the General Assembly
and the various Committees and were thus taken up by
Assembly business. That does not, however, mean that all
was quiet and peaceful in the world during Mr. Yost’s
month of Presidency.

3. As regards Ambassador Charles Yost of the United
States, who was President of the Security Council for the
month of November, although he very carefully and
successfully avoided any meetings during his tenure of
office, we cannot fail to recognize the exalted qualities he
possesses and the skilful consultations he conducted behind
the scenes on the composition of the sanctions Committee.
I am truly indebted to him for his efforts.
4. Having paid a tribute to my distinguished colleagues, I
should like in all humility and seriousness to make an
appeal to all of you, and to all those not represented at this
table. As we enter into the Christmas festivities many of us
are reminded that this is the period when the call for peace
on earth and goodwill towards men becomes more urgent
and more demanding. Without prejudice to all that each
one of us may consider sacred and at stake, let us,
nevertheless, extend the spirit of Christmas to all our
endeavours. Let us’ be resolved here and now to give
mankind a surprising Christmas gift: the cessation of all
hostilities with a determination to return to peace and
.

8. Bearing in mind the item before us today, there were at
least four places in the world where wars and conflicts were
taking place. We should, therefore, do better to hope for a
greater number of meetings of the Security Council and
fewer armed conflicts, clashes or wars, or perhaps hope that
there were none at all. That might be a better wish.
9. Therefore, Mr. President, I welcome with all my heart
your statement upon assuming the Presidency, and may I
1

express the strong hope that what you have said will come
true and that we shall have more Security Council meetings
and fewer armed confrontations and conflicts. May I wish
you every success in your important post.

undisturbed working conditions and adequate protect:i
and security to all missions to the United Nations. 1:
Arab countries have taken steps to this effect after I
incident that occurred yesterday, and we should like I
President of our Council to act to guarantee adequ,
conditions of safety for delegations accredited to I
United Nations.

10. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of the
Soviet Union for the kind words he has addressed to the
Chair.

16. I would add that the problem does not arise in tel
of bilateral relationships between certain countries and 1
United States of America, but in terms of relations131
between the United Nations of which we’are members a
the host country. It is not for us to intervene in the inten
affairs of the United States of America, but it is our duty
express our astonishment before the matter takes on a le
character and is brought before the Supreme Court, thou
we have no intention of discussing this in legal terms,
are astonished because the occupation of private premi
is, it seems, a violation under United States law and whelr
comes to missions that have diplomatic immunity i
breach of the law is more serious, and we are still wqiting
hear that the individuals who occupied missions, as was I
case yesterday with the Syrian mission, have been prose1
ted or condemned.

11. Mr. YAZID (Algeria) (translated from French):
Mr. President, before making my statement I wish to
express to you the fraternal congratulations of my delegation on the occasion of your accession to the Presidency of
the Council for the month of December, which is the last
month of our term of office.
12. We have had the honour of knowing you in the United
Nations and elsewhere for many years, at conferences of
States as well as at peoples’ conferences, and have appreciated your qualities and your determination to defend the
principles of the United Nations Charter and those of the
Organization of African Unity. You can rely entirely on the
co-operation of my delegation for the duration of your
term of office. My delegation would also like to pay tribute
to your predecessors, Lord Caradon and Ambassador Yost.
Speaking personally of your two predecessors, I would say
that Lord Caradon has welcomed me in this Council in
terms that I have had reproduced, framed and sent to my
son. Ambassador Yost holds a very special place in our
hearts in Arab North Africa, an area in which he had
occasion to serve during times that were difficult for our
peoples, when we were able to appreciate his human
qualities and his far-sightedness in regard to the future of
North Africa.

17. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative
Algeria for the brotherly compliments addressed to 1
Chair.
18. Mr. YOST (United States of America): I should Iike
assure the representative of Algeria and the other memb
of the Council that we are very keenly aware of lc
responsibilities, as host Government, to provide the fulls
protection to missions and representatives of Memt
States. In this particular case we have expressed our reg
to Ambassador Tomeh for the incident which, I may s::
happened unexpectedly and had not been anticipated.

13. Mr. President, I would add my voice to your appeal;
we are on the threshold of great celebrations traditional for
Jews, Christians and Moslems. I hope that during this
month of December, during which there will be Jewish,
Christian and Moslem celebrations, we will do everything
within our power to serve the ideals of peace, justice and
security laid down in the sacred books of these three
religions, the Torah, the Bible and the Koran.

19. As soon as it occurred, the New York City poli
moved with rapidity and dispatch to deal with it. We,
course, as do most other members of the Council, have t
right of free assembly and free protest; but within the
constitutional limits the necessary action was tak
promptly. A11due precautions have been taken today to I
to it that the demonstration which has been announced f
this afternoon is also held within proper bounds. I shol
like to assure all members that we remain, as does t
Police Department of the City of New York, constantly
their disposition, to provide protection normally and
special occasions, and they have only to inform us in C:Z
emergencies arise and we will immediately do everythi
that we can to see that the situation is kept under contri

14,. My statement concerns the working conditions of
m&ion.: accredited to the United Nations. As you know,
some time ago the General Assembly elected Syria to the
Security Council and Syria will shortly be seated here in the
Council. You have all learned that yesterday, on 3 December, the delegation of Syria was occupied by a commando
of the so-called “.4d hoc Committee for Jewish Defence”, a
commando which we think--and we say so outright-is
manipulated by the representatives of the Tel Aviv interests
in this country. The Syrian mission which has been
occupied for the second time-the first time was on
4 October 1966-did not have adequate protection and
when it asked for protection against any future attempts at
occupation, particularly after the new threats of occupation
today, following on the demonstrations scheduled for
4 p.m. today outside the mission, it received the reply that
it had better close for the day.

20. I believe we need not anticipate any serious CC
sequences, and I am sure that if the Syrian mission has :u
further requests to make in this connexion the fnIl(
consideration will be given to them by all of our federal ;I]
city authorities.
21. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republic
(translated from Russian): The question raised at It1
meeting by the representative of Algeria is indeed a serio
one and affects all permanent missions accredited to t
United Nations. All missions should enjoy normal cc

15. We raise this point because we believe that our
Organization and our Council have a duty to act to ensure
2

namely, the representative of the United Kingdom and my
distinguished friend, Lord Caradon, and the representative
of the United States, Mr. Yost, both of whom have
maintained the high standards of this organ, and, as the
representative of the Soviet Union has afready stated, they
have done so though the Council held no meetings, not
because they failed to work behind the scenes, as it were,
but because the work of other important United Nations
organs have kept us busy. I should like to express our
gratitude to both of them for their efficiency and skill in
the discharge of their duties.

ditions of work and their safety in the country which is
host to the United Nations should be guaranteed.
22. The events in the Syrian mission were like a bolt out
of the blue and startled the permanent missions to the
United Nations. Though these events are indeed surprising,
there have been other cases in the past. I remember when I
was President of the Security Council, the representative of
Saudi Arabia, Mr. Baroody, raised the question when he
received a whole series of threats from Zionist organizations. The matter took a very serious turn and he felt
bound to draw the attention of the Security Council to it,
while I, as President of the Security Council, had to contact
the representative of the United States about it, requesting
him to inform the appropriate United States authorities to
take measures to protect and guarantee the safety of the
representative of Saudi Arabia.

27. My delegation listened with concern-and it had
occasion to hear it yesterday in the Special Political
Committee-to
the complaint [S/9532/ addressed to the
Secretary-General and to the United States mission regarding the sudden irruption of a group of persons into the
Syrian mission. These events have ‘already been described
by the representative of Algeria. My delegation endorses
everything he has said and is grateful for the explanatory
statement made by the representative of the United States
to this organ in which he assured us that such events would
not be repeated.

23. The present and more striking case of this kind, in
which a hostile and disorderly crowd broke into the
premises of the mission and threatened the permanent
representative of a sovereign State Member of the United
Nations, is unprecedented. The members of the Security
Council and the United Nations should therefore undoubtedly devote serious attention to this matter, the more
so as under the existing agreement between the United
Nations and the United States, the latter has assumed all
the necessary obligations relating to such cases. Such
deplorable events are fraught with very serious dangers.
Why should we hide the facts? Many delegations do not
feel safe in New York, This gives rise to all kinds of strong
feeling, and serious assumptions may be made or conclusions drawn, It is therefore understandable that each one of
us ask the representative of the United States to take the
necessary precautionary measures to enlighten those people
who may not like this or that delegation or representative.
There are other ways of expressing views. There are
embassies, But we here are accredited to the United
Nations, and for local organizations to express such hostile
feelings and attitudes against the missions is unacceptable
not only from the point of view of international law but
from the point of view of the elementary courtesy due to
foreign representatives.

28. We are grateful for this explanation and we hope that,
in fact, we shall in future be permitted to discharge our
responsibilities as members of this Organization in an
atmosphere of calm and efficiency required by our functions.
29. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Spain
for his kind and complimentary sentiments addressed to the
Chair.
30. Mr. CSATORDAY [Hungary): Mr. President, first of
all permit me to join you in congratulating the outgoing
Presidents, Lord Caradon and Ambassador Charles Yost, for
the excellent, efficient and elegant manner in which they
have displayed their competence as Presidents of the
Security Council in the months of October and November
respectively.
31. At the same time, on behalf of the Hungarian
delegation, may ‘f welcome you, Mr. President, to the Chair.
We all know your high qualities as an outstanding diplomat
of the African continent, who is able to mediate among
opposing parties and to resolve the outstanding problems.
Your equanimity, tact and perspicacity are guarantees that
under such tense conditions as prevail during the concluding period of the twenty-fourth
session of the General
Assembly and of the year 1969, the Security Council will
successfully accomplish its tasks. I offer you my delegation’s full co-operation in carrying out your difficult tasks.

24. 1 must recall here the memorable words of L. N.
Tolstoy, the great classical writer, “I cannot keep silent.” In
the case of such an exceptional occurrence one cannot keep
silent and must draw the attention of the representative of
the United States and of the local authorities to it so that
all necessary measures should be taken by the United States
Government to avoid any repetition of such events in the
future, since, as I have said, they can lead to the most
serious consequences.
25. Mr, DE PINIES (Spain) (translated fi-om Spanish):
First of all, I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
upon your assumption of the Presidency of this most
important organ of the United Nations, and to wish you
every success in the discharge of your duties, in which you
can always count on the support and co-operation of my
delegation.

32. We have listened with great apprehension to the
statements that have just been made, in view of the fact
that the United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, has to deal with problems of international peace
and security. To ensure that we do not fail in carrying out
our tasks, we must, of course, have adequate conditions
that are guaranteed to the permanent representatives of the
various countries of the world in order to comply with their
important mandate.

26. At the same time, I should like to congratulate the
outgoing Presidents on their discharge of this lofty office,

33. We ourselves have experienced considerable inconvenience, and now that we have learned of this most recent
3

Letter dated 27 November 1969 from the Permanent
Representativeof Senegaladdressedto the Presidentof
the Security Council (S/9513)

outraaeous incident of the illegal occupation of the
Pen&rent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic, our
feelings of insecurity grow deeper. We feel deep sympathy
for our Syrian colleagues. The Hungarian delegation joins
most energetically in the protest expressed here by the
representative of Algeria, and expects the authorities of the
host country to take the appropriate measures necessary for
the protection of representatives accredited to the United
Nations, and of their missions.

40. The PRESIDENT: Requeststo be allowed to participate in the Council’s discussionof the item before it
today have been received from Portugal and Guinea.The
requestin the telegram dated 2 December1969 from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Portugal is contained in
document S/9519; and that in the letter of 3 December
1969 from the representative of Guinea is contained in
document S/9525. In accordancewith the usualpractice of
the Council and with the provisional rulesof procedure,I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite the
representativesof those countries to take placesat the
Council table in order to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote.

34. The argument we have heard from Ambassador Yostthat the democratic right of free assembly and protest
within proper bounds is guaranteed in the United States-in
principle, is correct, but in this instance its practice is
inadmissible, since the occupation of a diplomatic mission
for several hours by unauthorized persons, preventing its
proper and effective functioning, is contrary to intemational law and practice.

At the invitation of the President,Mr. F. B, de Miranda
(Portugal) and Mr. M. L. Condo!(Guinea)took placesat the
Counciltable.

35. Therefore, my delegation considers that proper
guarantees should be given-as called for by the Agreement
between the United Nations and the United States of
America regarding the Headquarters of the United
Nations’ -to all diplomats and diplomatic missions, so that
they may discharge the difficult tasks of the world
Organization.

41. The PRESIDENT: I have just receiveda letter from
the PermanentRepresentativeof Morocco [S/9529] who
alsorequeststo participate in the discussion
of the question
before the Council. If there is no objection, I proposeto
invite the representative of Morocco, in accordancewith
the usual practice of the Council, to take a place at the
Council table in order to participate in our discussion
without the right to vote.

36. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Hungary for his kind words addressed to the Chair. I
sincerely hope that I shall live up to his optimistic
expectations.

At the invitation of the President, Mr, A, T. Ben&la
(Morocco) took a placeat the Council table.

37. Mr. YUNUS (Pakistan): Sir, my delegation will be
happy to have another occasion at a later stage to convey to
you
its congratulations on your elevation to the Presidency
of this Council, and also to express its appreciation and
gratitude to your two distinguished predecessors,

42. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the complaint submitted by
Senegalin its letter dated 27 November1969,which was
circulatedin documentS/9513.

38. The purpose of my asking to speak at this stage of our
deliberations is limited. We have been gravely concerned to
hear of the serious and outrageous incident that took place
today-the occupation of the Syrian mission by Zionist
sympathizers. We entirely agree with the representative of
Algeria and support whole-heartedly the considerations that
he has submitted to this Council. The security of one’s
premises is the most elementary requirement of effective
participation in the work of the United Nations, to which
we are all accredited, and we expect that this will be
guaranteed by the host Government. In this connexion, we
have taken note of the statement made by the representative of the United States.

43. In this connexion, I shouldlike to drawattention to
the letter addressed
to the Presidentof the Security Council
on 2 December1969 by the representatives
of 35 African
States[S/9524] as well as to the letter of the samedate
from the representativeof Guinea[S/9.525],
44. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated from Remh):
Mr. President, I should first like to congratulate you
warmly, on behalf of my delegation,on your accessionto
the Presidencyof the Council for the month of December.
We have been working together for almosta year in the
Council andhave beenableto appreciateyour courtesy and
your considerableknowledge of internationalmattersand,
more particularly, of African questions.My delegation
would like to assureyou of its loyal and sincereco-operation sothat you can fulfil1 your difficult task.

39. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Algeria has
raised a subject which is of grave concern to all of us-the
protection of diplomats, their property and their chanceries. In view of the assurances given by Ambassador
Charles Yost on behalf of the United States, it is the hope
of the President that the city, state and federal authorities
will do everying possible in New York City to ensure that
there is no recurrence of such unpleasant incidents,

45. My delegationwould alsolike to expressits appreciation to your eminentpredecessors,
the representative:
of the
United Kingdom, Lord Caradon,and the representativeof
the United States,Mr. Yost. Both of them have discreetly,
yet skilfully and efficiently, directed the work of the
Councilin the months of October and November.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

46. I should also like to express my gratitude tlo you,
Mr. President,and through you, to all the membersof the

1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 11 (1947), No. .147, p. 11,
4

.
Council, for having agreed to hold this meeting, at which
the Government of Senegal will submit to the Council
extremely serious facts that require it to take a firm
decision,

space, While several villages were fired on by Portuguese
troops.
53. On 14 August 1964, a young soldier, 23 years of age,
named Jose Femandez Varela, of the 594th Company of
the 15th Battalion of the regular Portuguese army, sta.
tioned in Mansaba, was arrested on Senegaleseterritory. He
declared that he did not wish to serve any longer in the
Portuguese army but wanted to join his mother in Tuy,
Spain.

47. If my Government asked for this meeting of the
Council, it was, as you may guess for very serious reasons,
for’ all of you seated around this table, whose countries
have had fruitful relations, based ‘on friendship and cooperation, with Senegal, know the man who leads my
country and his political thinking. In view of the grave
events with which his country is faced as a result of the
deliberate provocations carried out by regular Portuguese
forces based in Guinea (Bissau), he is turning to you today
to ask YOU to set aside whatever feeling of affection you
may have for Portugal and judge calmly, without hatred,
fear or culpable weakness, the acts we shall bring to your
attention, and the authorities that ordered them. My
Government believes that these acts are sufficiently grave to
constitute a threat to international peace and security.

54. On 29 September 1964, a young divisional guard, aged
twenty-four, named Jose Carlos Soares, of Portuguese
nationality and origin, went to the prefecture of Velingara,
in Senegal, where he declared that he did not wish to return
to Portuguese Guinea,
55. In 1965, several incidents occurred in the d&rtements of Kolda on 6,7 and 8 January 1965, and in Sedhiou
on 23 January and 15 February 1965. These were cases of
overflight and burning of villages by the regular Portuguese
army. Villagers had to leave their homes and hide in the
bush in fear.

48. AS I have stated in my letter dated 27 November 1969
[S/9513], on 25 November 1969, between 11.30 a.m. and
12.35 p.m., the regular Portuguese army, based at Begene in
Guinea (Bissau), deliberately fired 20 shells on the Senegalese village of Samine, leaving one person dead and eight
seriously wounded. A building of the Senegalese gendarmerie of Samine, a village of about 1,000 inhabitants
situated 15 kilometres from the frontier, was hit, and two
houses were completely destroyed. The victims were as
follows: Dead: Bineta Mendy, 26 years of age, a married
woman with one child, Wounded: Aramba Sonkou Konate,
a girl 14 years of age, single; Fould Danfa, 25 years of age, a
married woman with two children; Bouraima Bodian, 70
years of age; Kadidatou Bfi, 26 years of age, a married
woman with no children; Alfous Seynou Tour& one year of
age; Gnima Seydi, 40 years of age; Moussa Signate, 11 years
of age, a student; Gnanguery Camara, 40 years of age. As
you can well imagine, several villagers were obliged to leave
their homes following the shelling.

56. On the night of 11/12 April 1965, a group of about
100 Portuguese soldiers attacked the little village of
Bambado-N’Ding with guns and grenades. After firing for
several minutes, the aggressors entered the village and set
fire to several houses.
57. On 14 April 1965, a large group of Portuguese soldiers
armed with rifles and machine-guns invaded the Senegalese
village of Sambalcounda in Djirbang and, after forcing the
inhabitants to leave by firing several times, they engaged in
acts of brigandage, robbing several houses and stores.
58. On 18, 19 and 20 April 1965, armed Portuguese
troops crossed the frontier and went to the Senegslese
village of Bambado, which they subsequently left with 24
unarmed refugees from Guinea (Bissau).

49. This is not the first time that the regular Portuguese
army has attacked Senegalese citizens and deliberately
violated the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Senegal.

59. This matter was again brought before the Security
Council, and in its resolution 204 (1965) of 19 May 1965 it
deeply deplcred “any incursions by Portuguese military
forces into Senegaleseterritory” and once again requested
“the Government of Portugal to take all effective and
necessary action to prevent any violation of Senegal’s
sovereignty ami territorial integrity”.

50. As far back as 8 April 1963, four Portuguese aircraft
flew over the village of Bougnack, in the Scnegalese region
of Casamance, and dropped grenades. Following that event,
the Security Council, in its resolution 178 (1963) of 24
April 1963, had, while “taking note of the declared
intention of the Portuguese Government scrupulously to
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Senegal”,
deplored “any incursion by Portuguese military forces into
Senegalese territory”
and requested “the Government of
Portugal, in accordance with its declared intentions, to take
whatever action may be necessary to prevent any violation
of Senegal’s sovereignty and integrity”.

60. The Government of Portugal was no doubt satisfied
and probably happy with the Security Council’s decision,
the regrettably mild language of which, when dealing with
such serious events, must have encouraged it to commit
further acts of provocation in 1967,1968 and 1969.
61. 1 shall limit myself to pointing out that on 12 July
1967, Portuguese soldiers committed ‘acts of banditry and
penetrated into Senegalese territory as far as the village of
Boussolomou where they fired on our nationals, killing a
young man aged twenty and kidnapping a Senegalese
couple. On 7 October 1967, Portuguese aircraft violated
Senegalese airspace by flying over the district of M’Pack.
Gn the night of 5/6 November 1967, Portuguese elements
crossed the frontier and threw two grenades on the village

51, Despite this decision-and, I would add, perhaps
because of this timid decision-a Portuguese patrol violated
the frontier between Senegal and Portuguese Guinea on
8 July 1963, less than three months after the Security
Council adopted the resolution.
52. On 4 April, lo April, 14 June and 5 July 1964,there
were a series of violations of the Senegalesefrontier and air
5

of Salikeme, wounding several among the civilian popula
tion. On 5 November 1967, Portuguese soldiers crossed the
frontier in the area of Tanaff and kidnapped ‘an unarmed
refugee in the village of Bissassou, struck a woman and stole
some money. On 5 August 1967, Portuguese units supported by heavy artillery, penetrated into the Santiaba
Manjack Forest and stayed for several hours on Senegalese
soil where they committed acts of destruction and looting.
On 1 September 1967, Portuguese elements on the frontier
near Santiaba Manjack opened fire, using automatic
weapons and mortars on Senegalese territory. On 16
September Portuguese elements infiltrated the area of
Santiaba Manjack.

Senegalese village of Babonda. The Portuguese soldiers fired
on the villagers killing one person and wounding another
slightly, set fire to four houses and took away with them
clothing and equipment. On 22 and 23 October 1069
Portuguese units fired several shells against the village:;of
Medina-Balante, Yarang, Adiouty, and Baylang, On 25
October 1969 Portuguese jet planes coming from Guinea
(Bissau) violated Senegalese airspace and flew over the
guard posts of Sare-N’Diaye, Sare-Cogno, M’Pack, Kenia
and Tobacouta. On 2 November 1969 at about 4 p.m., five
shells were fired from the Portuguese base of N’Gore and
exploded in the fields of Bafata No. 2 and in the frontier
post area of Bafata No. 1. On 4 November 1969 at 4 p.m.,
twelve shells were fired from the N’Gore base and feI1 near
the frontier post of Bafata. During the night, between
8 p.m. and midnight several shells fell in national territory,

62. In 1969 during every month from January to November, the regular Portuguese army violated Senegalese airspace or fired shells onto Senegalese villages. You will thus
note that the incidents have become more frequent and
more serious. So as not to tire you I shall refer to only a
few of the incidents of 1969. In January of that year the
Senegalese village of Djirbang was shelled from the Portuguese base of Begene. In February 1969, several shells
were fired by the Portuguese from Guinea (Bissau) soil and
fell in the immediate outskirts of the frontier village of
Bafata. One of the villagers, a man called Ibrahima Camara,
aged 22 years, was wounded on 14 February 1969 by the
explosion of a mine while he was gathering straw. A very
serious case occurred on 15 February 1969 when a shell
exploded in the market place of the Senegalese village of
Mangaroungou in the district of Diatta-Counda. Four
persons were killed and five wounded. Another extremely
serious event occurred on 18 March 1969 when a very
heavy shell exploded in the same village of Mangaroungou
killing four and seriously wounding eight other persons. On
15 May 1969 shell fragments hit the customs post and the
building of the police in M’Pack in the dgpartement of
Ziguinchor. On 18 May 1969 the Portuguese authorities
kidnapped eight girls aged from 6 to 15 years. On 29 May
1969 two 120 mm shells exploded in the village of
Linkiring and a woman was wounded. On 29 May 1969 one
shell was fired from the Begene base and exploded in the
market place of Mangaroundou. Two other shells fell on the
same day in the extreme north-eastern part of the Yarang
village and in the Mangaroundou village. On 12 June 1969
the frontier villages of Mangaroundou and Yarang were
abandoned by their entire population, which wanted to be
out of reach of the heavy artillery of the Portuguese bases
of Guibadji and Begene. On 17 June 1969 two jet planes of
the Portuguese army that were bombing Fakima flew over
Sare-Kobe. On G ‘August 1969 shells fired from the Begene
base fell near the Senegalese villages of Sanou and Samine.
On the night of 22/23 September 1969, a man called
Moctarou Diallo, aged 52, living in the Senegalese village of
Bassane, was wounded by grenade fragments while trying to
resist an attempt by three men who had come from
Guinea (Bissau) to steal cattle.

66. I should like to state here that Senegal possesses one
of the best trained armies of Africa, which embodies the
best military qualities. If the people of Senegal stands
united behind its President, a statesman respected by
everyone and an ardent defender of human values, if the
people of Senegal has shown moderation, despite repeated
provocations by Portugal, it is because it is conscious ofits
role as a builder of international peace and security. Senlsgal
has wanted to preserve peace by refusing to answer the
provocations of Portugal. But you will understand that our
patience is not unlimited. If Portugal, despite everything,
were to continue its provocations, then Senegalwould have
no other choice than to resort to force in order to impose
the respect of its territorial sovereignty and integrity.

63. On the night of 2/3 October 1969, five shells were
fired from the Begene base and fell in the fields in the
immediate vicinity of the village of Touba-Couta. On
3 October 1969, about 3 p.m., a Portuguese helicopter flew
at low altitude over the southern national highway from
Mango-Roygou to Diatta-Counda. On 7 October 1969 a
detachment of the regular Portuguese army invaded the

67. However, we are convinced that this time the SeCudtY
Council, in which again we express our trust and respect,
will not cause Senegal to have recourse to force. Weare
convinced that the Security Council will be able to
eliminate the weak language it has used in the past and will
set aside such words as “deplores” and “censures” to find
in the text of the Charter the appropriate words to

64. In view of this list of outrageously provocative acts, it
will be easily understood why Senegal has decided today to
ask for the meeting of the Security Council. If Portugal
persists in its policy of systematic provocation against the
independent States of Africa, if Portugal deliberately
violates the territorial integrity of African countries it must
be admitted that it is because it is sure of its impunity and
of the support it receives from its allies who allow it to use
the arms of a military alliance designed for Europe.
65. I who am speaking here today, I, who have devated
these last few years to a struggle for the respect of hurnan
rights and fundamental freedoms, would like to call upon
those who support Portugal in its colonial adventure to
advise that country firmly to use its resources for the
improvement of the standard of life of its nationals. For the
Portuguese authorities should remember that their country
is an under-developed one that cannot face a colonial war.
We know that weight in gold which Portugal receives from
the Government of South Africa in exchange for the
freedom fighters which it supplies to South Africa to do
forced labour in the gold mines. Portugal must realize that
it is futile for it to want to keep under its yoke people who
wish to live freely’and independently.

6
!

-1

condemn severely, and without the possibility of appeal,
the Portuguese authorities and the acts of aggression they
have committed aginst my country.

Guinea (Bissau). States Members of our Organization, suck
as-and I am mentioning the most recent cases of aggression-Guinea and Senegal, are constantly victims of the
colonialist aggressor and this is a state of affairs which we
are sure will not end until the Portuguese presence in Africa
is eliminated.

68. We continue to believe that international life is a life
based on morality and that relations between States are not
settled on the basis of brute force but by principles of
justice, equality and dignity. These principles are ignored
by the Government of Lisbon, despite its declaration of
intent; it acts as an international bandit as a wounded
animal, striking wild blows at the independent countries
adjacent to the territories under its domination.

74. We have listened to the statement made by our friend
Mr. Ibrahima Boye, the representative of Senegal, a country
that has been the victim of further Portuguese aggression
and which has requested this meeting of the Security
Council. In our preliminary statement we should like to
emphasize the soundness of his arguments and the responsible character of his assessment of the situation
created by the repeated aggressions of Portugal. Algeria
completely endorses the conclusions of that statement; and
we are sure that this is the attitude of all States members of
the Organization of African Unity.

69. I apologize for having spoken at length and tried your
patience but I think you will understand my indignation in
view of the acts committed by anachronistic Portuguese
colonialism. You will also understand better the attachment
to peace which small countries like mine cherish so much.
And you will understand the call of an entire people that
asks that the Security Council should eliminate once and
for all from the path that leads it to happiness and
prosperity all threats to international peace and security
that may hover over it.

75. The shelling of the Senegalese village of SaminB by
regular Pdrtuguese forces on 25 November 1969 was a
deliberate act of aggression, resulting in one person dead
and eight seriously wounded. Among these Senegalese
victims were women, children and one old man.

70. Mr. YAZID (Algeria) (translated from l+ench): The
African delegations have addressed a letter to our Council
dated 2 December 1969 [S/9524]. In this letter the African
States on behalf of their Governments have supported the
request for a Security Council meeting made by Senegal
after the deliberate attacks on its sovereignty and territorial
integrity by Portugal, The Portuguese aggressions against
African States have frequently led us to debate this
problem in the Security Council, This is not the first time
that Senegal has been attacked. Guinea has often been
attacked and it has just been attacked again. So has the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Republic of
Zambia and the Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville) have
suffered similar acts of aggression. I should also mention
the United Republic of Tanzania which has been the victim
of attacks by Portugal against its sovereignty and territorial
integrity.

76. The series of Portuguese aggressions against Senegal is
indeed a long one. The representative of Senegal has given
us a long list and we would point out that for the year 1969
alone this is the nineteenth act of aggression and of
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Senegal. We are convinced that it is quite probable that the
number will increase before the end of the year, for
colonialism has no regard for the lessons of the Jewish,
Christian and Moslem religions which, as I have said, wiLl
celebrate their great traditional religious feasts before the
end of the year.
77. Portugal persists in its policy of aggression and
,provocation because it knows that it has the support of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, which provides
weapons and all the necessary logistical and technical
support to its expeditionary force which is operating
against the people of Guinea (Bissau), and does not hesitate
to attack its African neighbours, as is frequently the case in
Guinea and Senegal. Africa, which as a whole is a victim of
permanent Portuguese aggression, is aware of this fact and
considers that the Security Council has not, so far, fulfil!ed
its responsibilities in the maintenance of peace, justice and
security on our continent.

71. The position of the African States, as stated in the
document before us, is based on the Charter of the
Organization of African Unity, which enjoins us all to
strengthen African unity and solidarity and to eliminate all
forms of colonialism in Africa.
72. In the case before us today, Africans know that
Senegal has been attacked simply because it has complied
with the Charter of the Organization of African Unity and
the United Nations Charter and because, like all African
States, it has implemented the resolutions of the Organization of African Unity and of the United Nations which
condemn Portugal for its persistent refusal to recognize the
right to self-determination of many African States which
still suffer from its domination and which have quite rightly
chosen the only valid and only just course, that of armed
conflict.

78. Portugal’s arsenals are constantly being renewed with
modern weapons supplied by Western powers. The Security
Council’s arsenal of words on the subject has been
outstripped since, so far, the Council has contented itself
with words like “deplore” and “censure”.
79. Algeria believes that, confronted with this new Portuguese aggression against Senegal, the Security Council must
assume its responsibility and strongly condemn the Portuguese colonialist aggressor armed by Western Powers.

73. Colonialism is by its very nature a permanent aggressor. Portuguese colonialism, which still persists in various
parts of our African continent, is continually engaging in
aggression against the peoples of Angola, Mozambique and

80. The Salisbury-Pretoria-Lisbon
axis constitutes an evergreater threat to international peace, justice and security. It
is the ally of the aggressors in the Middle East and in
7

Viet-Nam and its aim is to extend and consolidate the last
colonialist-racist areas, the last sores on African soil. By
repeated aggressionand provocation against African States,
it believes that it can limit their support to African national
liberation movements.

88. Mr, MIRANDA (Portugal): Mr. President, it is my
pleasant duty to express to you and, through you, to :your
distinguished colleagues in the Council, my thanks for
inviting me to participate in this debate as the representative of Portugal under the relevant rules of procedure.

81. The colonialist aggressorsare as always mistaken. The
whole of Africa stands side by side with the peoples under
Portuguese domination. Africa is determined to pursue this
just policy of unconditional solidarity with colonized
peoples. Attempts at intimidation simply strengthen its will
to fight.

89. The Security Council is seized of a complaint brought
before it by the Government of Senegal. It concerns an
incident described in the letter addressedby the representative of Senegal on 27 November 1969 to the President of
the Security Council and issued asdocument S/95 13 of the
same date. The representative of Senegal hashow stated the
case for his Government. The Council will surely be
interested in hearing the Portuguese side. I shall, with your
permission, proceed to present it as briefly aspossible. And,
indeed, not much discussion would be needed if certain
basic facts were clarified at the outset. With a view to
ensuring both brevity and clarification, I should like, if I
may, to ask the representative of Senegal three simple
questions.

82. African countries are opposed to what has been called
the “escalation” of cpnflicts, but they are not afraid of
“escalation”. It is for our Organization and the Security
Council to take energetic, radical measures to prevent such
“escalations” from being imposed on Africans.
83. We have heard the representative of Senegal state
forcibly the determination of his people and his Government not to be content with coming to the United Nations
and the Security Council to plead for justice. The expression of that determination of the Government and people
of Senegal is no surprise to us. We all know this great
people of Senegal and the anti-imperialist and ,gti-colonialist determination of its Government. And I am sure they
will welcome without any surprise whatever the fact that
we have just stated, namely that Africa and Algeria will
always be at their side in their struggle to impose justice in
Africa, without which there can be neither peace nor
security.
84. During this twenty-fourth session of the Genera1
Assembly we have had debates on the concept of justice as
an essential condition for the maintenance of peace and
security. In Africa there can be no justice without the
elimination of colonialism, of which Portugal and those
who support it are the main protagonists. Justice cannot
exist so long as racist abscesses,such as those of Salisbury
and Pretoria, remain; it cannot exist so long as the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of African States are
not guaranteed and preserved.

90. First, is it or is it not a fact that anti-Portuguese
organizations avowedly dedicated to violence have bden
given bases in Senegal from which to carry out armed
attacks across the frontier against Portuguese Guinea and
return for shelter in Senegalese territory?
91. Second, is it or is it not a fact that Samin is one of
such bases?
92. Third, did the Government of Senegal contact the
Portuguese Government on the subject of its present
complaint before notifying the Security Council?
93. It will have been noticed that all of these three
questions relate to matters of fact and I am sure that tile
representative of Senegal will have no difficulty in answering “yes” or “no” to each of them. I, therefore, request
you, Sir, to be kind enough to ask the representa.tive of
Senegal, if he will oblige, With your permission, Mr. President, I shall pause for his answersbefore I proceed.
94. The PRESIDENT:
wish to reply?

85. This Council, whose essential function is to preserve
peace and security, has held numerous debates on this
problem since the creation of our Organization. It should,
when assessinga situation such as that created by aggressive
Portuguese colonialism in Africa, bend its efforts to
re-establishing justice in Africa and, as a first step to this
end, should energetically and unequivocally condemn
Portuguese aggression, such as that against Senegal, an
aggression which, as the representative of Senegal has said,
constitutes an act of international banditry.

Does the representative of Senegal

95. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated from IhWchJ:
Mr. President, I should like to note merely that this is the
first time that the representative of Portugal has tried to
avoid the question under discussion. I should like to note
too, for the first time, that he is not answering the
arguments I have put forward and that he has confined
himself to asking three questions.
96. To these three questions I shall reply, first, that there
are still 50,000 reftigees at Casamance from GUhXI
(Bissau). These refugees are regularly listed by the I&h
Commissioner for Refugees of the United Nations Office.

86. We shall have an opportunity to speak on this again in
the course of our debate, but as an African country,
signatory of the letter of 2 December 1969, we wished to
say, immediately after the representative of Senegal had
spoken, that, by bombing a Senegalesevillage, Portugal has
committed aggression not only against Senegal but against
the whole of Africa, including my country,

97. As to Samine, the Portuguese representative is asking
whether it is a base for subversive elements against Portugal.
I shall merely refer him to the list of persons killed or
wounded during the attacks, The representative of Portugal
can see that a woman was killed and that among the
wounded were schoolchildren and persons ranging from

87. The PRESIDENT: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
8

seventy years to one Year of age. He may draw the obvious
conclusions as to whether they were or were not freedom
fighters.

105. As I was saying, for several years now such attacks
have been directed against Portuguese Guinea from bases
situated in Senegal.By now such attacks add up to several
hundred and they have already taken a toll ofhundreds of
innocent lives in Portuguese Guinea and inflicted untold
suffering on its peopIe. That is an undeniable fact. Are
those orgardzed attacks on the peaceful people of Portuguese Guinea to be ignored or condoned? Is it in order to
allow such attacks to be carried out across frontiers? If the
answer to those questions were in the affirmative it would
spell the end of the rule of law in international life and
violence would be consecrated as a valid principle of
international conduct.

‘98. As for the question why the Government of Senegal
has not contacted the Government of Portugal, the answer
is &at the Government of Senegal does not have to contact
the Government of Portugal. The Senegalese Government
has addressed itself to the Security Council, neither more
nor less, and we are awaiting the Council’s decision.
99. The PFtESlDENT:The representative of Portugal has
the floor again.
100. Mr. MIRANDA (Portugal): Mr. President, I thank
you very much for your kindness and I also thank the
representative of Senegal for the statement he made,

106. The Portuguese Government cannot, under any,
Circumstances, fail in its duty to protect the lives and
Property Of its citizens and to help them defend themselves.
That is an elementary duty of any Government worthy of
the name.

101. Unfortunately, he has not answered my questions
and, I am sure, the Council will have taken note of his
‘answer to my third question. The questions I put to the
representative of Senegal @ated to matters of fact, not of
opinion. And they related to facts which are at the basis of
the issue before this Council. Indeed, this issue cannot be
understood outside the context of those facts, It is
indispensable to know the context in order to place the
responsibility
where it belongs. For it makes all the
difference in the world to ascertain whether Portugal took
the initiative to attack or was attacked and reacted in
self-defence,

10’7. Incidentally, it is a sad example of inverted phraseology to describe the people who are defending themselves as
“merCenarieS
acting on Portuguese orders”.
108. We know that for a certain school of thought the
classification of rights is a monopoly reserved for its own
adepts. Rights are held to be legitimate or illegitimate
according as they apply to them or to those who do not
agree with them. They of course claim all the rights for
themselves, including the “right” to eliminate from this
world those whom they consider as obstacles to the
achievement of their own objectives. That twisted philosophy is surprisingly evident in the official communique
issued in Dakar on 28 November, as reported by Agence
France-Presse in a dispatch from the Senegalese capital on
the same day.

102. My delegation wishes to declare most categorically
that the attacks came in every case from Senegal; Portugal
has limited itself to actions strictly in conformity with the
needs of self-defence.

109. My delegation would like particularly to invite the
attention of the Council to an important aspect of attacks
carried out by armed bands based in Senegal against
Portuguese Guinea. Those armed bands make regular use of
the most sophisticated war equipment-which could only
come from the arsenals of the well-equipped armies of
Powers outside the African continent, whose avowed pol.icy
is to incite and feed the fires of international strife. That
fact has been admitted by one of the Powers involved even
here in the United Nations, It must be conjugated with the
other proven fact that high-ranking officers of the regular
army of at least one of those Powers are officially
commissioned to serve with the armed bands attacking
Portuguese Guinea. I need not name the Power in question,
but if the Security Council is interested, I am in a position
to furnish further information. Meanwhile, I should like to
draw the attention of the Security COunCil to this Very
seeous matter. It places the entire pattern of those hostile
acts directed against Portuguese Guinea in a new and
sinister light, of which those genuinely concerned for the
maintenance of international peace and security ought to
take due notice. Examples are easy to follow, and before
long we may see similar techniques employed elsewhere in
the troubled regions of the world.

>’ 103. It is common knowledge that anti-Portuguese organizations operate from ,Senegal and from the Republic of
Guinea against Portuguese Guinea. For several years now
those organizations have been carrying out armed attacks
against the peaceful rural populations of the Portuguese
territory on the other side of the frontier. This is, I repeat,
common knowledge. In fact, even in reporting on the
matter of the present complaint, an Agence France-&me
dispatch dated 28 November from Dakar said:
“Observers here said that the Portuguese action probably aimed at guerrillas of the PAIGC, the African party
for the independence of Guinea and the Cape Verde
Islands, who are fighting the Portuguese in Portuguese
Guinea and who often enter Senegal for rest periods and
to obtain supplies.”
The same dispatch also said:
“The party has a permanent office in Dakar and several
bases in Casamance Province, which includes the village of
San-d& and borders on Portuguese Guinea.”
104. Here, in a few words, a well-known Press agency @‘es
information which should be of great help to the Council. I
quoted it because it is information that cannot be suspected
of any Portuguese influence. It is information coming from
Dakar.

110. I now request the Council to consider some facts
which my delegation views as indispensable for a COrWt
assessment of the issue under discussion.
9

111. The populations living in the frontier areas of
Portuguese Guinea are under constant harrassment by
attackers coming from Senegal. To enable the Council to
have an approximate idea of that harrassment, I must point
out that since the beginning of this year alone there were
thirty-seven attacks on Portuguese Guinea carried out with
heavy artillery based in Senegal. There were 25 further
attacks by armed raiders who came from and returned to
Senegal. There were ten violations of the air space of
Portuguese Guinea by helicopters based in Senegal and
providing air-support to the infiltrating raiders. There were
eight other violations of the air space of Portuguese Guinea
by Senegalese planes apparently flying on reconnaissance
missions. A Senegalese plane flew over the Ingore-Guidage
area in Portuguese Guinea for two,.hours on 24 November.

among the civilian population of Portuguese Guinea,
Twenty-one tenements were destroyed. The attackers took
away cattle and other belongings of the villagers. They
retreated towards Panangar in Senegalese territory. On 31
October raiders coming from Senegal again attacked the
region of Sao Domingos with mortars and other firearms
for seventeen minutes. On 2 November the region of Ingopj
was attacked with 82 mm mortars and other firearms for
fifteen minutes. On 4 November the attack on Ingore was
repeated in the same manner. Also on 4 November raiders
coming from Senegal attacked with 82 mm mortars and
automatic weapons the region of Guidage for thirty
minutes. They killed one person and injured five, twla of
them seriously. On 6 November, the region of Susana was
attacked with 82 mm mortars. Nine enemy shellbursts were
registered. On 18 November, the region of Bigene was
attacked with 82 mm and 60 mm mortars and other
firearms. On 24 November, the region of Guidage was
attacked again for twenty minutes with 82 mm mortars and
other firearms. Also on 24 November, the region of Sao
Domingos was attacked with 82 mm mortars for two hours.
As a result of another attack on the same day on Sao
Domingos, five persons were injured in that region. The
attackers used 82 mm and 60 mm mortars, recoilless
cannon and other firearms. Again on 24 November, the
regionof Ingore wasattacked with 82 mm mortars for ten
minutes.

112. I will not trouble the Council with details of the
flagrant and repeated violations of the territory of Portuguese Guinea, but I am prepared at any time to place the
details before the Council. Once again, I should like to say
that I am referring only to incidents which took place since
the beginning of this year.
113. In addition to the incidents I have mentioned, there
were this year again three actions in which Senegalese
armed forces participated alongside raiders inside Portuguese Guinea. One of those actions took place on 6 June,
when the second platoon of the 8th Senegalese Company of
Kolda joined raiders in action against Portuguese security
forces in the areas of Faquina and Cuntima, advancing and
taking up positions 500 metres inside Portuguese territory.

118. It will have beennoticed by the Councilthat on 24
November alone there were no less than four attacks
coming from Senegalat variousplacesin PortugueseGuinea
situated along the frontier; they werein preparationfor the
attacks launched on 25 November. There wasthus a Iclear
intensification of hostile activity which continued from 24
November until 25 November, The raidersweresupported
by artillery fire coming from Senegalese
territory. For the
attacks on Ingore and Guidage,the artillery fire came:from
Singuer and Sekouna, both placessituatedinside Senegal.
Heavy artillery fire came from Samine,in Senegal,alndit
was in the direction of Saminethat the raidersretreated
whenpursuedby Portuguesesecurity forces.

114. On 14 June the infiltrating raiders who attacked the
village of Cambaju in Portuguese Guinea were again joined
by Senegalese troops who covered their retreat into
Senegal.
115. On I4 August, after a raid on Cuntima in Portuguese
Guinea, supported by heavy artillery based in Senegalese
territory, Senegalese troops covered with intense fire the
retreat of the infiltrating raiders, preventing the Portuguese
security forces from pursuing them even while they were
inside Portuguese territory,

119. When Senegalhas thus given the freedom of its
territory for attacks againstPortugueseGuinea, whenour
frontier areas are shelled from artillery basesset up in
Senegalese
territory, when the initiative of the attacksis
taken invariably on the Senegalese
side of the frontier,
when Senegalese
armed forces do not hesitate to join in
theseraids, the responsibility for the consequence
mustbe
placed where it obviously belongs.On our side,what can
we do in the circumstancesexcept defend ourselves?I am
sure nobody will be so absurd as to ask us to resign
ourselvesto the prospectof beingkilled. Do not our people
have as much right to live as anybody else?Or are there
two standardsto be adoptedeven on this question?

116. Those are only a few of the many actions in which
Senegalese troops have intervened inside Portuguese territory in support of the raiders coming from Senegal. My
delegation formally draws the attention of the Council to
this serious matter. The Senegalese armed forces have
clearly participated in actions that have as their objective
the violation of Portuguese territorial integrity and sovereignty.
117. I come now to more recent events. Between 26
October and 24 November 1969, there were not less than
twelve attacks against Portuguese Guinea, all coming from
Senegal. The weapons used by the attackers ranged from
mortars and grenade-throwers to recoilless cannon. Here are
some details: On 26 October the region of Sao Domingos
was attacked with mortar fire for twelve minutes. Twenty
one enemy shell bursts were registered inside Portuguese
territory. On 28 October the region of Cuntima was
attacked with 82 mm and 62 mm mortars for forty-five
minutes. The attack caused five dead and two injured

120. The representativeof Senegalhasmentionedseveral
incidents; obviously, I am not in a positionto commenton
them. I have no elementsof information. I ampreparedto
do so, if necessary,but in the opinion of my delegationit is
hardly necessaryto go into details.
121. No matter what are the theories invoked in &is
Organization or elsewhere,we have the right to defend
ourselves.
10

127. In the concrete cask now under consideration, OUT
frontier area was continually subjected to intense artillery
fire coming from the interior of Senegal and providing a
cover for the infiltrating raiders who, being pursued by our
forces, retreated across the frontier in the direction of
SaminB. Given that this action took place near the frontier,
it is possible that our return fire produced results such as
those alleged in the complaint brought to the Council by
Senegal. It is a possibility which my delegation does not
wish to exclude a priori, Given the nature of the operation,
it could have happened incidentally, but certainly not by
design. If it did happen, the normal procedure would be to
have the matter investigated by a mixed commission.

122, No matter what are the motives of those who attack
us, we have the right to defend ourselves.
123. No matter who supplies the arms, the military bases
and the military leaders, to those who attack us-everybody
knows who the suppliers are and what their motives are-we
have the right to defend ourselves,
124. No matter from where the attacks are launched, we
have the right to defend ourselves.
125, My delegation expects that nobody will contest our
right of self-defence and that this right will be taken into
due consideration in assessing the complaint before the
Council.

128. On the two previous occasions when Senegal brought
similar complaints to the Security Council, my delegation
formally proposed that such investigation be held; but
Senegal did not want it, It was Senegal that did not want an
investigation. Similarly, Senegal has come today to the
Security Council without having made any attempt to
contact the Portuguese Government on the subject of its
complaint.

126. At this stage I must emphasize that we exercise otir
right of self-defence within our own territory. Our security
forces are under strict orders to r’&p&ct the sovereignty and
the territorial integrity of all countries bordering on our
territories. We have no intention or desire to disrespect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of any country. But,
when we are attacked from a neighbouring country, when
we are fired upon from the other side of the frontier, what
are we supposed to do? If we did not react-and here I
must emphasize that we react inside our own territory-it
would mean that a belt of our territory along the frontier
could escape the jurisdiction of our authorities. We cannot
be expected to allow this to happen, Nevertheless, we take
all possible precautions to ensure that, in safeguarding our
own security, we limit the exercise of our right of
self-defence to the indispensable minimum. This is our
declared policy stated at the highest level. Even last
Monday, 1 December, it was reaffirmed by His Excellency
the President of the Republic of Portugal, Admiral Americo
Thomaz, in his opening address to the National Assembly:

129. Yet, in terms of Article 33 of the Charter it was
incumbent on Senegal to contact Portugal in an attempt to
ensure that such an investigation of the occurrence would
be held with a view to a settlement through conciliation.
On our side, in proof of our continued goodwill towards
Senegal and of our spirit of co-operation, we would be
prepared to talk to Senegal over the concrete case rnentioned in its complaint [S/9513] and, after a proper
bilateral investigation, to compensate Senegal for any
damage which might have been caused to Senegalese
nationals as the result of our defensive action. We should,
particularly regret any loss of Senegalese life, or injury to
Senegalese citizens, as the result of any action of our forces.
But at the same time, we cannot help pointing out that
there are dead and injured among our people, also, as the
result of attacks launched against us from Senegal, in
addition to damage to property. We cannot help pointing
out that the lives and property of our people are not less
sacred than the lives and property of anybody else. Aside
from this, it is to be noted that all such incidents result
from the fact that armed attacks against Portuguese Guinea
are allowed to be carried out from Senegalese territory.
This is the crux of the whole problem, and it is entirely in
the hands of the Government of Senegal to remedy the
situation.

“All the propaganda unleashed the world over against
Portugal, on account of its decision not to abandon its
overseas provinces, cannot deny this fact: it is only in the
areas where there are frontiers with other countries
favouring such situations that a state of subversion has
been created and is being maintained. It is therefore
amazing that complaints of violation of frontiers are
made by some of the very countries in whose territory are
situated camps for the training of terrorists, supply
depots, barracks and bases for operations against Portuguese territories, We have always scrupulously respected
the sovereignty of neighbouring countries and their
territorial integrity. And it is only because the bands
which our forces oppose and pursue come from there and
take refuge there that an error may have accidentally
occurred along extensive and poorly demarcated frontiers. But for each one of such involuntary incidentswhich, when verified, have been at once admitted and
indemnified-how many violations of our territory, how
many acts of disrespect for the norms of internationa1
and good relations and neighbourliness, how many
flagrant violations of international law have been committed against Portugal in Africa.”

130. Here I must add that we have good reason to think
that the Senegalese people living in our vicinity are
themselves anxious to see an end put to the attacks
launched against Portuguese Guinea from their territory. In
saying so, I do not of course pretend to speak for the
Senegalese people in question, I am only referring here to
something that is common knowledge in Casamance. I am
referring to what the people of Casamance have expressly
told is, and in no uncertain terms. In fact, only last week,
on 29 November, when the Governor of Portuguese Guinea
visited the frontier area of Birada, he was welcomed by the
people from Casamance who came across the frontier to
greet him.

These words of the President of Portugal sum up the entire
situation and constitute a clear statement of Portugal’s
position on the matter.

131. Does anyone honestly believe that Portugal has any
interest in antagonizing Senegal, or for that matter any
11

Senegal has been acting in a hostile way, the Senegalese
populations in the vicinity of Portuguese Guinea have never
failed to receive from us the traditional benefits of
good-neighbourly relations, particularly by way of medical
assistance which we willingly extend to them, 1 do not
mention this fact in order to enhance our merits, but only
to show how much greater would be the advantageto the
populationson both sidesof the frontier if Senegalwereto
abandonthe path of hostility-unjustifiable and gratuitous
in any case-and open the door to friendly co-operation
which Portugal,on its part, hasalwaysoffered,

other African country? Have we not ever so often assured
African countries, particularly those having common frontiers with us, of our desire for co-opg.ration with them and
of our readiness to conclude non-aggression pacts with
them? Is it not a fact that our offers have met with no
response, and, instead, certain African countries have
embarked on a course of aiding and encouraging violence
against our territories? The philosophy behind this policy
was reaffirmed only a short while ago in this Council by the
representative of Al’geria. ,
132. On the @her hand, who can pretend to ignore the
fact that some African countries, among them Senegal, are
gratuitously and avowedly hostile to Portugal? Who can
pretend to ignore that movements hostile to Portugal are
organized, aided and allowed freely to use the territories of
certain African countries, among them Senegal, for armed
attacks against Portuguese territories? Under which Article
of the Charter, which norm of international law, which
principle of mofality are such armed attacks across frontiers
sought to be justified?

136. The PRESIDENT: I give the floor to the representative of Guinea.
137. Mr. CONDE (Guinea) ~translateclfrom French): we
have a sayingin our country that within a family therecan
be no thanks and that behind congratulationsthere can
only be guile. Therefore, Mr. President,I shallrefrain from
addressingmy congratulations to you on assumingthe
Presidencyof the Security Council andshallsaysimply that
the vitality, charm and intelligence which have characterized your every action within the United Nationscanbut
confirm us in our conviction that you will dischargeyour
dutieswith the utmost success.

133. It is alleged that certain countries do not like our
internal policy. Whatever may be the merits or demerits of
our internal policy-and this is a matter which is discussed
elsewhere in the United Nations-one thing is undeniable:
our internal policy does not interfere with any other
country, Other countries are free to like, or to dislike, our
internal policy, as we consider ourselves free to like or
dislike theirs, But dislike for the internal policy of another
country does not justify the use of violence to force that
country to change its policy. The Charter of the United
Nations could not have been more explicit in condemning
the use of violence, whatever may be the political differences, Violence, however, is exactly what certain countries
are officially and avowedly aiding and encouraging, directly
and indirectly, against Portuguese territories in Africa. This
in turn creates incidents at the frontiers, since we are forced
to exercise our right of self-defence. Then the very
countries responsible for causing the incidents, or for
allowing them to be caused, come to the Security Council
with complaints against Portugal, This attempt to invert
situations cannot be ignored by the Security Council for it
would amount to ignoring something that the whole world
knows.

138. We also congratulate your predecessors,
who have
fulfilled successfullythe great task of, Presidentof the
Security Council. We are also grateful to the Security
Council for having invited us to participate, without the
right to vote, in the present debate in the Council,
,convened at the request of our sister Republicof Senegal.
139. This afternoon I addressedto the Presidentof the
Security Council a letter /S/9528/ which stated,inter alia:
“Further to our letter of 2 December1969[S/‘9525/
concerningthe aggressioncommitted by Portugal against
the Republic of Guinea and having regard to the
explanations provided in the said letter and to the
solidarity shown us by the African group, I have the
honour to inform you that the Government of the
Republic of Guinea has decided to request you to
convenea meetingof the Security Councilto considerthe
vile aggressionrecently committed by the Portuguese
colonial army against the territorial integrity of the
Republic of Guinea.

134. From the time that Senegal became independent,
Portugal has sought to maintain friendly relations with that
country. We had diplomatic relations; Senegal took the
initiative to break .them off. We had consular relations;
again it was Senegal that took the initiative to break them
off. If these unfriendly actions on the part of Senegal are
sought to be justified in the name of any resolutions, then
so much the worse of those resolutions and for Senegal; for
resolutions which recommend the rupture of normal
international relations with a view to forcing a country to
change its internal policy, are not politically constructive,
nor justifiable from any other angle. Such actions are the
usual prelude to violence in international relations, and this
is the course which Senegal has in fact adopted in relation
to Portugal, as I have abundantly shown in my foregoing
remarks,

“AmbassadorAbdoulaye Touri, the PermanentRepresentative, who is at presentin the Republicof Guiaeafor
consultations, will arrive in New York on 5 December
with full information concerning this infamous act of
Portuguesebanditry.”
140. Accordingly we deemedit appropriateto wait until
another time to speakin the debate on the item on the
agenda which, in effect, together with the pe:rsistent
aggressionof Portuguesecolonialismagainstmy country,
makeup but one picture of the whole Portuguese
po:licY.
141. Portugal is in fact the prototype of the most
underdeveloped and obdurate colonialism.This is the
moment to say that the complaint of the Republic of
Guinea againstPortugal before this Councilis permanent.
As long as Portugal, basingitself on a colonialistideOlO@’

135. Nevertheless, Portugal has always scrupulously
avoided offending Senegal. Although the Government of
12

1

and supported by allies that enable it to perpetrate its
fascist crimes-free of charge, of course-is not made to
reconsider its policy, which is doomed from the outset, it
will find that all independent countries that neighbour on
territories still under Portuguese domination are enemies
that will not tolerate it.

defend themselves. In the case of relations between States
the right of self-defence applies to the national territory.
Neither Africa nor the United Nations recognize Guinea
(Bissau) as part of Portugal, as being under Portuguese
sovereignty, or as a Portuguese province. Those who are
using the legitimate right of self-defence in Guinea (Bissau)
are the freedom fighters of this part of Africa who are
fighting the Portuguese colonialist expeditionary corps.

142. The representative of Portugal seated here knows,
despite his arrogant utterances, that his army, though it has
hidden support, cannot withstand an offensive by the
Guinean people’s army. Once again we are reasoning with
Portugal. The Republic of Guinea will come once more to
report to the international community on the vile crimes
perpetrated by Portuguese fascism and to ascertain how the
international Organization proposes to put an end to them.
If our attempts are in vain, the Republic of Guinea will not
hesitate for its part to respond to colonialist aggression with
popular revolutionary and patriotic violence, Portugal will
have enough time to learn to know us well.

147. The representative of Portugal referred to my preliminary statement and spoke of my delegation’s conception of the struggle for national liberation. We regard it as
an honour and as our duty to repeat our conception of this
struggle in the month of December-the last month of our
membership of the Security Council; it is also an honour
for us to speak under the Presidency of an African who
embodies the principles of the struggle for national liberation and in the presence of our Secretary-General who
represents the Bandung principles to whose definition he
considerably contributed. Our philosophy, born of the
Bandung Conference, and based on our experience of
armed struggle, is clear: there is no possible path for the
liberation of the African peoples under Portuguese domination other than that of armed struggle.

143. The PRESIDENT: In regard to the requests which
were submitted this afternoon by the Republic of Guinea
for a meeting of the Security Council, I wish to say that I
shall conduct consultations with the members of the
Security Council to determine the date and time of the
meeting.

148. Our position is all the more justified since it was the
populations of the Territories occupied by Portugal themselves that took the original decision, without any foreign
interference, to take up arms. Since they have taken this
free choice of an armed struggle they are assured of our
total and unconditional support in that armed struggle, be
it moral, political, diplomatic or material. Our only regret is
that our means and technical possibilities are limited. We
feel that our efforts to help these people fighting for their
right to self-determination and for their independence
should be even greater, and we hope to be able to do a little
more each day to give the material assistance we owe them.

144. Mr. YAZID (Algeria) (translatedffom French): When
the representative of Portugal began his denunciation of
subversive ideologies, I expected him to threaten our
Organization with the fire of Portuguese artillery and
aircraft, for, only just a week ago in the Fourth Committee
and subsequently in the General Assembly, it adopted a
resolution [2507 fXXlVj/ on Territories under Portuguese
administration, which recognized the legitimacy of the
struggle of peoples under Portuguese domination and called
upon the Member States to support and give material
assistance to these people fighting for their freedom.
*

149. This philosophy may sometimes be expressed in
other ways, A week ago, for instance, it was reflected in a
resolution of the General Assembly. It can also be found in
all the texts of the Organization of African Unity I

145. We feel that the text adopted by the United Nations
would, if we base ourselves on the analysis of the
representative of Portugal, turn out to be a subversive one.
And I think Member States should take steps to protect our
buildings from possible attacks by Portugal. The representative of Portugal, in trying to justify Portuguese aggression
against Senegal, referred to the presence of refugees from
Guinea (Bissau)-I should point out here that, as far as the
United Nations is concerned, there is no such territory as
Portuguese Guinea, only Guinea (Bissau), if we refer to the
relevant documents-and of representatives from the national organizations, the PAIGC, at Dakar. The same applies
to many other African countries, including my OWN, and I
have met representatives of these organizations in New
York. I cannot see why Senegal or any African country
should be prevented from implementing resolutions of the
General Assembly by supporting these peoples in their
struggle or from granting the representatives of their
national organizations the same facilities as those that are
granted to them in most of the African countries or that are
regularly granted to them during the General Assembly here
in New York.

150. The Portuguese presence in Africa can no longer be
tolerated; it jeopardizes the future of Africa, including that
of the independent countries, and their prospects of
economic and social development.
15 1. Algeria’s position in this respect is well known. It is
shared by a considerable number of other States, We are
well able to explain that position clearly, precisely and
frankly. Before us countries of Asia, like Indonesia, Burma,
the Philippines and others, took up arms in order to free
themselves of Japanese or Dutch occupation, and it is as a
result of their struggle that they achieved their independence. In Africa we have had the same experience. In
Europe the efforts of the nationalities to gain the right to
an independent existence was marked by struggle, even
though they may have had other features as well. The
countries of Latin America have had the same problems.
That is why in Algeria, where we honour all heroes of
national independence and freedom in the world, some of
our streets bear the names of heroes of the national
liberation struggle in Africa, Asia, Latin America and
Europe.

146. The representative of Portugal constantly referred in
his statement to the duty of the Portuguese authorities to
13

‘I

-152. Our position in the Council and in the General
Assembly is similar to that of two other African representatives that spoke before me this afternoon, the representatives of Senegal and of Guinea. They said, as we did, that
either the United Nations must help us to put an end to
colonialism, to Portuguese aggression and to imperialist
injustice on our continent, or we would have to draw on
our own military resources and, more particularly, avail
ourselves of the spirit of sacrifice of our people.
153. In the Council, where we are attending our last
meetings, we cannot repudiate what our national experience has taught us. Our experience has been a struggle
which succeeded not only as a result of the action of our
people, but also as a result of the material assistance in arms
and money given by many countries of Asia, Latin
America, Africa and Europe. These material contributions
made it possible for us to be present here today as a
respected member of the Security Council. Many countries
have aided us and such aid was just, for it was given in order
to preserve peace, justice and international security. If
those States announce some day that they helped us-some
may have done so already-the representative of Portugal
will reahze that the number of so-called subversive States in
the United Nations is much greater than he imagines.
154. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated from French): I
should first like to apologize to my colleagues for having
taken up their time, but all who are familiar with the
political thinking of President Senghor will, with me,
wholly reject the allegations of the representative of
Portugal, according to which regular Senegaleseforces have
participated in attacks against the territory of Guinea
(Bissau). Portugal feels so guilty that its Government
endeavoured to prevent this meeting of the Security
Council from taking place today by asking us to withdraw
our complaint in exchange for payment of damages
following an inquiry. Obviously we could not accede to this

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

request which was nothing but an attempt
condemnation by the Security Council.

to escap

155. I say again that Senegal has been patient long
enough. The civilian population of Casamance, which an
no longer pursue its work in the fields, demands that th8
Security Council, which is dealing with this matter for ~hp:
third time, should see to it that justice is done. I’he
Security Council must pronounce itself in a cle,ar-&,
definite and vigorous manner against Portugal, nnless iL
wants Senegal to take other measures to protect ils
frontiers.
156. The PRESIDENT:
tive of Portugal.

I give the floor to the representa-

157. Mr. MIRANDA (Portugal): I shall be very brief. I
have asked for the floor only to thank the representative af
Algeria for explaining so clearly the origin of the violence
against the Portuguese territories in Africa. He has confirmed that the violence has not been initiated by Portugal
and that therefore responsibility cannot be laid at its dlh!r158. Mr, YAZID (Algeria) (translatedfrom Fkxch): !&FM
dialogues are possible, like the one just resumed by the
representative of Portugal. In this philosophical dialogue,
my reply to his thanks will be brief. The origin or he
violence in territories under Portuguese dominatiion in
Africa is the policy of a Europeancolonial Power whit+ IW
learnednothing and understoodnothing.
159. The PRESIDENT: There are no further speakerstin
my list. I shalltherefore adjourn the meeting.In accolrdancc
with the viewsexpressedin informal consultations,the nest
meeting of the Security Council on this item will be ha!.!
tomorrow, 5 December1969, promptly at IO.30 a.m.
The meetingroseat 6.15 p.m.

in other

currencies)

82265-December

1972-2.Q90
