S/PV.8089

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8089

th meeting
Tuesday, 7 November 2017, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cardi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Tachco
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 1 November 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2017/922)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-36814 (E)
*1736814*

S/PV.8089

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 1 November 2017 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/922)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Serbia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Ms. Joanne Adamson, Deputy Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of item two of its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/922, which contains the text of
a letter dated 1 November 2017 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the fifty-second report of the
High Representative for Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I now give the floor to Mr. Inzko.
Mr. Inzko: More than 25 years have passed since
Bosnia and Herzegovina joined the United Nations in
1992, and more than two decades have elapsed since
the tragic conflict came to an end in 1995. In many
ways, the country has made remarkable progress since
then: the State institutions provided for in annex 4 of
the Peace Agreement — the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina — were established; the three armies that
fought each other were unified into one; a modern and
efficient tax collection system was established; and the
country adopted a flag, a national anthem, common
passports and very stable currency. Those are just some
of the achievements.
2/24

07/11/2017

The country is today at a crucial moment in its
history, as leaders of all ethnic affiliations aspire to
join the European Union (EU) and are working towards
fulfilling the requirements necessary for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to be granted EU candidate status. Despite
those promising strides, Bosnia and Herzegovina still
requires the attention of the international community.
Looking at the past six months, many of the key political
actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina have continued to
hold maximalist positions on the concrete challenges
facing the country. Those political actors have been
unwilling, in most cases, to search for the compromises
needed to adopt the necessary reforms.
Of course, there have been positive counterexamples
to that negative trend. Bosnia and Herzegovina has
taken some steps to implement the EU reform agenda
and continues to work on the questionnaire of the
European Commission. In addition, the country signed,
in September in Trieste, a treaty establishing a transport
community with the EU and five other Western Balkan
countries, which will eventually open the door to
infrastructure developments.
There were also some positive developments in
terms of regional relations, such as the official visit
to Sarajevo in September of the President of Serbia,
Aleksandar Vučić. There were also important visits to
Bosnia and Herzegovina made by Croatian officials.
But the overall picture is one in which reforms have
slowed down considerably. The Foreign Ministers of
the European Union described the situation accurately
last month when they expressed
“regret that a divisive rhetoric rooted in the past
and an early electoral agenda have slowed down the
pace of reform and affected the political climate”.
In addition to the current political stalemate, I want
to highlight the risk of a deeper political crisis arising
next year due to disagreement on the rules regulating
the indirect election of delegates to one of the Houses of
Parliament in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
If the Federation’s House of Parliament is not formed
following the next elections, it will most likely prevent
the formation of the Federation’s Government, as well
as one chamber of the State-level Parliament. I want to
call attention to that issue now, while there is still time
for the parties in Parliament to address the problem
before the elections in October 2018. The parties must
do whatever is necessary to ensure that the elections
17-36814

07/11/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV. 8089

can take place next year and that the results are
implemented without undue delays.

cohesion, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina”.

In addition to the possible political stalemate
in the Federation that I have just described, we have
also seen continued actions and statements from the
representatives of Republika Srpska, questioning the
future of the country and challenging the authority
of State-level institutions, including the decisions of
the State’s highest courts. The President of Republika
Srpska has called for Serb judges to withdraw from
State judicial institutions and made it clear that entity
institutions will not implement decisions of the Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina related to the State’s right
to own real estate within Republika Srpska territory.

Yesterday, the Republika Srpska National
Assembly formally took out of force the decision
made in 2015 to hold that referendum — a decision
that should never have been made in the first place.
However, that National Assembly also adopted
conclusions that pose gravely concerning issues. They
again incorrectly assert that Republika Srpska is a State
and that it has the right to hold referendums on matters
within the clear competence of the State of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I would like to emphasize that the
Republika Srpska authorities only have the right to
make decisions on matters that fall under their own
constitutional responsibilities — including through
referendums. That is clearly not the case when it comes
to the laws concerning judicial institutions at State
level or decisions made by the High Representative.

That is part of a campaign to assert that Bosnia
and Herzegovina derives its sovereignty only from
the entities and that it is not a real State. In practice,
it involves challenging the competence of the State to
deal with almost any issue, and that has led to paralysis
on a number of concrete reforms needed for the country
to advance on its path of Euro-Atlantic integration. For
example, in October, the Republika Srpska National
Assembly adopted a resolution that asserts the entity’s
neutrality vis-à-vis integration with NATO and attempts
to redefine the position and obligations of the Republika
Srpska under the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular under
the Constitution, which is set forth in annex 4 of the
Peace Agreement.
In response, I have been clear that the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, including the
Constitution, prevails over any act adopted by the
Republika Srpska National Assembly and that foreign
policy is the exclusive responsibility of the State’s
institutions. Furthermore, in my view — and this
stands for other issues as well — decisions of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s State Presidency remain valid until
they are amended by subsequent acts.
In the past I have reported to the Security Council
on another potential challenge to the Dayton Peace
Agreement and the sovereignty of the country, namely,
the decision to hold a referendum in the entity of
Republika Srpska on the State’s judicial institutions
and the authorities of the High Representative. When
that issue arose in 2015, I made it clear that such a
referendum would violate annexes 4 and 10 of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. At the time, the European Council
also said that such a referendum would “challenge the

Many of the problems that we see in Bosnia and
Herzegovina serve to highlight a more general longterm trend of diminishing regard for the rule of law by
those in authority. Those include the continued failure
to implement the rulings made in 2009 by the European
Court of Human Rights in the Sejdić and Finci and
related cases. As a result, under the current system,
certain groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina — such as
Jews and Roma peoples — have been discriminated
against for over two decades in their right to hold
political office.
In the city of Mostar, citizens have been unable to
elect local representatives during the past two electoral
cycles because the two main political parties in the city
have been unwilling to implement the Constitutional
Court’s decision on the electoral system. One final
example: some of the cantons in the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina have failed to amend their
Constitutions to include guaranteeing the status of
Serb peoples and the Serb language, despite a legal
requirement since 2002 to do so.
All of those issues need to be addressed. Of course,
problems with the rule of law go much deeper in terms
of corruption in the political system, the large public
sector and the provision of basic services to the public.
Those deficiencies in the rule of law contribute to
the large exodus of talented young people from the
country, which strengthens the forces of nationalism
and division.

17-368143/24

S/PV.8089

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The Dayton Peace Agreement defines Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a State governed by the rule of law. I
believe that we, as the international community, need
to re-engage and reinvigorate our efforts more robustly
in order to buttress the rule of law, including through
stronger anti-corruption efforts.
In the light of the many internal challenges still
present in Bosnia and Herzegovina, I believe that
the international community should retain all of the
instruments at its disposal to maintain stability. Bosnia
and Herzegovina represents a complex political and
security environment in which negative scenarios can
quickly endanger the Dayton Peace Agreement and
the progress achieved so far. For that reason, I am
firmly convinced that there is still the necessity to
maintain the EU military force on the ground with an
executive mandate.
Before concluding, I want to mention one more
recent positive development that I think reminds us
that our efforts are not in vain in supporting Bosnia
and Herzegovina and its people. Last year, politicians
in Central Bosnia Canton adopted an initiative in
the regional Parliament to segregate Bosniak and
Croat pupils in the local high school in the town of
Jajce. However, they quickly encountered determined
resistance from a group of vocal students and other
citizens of all nationalities. In large part because of that
resistance, the planned division of the school did not
move forward in September. That example reminds me
of two things. First, it shows that there is a desire among
citizens at the local level for social and institutional
integration and for European standards to be applied
in the public sphere. Secondly, it demonstrates to me
that, when we are united as an international community
in speaking out in support of local actors working to
improve their own country, we see results.
Looking ahead, the principal challenges for
the political leaders and institutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are clear. First and foremost, they include
completing the actions needed to achieve the next steps
in Euro-Atlantic integration. Those are the very same
measures that will deliver the economic development
that is so badly needed for the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Secondly, they include taking all the
necessary steps to ensure that the 2018 elections can
be held and that their results be implemented smoothly.
And, finally, there is the rule of law. Respecting and
implementing the decisions of courts and respecting the
4/24

07/11/2017

Dayton Peace Agreement are absolute preconditions for
real progress.
As an international community, we cannot do any
of those things on behalf of the elected leaders of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, but we can speak out clearly against
attempts to roll back the progress made in integrating
Bosnia and Herzegovina and its peoples. And we can
support all those who demonstrate a true commitment
to making Bosnia and Herzegovina a stable, functional
and prosperous country, irreversibly integrated into
European structures.
The President: I thank Mr. Inzko for his briefing.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/928, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Italy.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2384 (2017).
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
for his briefing. More than 20 years after a deadly
conflict, the Dayton Peace Agreement continues to
be the cornerstone of institutional stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Today’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2384
(2017) serves to highlight that all the members of the
Council share the same cardinal principles with regard
to Bosnia and Herzegovina. First, it serves as a reminder
of the imperative need to respect the principles and
institutions set up by the Dayton Peace Agreemen;
secondly, of the need to respect the aspiration of all
the components of the country in favour of a European
17-36814

07/11/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV. 8089

perspective; and, thirdly, of the need to support the
presence of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force Althea, with an executive mandate.

development and consolidation of the country. Frances
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the
observer of the European Union.

The unity of the Council around those common
elements sends a signal of peace that is essential for
the calming of the political climate in a context that
remains marked by great polarization among political
stakeholders. The unity of the Council recalls the
support of the international community for the
independence and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which cannot be questioned by any one
of its entities, as well as for respecting the choices of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, insofar as they comply with
international law and the framework established by the
Peace Agreement. In that regard, we call on all Bosnian
political actors to respect the central institutions
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to refrain from any
initiative that could undermine those institutions, such
as the referendum project. The establishment of the rule
of law is a prerequisite for a calm political debate.

In that regard, we welcome several positive
developments for Bosnia and Herzegovina on the road
to European integration. The official submission to
the Bosnian authorities of the questionnaire to launch
the European Commission’s examination of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s candidacy for the European Union
is certainly part of those positive developments. It is
part of a context in which the prospect of European
integration enjoys massive support among the Bosnian
population and it is the subject of real unanimity
within institutions, from the Presidency to the cantons,
including political entities, which is something that we
can only welcome enthusiastically.

We call for great vigilance with regard to any
initiative likely to introduce new divisions in the
country. We once again urge all parties to cooperate
with the institutions mentioned in the Peace Agreement,
including the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Office of the High Representative.
The latter must focus its efforts on facilitating a
peaceful dialogue on a daily basis between the different
communities and the different entities involved.
France calls on all actors to abandon divisive
rhetoric. The time has come to focus on the
implementation of the economic and social reforms
that constitute the common aspirations of all citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, regardless of their community
of origin. That is also true for electoral reform. France
calls on all political parties to enter into a serious
dialogue. Otherwise, the legal framework for elections
risks being flawed.
However, despite that fragility, France remains
convinced that the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is now on the path towards normalization, thanks in
particular to the European perspective. Our objective
for the next few years remains, without calling into
question the founding principles of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, to change the international presence, taking
into account, in particular, the progress of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its European path. France is pleased
that the European perspective is now the main driver of

In that context, the European Union will continue
more than ever to support the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in the implementation of reforms
that meet the economic and social aspirations of the
population. The reform agenda is central to that end.
We are therefore concerned about the slowdown in
the reforms, which started at the beginning of the
year. In the framework of the questionnaire, we will
attach particular importance to demonstrating the full
functionality of the coordination mechanism in the
European matter.
Finally, the Althea military operation will also
continue its work by adapting itself as best as it can to
the security situation on the ground in order to enable
the Bosnian security forces to operate autonomously. In
the coming weeks, it will be the subject of a strategic
review led by the European Union, which will guide its
efforts for the years to come.
Twenty-one years after the horror of war, 25
years after the beginning of the conflict, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is moving in the right direction today,
with the support of the European Union and its other
partners. The responsibility of the international
community, and in particular of the Council, is to
encourage it along that path, so that it definitively turn
the page on quarrels of the past.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): I would like to align myself
with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union (EU).
Let me begin by thanking the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for

17-368145/24

S/PV.8089

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

07/11/2017

his comprehensive briefing to the Security Council this
morning. I would like to assure the High Representative
of our continued full support for his important work.

more difficult. In addition, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
national action plan on women and peace and security
should be fully implemented.

During the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
line from Ivo Andrić’s Letter from the Year 1920 that
Bosnia was a country of fear and hatred was often
quoted. However, since the end of the war, the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, supported by the international
community, not least the European Union, have been
on a journey to replace that fear and hatred with trust
and mutual respect. It is a journey to build a peaceful
and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina. And while
much has been achieved, it is a journey that has not yet
reached its end.

Finally, we welcome today’s unanimous adoption
of resolution 2384 (2017), which reviews the mandate
of the European Union-led peacekeeping force Althea
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also acknowledge
the need for discussion on the reconfiguration of the
international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We remain supportive of the idea of phasing out the
international presence when the situation on the ground
allows for it. With our partners in the European Union,
Sweden will continue to stand with the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as they work towards realizing
their European perspective and building a country of
prosperity, peace, stability and equality for all.

Bosnia and Herzegovina’s European Union
perspective remains central to its future. The President
of the European Commission, Mr. Jean-Claude Juncker,
in his state of the union speech in September, clearly
stated that the integration of the Western Balkans into
the Euroepan Union remains a top priority for the
EU. The Western Balkans region is a part of Europe,
and developments in the region will affect the rest
of the continent. European Union Foreign Ministers
reiterated the Union’s firm commitment to Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s EU perspective when they met at the
Foreign Affairs Council only last month. However,
much work remains to be done.
While we welcome the initial implementation of
the reform agenda, the pace of reform has, worryingly,
slowed this year. It is crucial that authorities step up the
implementation of comprehensive reforms in order to
regain momentum and to get the reform agenda back
on track. Those efforts should focus on socioeconomic
development, fighting corruption and organized crime,
ensuring fundamental freedoms and electoral reforms.
In addition, it is necessary to invest in bridging cultural
and social differences, not least among children and
youth. Next year’s elections must not be an excuse
for delaying key decisions. Election reform should be
approached in the spirit of consensus and dialogue.
Moreover, relevant rulings of the Constitutional Court
must be implemented swiftly in order to avoid a legal
vacuum after the elections next year.
It is important that efforts towards continued
reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina be supported.
Sexual and gender-based violence committed during the
war needs to be addressed. Impunity threatens stability
and social cohesion, making reconciliation even
6/24

Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his comprehensive briefing on his latest report on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2017/922, annex). Egypt stresses its
full support for the mandate of the High Representative
and his efforts to assist Bosnian authorities to overcome
the challenges.
Egypt welcomes all efforts to maintain stability
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and its unity, with all its
ethnic and cultural components. We are cognizant
of the important role played by the European Union
(EU)-led stabilization force in achieving that objective.
Accordingly, we welcome the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2384 (2017) today. That sends a strong
message from the international community to the
Bosnian people that we are committed to maintaining
stability and security in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
that we are committed to providing the necessary
support to country to anchor its sovereignty, unity and
territorial Integrity.
Two decades after its signing, the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains the cornerstone for institutional
stability and sustainable peace. We express our deep
concern about the great challenges to the Peace
Agreement referred to in the report during the reporting
period, especially resorting to inflammatory and
divisive rhetoric. We call upon all political leaders to
give precedence to the political interests of the Bosnian
people over any other considerations. We call upon
17-36814

07/11/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

them to rise above narrow political and ethnic interests
that undermine any progress and stability. We call upon
them to engage in serious political consultations to
discuss the proposed amendments to the election law in
Bosnia, which would prevent a potential political crisis.
Those events coincide with what the report referred
to as limited progress towards the implementation
of the 5+2 plan to close the Office of the High
Representative, especially regarding the registration
of defence property in addition to the rejection by the
Serbian entity to increase the budget allocated to State
institutions, which adversely affects the sustainability
of financial policies. Egypt stresses its full support to
the Office of the High Representative with respect to
what was provided for in the Dayton Peace Agreement
and the relevant Security Council resolutions. We call
upon the High Representative to intensify his efforts to
implement the plan in full.
In conclusion, Egypt stresses the importance of
respecting the unity, stability and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the respect of its national
Constitution and of all decisions and verdicts of the
judiciary by all parties to solidify stability. Egypt
welcomes the recent positive developments, especially
the improved relations with neighbouring countries and
the improvement of some of the economic indicators.
We call upon the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to strengthen social cohesion and political consensus
to move forward with peace efforts and reforms. In
addition, we call upon the international community to
continue its efforts to support Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which would have a positive effect not only on the
stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina but on the stability
of the entire region of the Balkans.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Inzko for
his report (S/2017/922, annex) and his briefing. He has
the full and continuous support of the United Kingdom.
I want to begin by warmly welcoming the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2384 (2017) this morning. I pay
tribute to you, Mr. President, and to your delegation
for your excellent efforts as penholder. This adoption
is a welcome show of the Security Council’s continued
support for the vital work of the European Union (EU)led peacekeeping force Althea and a clear sign of our
commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s stability,
security and territorial integrity. It is a commitment
that we now look to the Bosnian authorities to match.
They must do so in word and deed as they undertake

S/PV. 8089

the vital reforms necessary to bring about the social
and economic renewal that the country needs, and
which is so essential to Bosnia’s future within the
European Union.
Bosnia and Herzegovina made good progress
towards that goal in 2016, and the delivery of the EU
questionnaire in December was recognition of that
fact. However the promise and potential of 2016 has
not materialized this year. Instead, this year has seen
the pace of reform slowing markedly, and divisive
rhetoric and premature electioneering only increasing.
It is those negative trends that are now dominating the
political landscape, despite the elections being over
10 months away. When that sort of narrow-minded,
divisive electioneering takes hold, nobody gains. All
Bosnians lose out. We need only look to the tens of
millions of dollars in funding from the International
Monetary Fund that are currently on hold. Bosnia and
Herzegovina has failed to fulfil its responsibilities; if
it had done so, that funding would be released. The
money could be used to make considerable progress
on the reform path. It would transform Bosnia for the
better — building roads and other vital infrastructure
that would benefit all. Let us all encourage the Bosnian
authorities to refocus on the reform agenda to deliver
socioeconomic reforms that would improve the lives
of their citizens. Divisive, backwards-looking rhetoric
only distracts from that essential work, and will only
slow the country’s progress.
As a long-standing friend of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the United Kingdom calls on all the
parties to stop looking to the past and instead look
forward to a shared future. If they do so, they will have
the United Kingdom’s support. We stand ready to work
with the authorities to make progress on those critically
important issues.
As the High Representative said just now, a crucial
element of that effort must be to promote and uphold
the rule of law, including through a well-functioning
independent judiciary. We call on all political and
judicial leaders to avoid actions that undermine the
standards of judicial impartiality and integrity.
Ahead of next year’s elections, we also urge all
parties to approach the issue of electoral reform through
dialogue and to show willingness to reach a compromise.
The authorities must work towards the implementation
of judgements handed down by the European Court
of Human Rights. No one should be excluded from

17-368147/24

S/PV.8089

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

political office at any level of Government based on
their ethnicity or residence.
I would like to reiterate today the need for the
Bosnian authorities to find a resolution to the longstanding impasse concerning local elections in Mostar.
It is absolutely extraordinary that the citizens of Mostar
have now been denied their democratic rights for nearly
a decade. That cannot continue, and Mostar must
remain a single, coherent multi-ethnic unit of local selfgovernment.
Before I conclude, I would like to express the United
Kingdom’s support for reform, not just as a means of
generating prosperity for Bosnia and Herzegovina, but
also as a means of ensuring security for the country
through Euro-Atlantic integration. In order to make
progress towards that goal, it is vital that Bosnia and
Herzegovina undertake further efforts on registering
defence property, which is needed for the activation of
the NATO membership action plan and for progress on
the 5+2 agenda. But until that agenda is completed, we
remain committed to the continuing role of the High
Representative and his Office. The Office of the High
Representative remains the final authority in-theatre
with regard to the civilian implementation of the Peace
Agreement. That includes supporting the use of Bonn
powers if the situation requires it.
Therefore, both Operation Althea and the High
Representative have a vital role to play in Bosnia and
Herzegovina until stability and security are firmly
entrenched. That day is not yet here, and it is therefore
essential that the Security Council continue its support
for both until that moment arrives.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I thank High Representative
Inzko for his informative briefing. Japan continues to
appreciate Mr. Inzko’s important role in supporting
peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
also welcome the unanimous adoption of an extended
mandate for the European Union-led peacekeeping
force, which plays a pivotal role in maintaining peace
in the country.
All ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina share
a common position on joining the European Union
(EU). Japan strongly supports the Government’s efforts
in the country’s accession process towards membership
in the EU and NATO. We welcome progress on regional
cooperation, which can be seen in the signing of the
EU transport community treaty in September. Japan
calls for further accelerated efforts on the country’s
8/24

07/11/2017

EU candidacy through the submission of answers to
the European Commission’s questionnaire by the end
of the year.
We note, however, that the Government’s efforts on
economic reforms have not been sufficient. We hope
to see progress in efforts on a fuel-tax bill, including
addressing the serious unemployment situation,
especially for young people, and measures to create
an environment conducive to foreign investment. In
that regard, at the Japan-Bosnia Herzegovina Foreign
Ministers meeting on 1 October in Tokyo, Foreign
Minister Kono of Japan particularly stressed the
importance of improving the investment environment.
Next October’s elections and campaigns provide
a prime opportunity to solidify national unity and
inclusiveness among different ethnic groups, and
they should in no way be an occasion for ethnically
based actions and rhetoric. Japan strongly hopes that
electoral reform will move forward based on consensus
and inclusivity among ethnic groups in order for fair
elections to be held on schedule.
As I did in our previous debate (see S/PV.7943), I
unfortunately must reiterate Japan’s deep disappointment
over a number of ethnically divisive developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are particularly concerned
by actions, such as the Republika Srpska National
Assembly’s adoption of a resolution on the protection of
the constitutional order and on the military neutrality
of the Republika Srpska, which have a negative impact
on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We also emphasize that actions by Republika
Srpska’s leaders to undermine the authority of the High
Representative are not only politically unacceptable,
but they are also violations of the Dayton Agreement.
The international community must continue to
convince the leaders of the Republika Srpska that
containing nationalism and separatism are crucial for
people’s peace and prosperity. The High Representative
and his Office, the Peace Implementation Council and
the Security Council all have important responsibilities
and roles to play in this area.
Since the end of the conflict, Japan has provided
over $500 million to support Bosnia and Herzegovina,
both now and into the future. Recent efforts include
demining, agricultural development in Srebrenica,
the installation of a flue-gas desulphurization plant to
fight pollution in Republika Srpska, the development of
shared health- and physical-education curriculums for
17-36814

07/11/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

all ethnic groups, and support for children of different
ethnic backgrounds to learn sports together in Mostar.
While December will be Japan’s final month on the
Security Council during its current term, it will remain
a core member of the Peace Implementation Council.
We will continue to contribute to reconciliation, acting
as a neutral party among ethnic groups, while fully
supporting Mr. Inzko and his Office.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
High Representative Inzko for his briefing.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country
in the Balkans. To maintain its peace and stability,
promote economic and social development and achieve
harmonious coexistence among the various ethnic
groups is in the common interests of the countries of
the region and of the international community.
On the Bosnia and Herzegovina issue, the
international community should listen to the views
of all relevant parties, take a balanced and prudent
approach and hear the concerns of all interested
parties. China respects the independence, sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, respects the choice of the Bosnian people
in determining their future, and supports Bosnian
people of all ethnicities in achieving harmonious
coexistence and common development.
China welcomes the efforts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina aimed a promoting national reconciliation,
encouraging economic and social development and
strengthening the rule of law. We hope that Bosnian
people of all ethnicities will work actively to consolidate
the political and social progress achieved, engage
in dialogue and consultation to settle differences,
completely implement the Dayton Peace Agreement
and continue to strive for greater progress in all areas
so that they can all share in the peace dividend.
China welcomes the efforts of High Representative
Inzko aimed at promoting the political process in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We hope that, in accordance with his
mandate, he will play a constructive role in promoting
the implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
China welcomes the Security Council’s adoption
of resolution 2384 (2017) to renew the mandate of the
European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR)
Althea operation. We hope that EUFOR will continue
to maintain close cooperation with Bosnia and
Herzegovina and play a constructive role in safeguarding

S/PV. 8089

its peace and stability. China stands ready to work
with the international community in order to continue
to contribute to the achievement of lasting peace and
stability and development in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
thanking Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his comprehensive briefing
on the latest report (see S/2017/922, annex) on the
implementation of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We welcome the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2384 (2017), renewing
the mandate of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force (EUFOR) Althea operation, and we are grateful
to Italy for its role as penholder in facilitating the
negotiation of the draft resolution.
We would like to once again affirm our support
for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity and unity. We take note of the positive
developments, such as the signing of a transport
community treaty with the European Union and five
other Western Balkan countries, as indicated in the
report of the High Representative. We believe that
such progress will help to promote the stability and
prosperity of the country and the region at large. We
also take note of the continuing exchanges of visits by
high-level officials and political leaders of the countries
in the region, which we believe will strengthen goodneighbourly relations and enhance cooperation in the
Western Balkans.
We are nevertheless concerned about some of
the reported developments undermining Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s political stability, particularly the
divisive rhetoric and actions that continue to challenge
the constitutional order and integrity of the country’s
judiciary at the State level. In that regard, we call on
all authorities and political leaders to fully respect the
decision of the Constitutional Court. Respect for the rule
of law and the authority of State institutions established
under the Dayton Agreement is fundamental to the
State-building process, and it is therefore vital that all
parties refrain from any provocative statements and
actions that could undermine Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity, cohesion and
constitutional order.
We also take note of the disagreement over changes
to the electoral law in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
believe that the issue must be handled very carefully,
since it has the potential to affect the formation of a

17-368149/24

S/PV.8089

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Government after the next election cycle and undermine
the country’s institutional continuity and stability. It
is our hope that the ruling of the Constitutional Court
after its review of the country’s election law will be
implemented in a manner consistent with the provisions
of the Dayton Agreement. We also encourage the parties
to engage in serious political dialogue to address their
differences over the electoral reform issue, which would
be particularly appropriate in the light of the upcoming
general elections in 2018.
In conclusion, we would like to express our support
to the High Representative and his office in carrying
out their mandate to monitor the implementation of the
civilian aspects of the Dayton Agreement. We call on
all the parties to extend the cooperation essential to the
work of the High Representative. We also recognize
the vital role played by the European Union’s military
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, EUFOR Althea, in
maintaining the safety and stability of the country.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the very detailed
report (see S/2017/922, annex) he has just presented
to us, and, on behalf of Senegal, to hail the Security
Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2384
(2017), which extends the mandate of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Althea operation for a
further 12 months. My delegation would also like to
express its appreciation to the Italian presidency for
convening this meeting and giving us an opportunity
to discuss the High Representative’s report. We would
like to make some comments on its political, economic
and institutional aspects.
On the political front, despite various ongoing
problems, progress has definitely been made with
the adoption by the presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s of its defence review document and its
integration into NATO, as well as the official signing of
the Protocol on the adaptation of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union, and
the conclusion of a transport community treaty with the
European Union.
Despite those positive steps, it must be said that
the General Framework Agreement for Peace has
been undermined by the activities of the Republika
Srpska in particular, which has attempted to interfere
with the Constitutional Court’s ruling that the
results of the referendum of 25 December 2016 were
10/24

07/11/2017

unconstitutional. My delegation affirms its support
to respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as guaranteed by the
Dayton Agreement, by Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
constitution and international law. We believe that such
developments represent a challenge to the constitution
of a country that is in need of the exact opposite — a
calm atmosphere and frank dialogue with the entire
community with strict regard for the Constitution and
the law. In that regard, Senegal also urges all the parties
to engage in political dialogue and make good-faith
efforts to ensure that the 2018 elections are conducted
under good conditions.
With regard to the economy, Senegal commends
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress, while emphasizing
that it must be consolidated and built on in order to
foster harmonious development, stability and the wellbeing of the people. We therefore encourage all three
ethnic groups to work more closely together and to
pursue their shared desire for coexistence, the test of a
stable, strong and peaceful State that participates fully
in the community of nations.
We also affirm our support for the High
Representative and call on all the parties to cooperate
with him. As his report makes abundantly clear, the
presence of the European Union-led military mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, with its executive mandate,
is as important as ever insofar as it enables the High
Representative and other international players to
implement their respective mandates and ensure the
safety and security of every ethnic group in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Turning to the issue of the fight against terrorism,
which is one of the problems facing Bosnia and
Herzegovina, particularly in a situation featuring the
problems of foreign terrorist fighters and complex
flows of migrants, which continue to add to the
challenges to the security of the country and the entire
region. Needless to say, it will be impossible to achieve
concrete results in the fight against terrorism without
strengthening the necessary cooperation at every
level between the authorities of the various area of the
country. In our view, the international community must
continue to support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s efforts
in order to help it show greater resilience in dealing
with its ongoing socioeconomic problems. The same
is true with regard to strengthening its defence and
security forces so that they will eventually be able to
17-36814

07/11/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

overcome their operational and strategic deficiencies in
a situation where the threat of terror continues.
In conclusion, I would like to once again encourage
the international community, and the Security Council
in particular, to continue to engage and cooperate on
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to
ensure that it can continue to move forward, as it has
for more than 20 years.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to share our thoughts with you,
Mr. President, on the report of the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina (see S/2017/922, annex). In
our opinion, of all the reports Mr. Inzko has submitted
to the Security Council since 2009, this is the most
biased. To a lesser extent, the document refers to the
implementation of the General Framework Agreement,
but essentially it forms part of the tendentious and
biased attacks on the Republika Srpska that a number of
delegations in this Chamber have unfortunately already
seized on. There is only one thing to be gleaned from
the report, which is that the Bosnian Serbs alone are to
blame for all of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s problems.
It is clear to anyone even slightly familiar with the
situation in Bosnia that the picture painted by the High
Representative is a long way from the truth and very
misleading, and testifies to the fact that its author has
lost touch with reality.
We are deeply disturbed to see that Mr. Inzko
has entered the realm of blatant Serbophobia and
that his daily activity has been reduced to improving
his relations with Banja Luka and lobbying for EuroAtlantic integration for Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
contravention both of his mandate and internal political
realities in the host country. I will say straight out that
we should not be engaging in hostilities but carrying
out our duties conscientiously. That approach requires
fostering national reconciliation processes, mutually
respectful internal political dialogue, compromise and
consensus and, of course, respectful consideration of
the views of all the parties. Mr. Inzko should bear in
mind that in Bosnia and Herzegovina he represents
the entire international community, not the individual
members of his own choosing. He has to conduct
agreed-on policy, not carry out somebody’s individual
instructions or be guided by personal hostility.
However, let us get to grips with the reality of the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose main feature
is a deep internal political crisis at both the Bosnian

S/PV. 8089

level and in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
founded on the absence of any equal or mutually
respectful dialogue among the three constituent
peoples. Strangely enough, the High Representative
failed to underscore that in his report. It is exactly
that absence of genuine inter-ethnic interaction that is
creating problems in the functioning of Government
bodies, hindering the process of implementing essential
socioeconomic reforms — including, incidentally,
the European agenda — and compelling local ethnic
communities to undertake additional efforts to
establish and protect the equality and broad autonomy
guaranteed by the Dayton Agreement.
The Peace Agreement signed in Paris in 1995
contains a fully functioning set of rules and conditions
for the functioning of Bosnia and Herzegovina that
has no need of outside interference. Every decision
should be the result of internal political dialogue and
consensus. That applies to one of the current priority
issues, the reform of the electoral laws, which should be
based on respect for one of the key Dayton provisions,
equality for all peoples. That same principle should
also be observed in the Bosnia and Herzegovina
justice system, about whose fairness, independence,
impartiality and effectiveness many serious questions
have been raised, one revealing example being the
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s recent decision in
the case of the Bosniak commander Naser Orić during
the Yugoslavian conflict. It is surprising that in his
report Mr. Inzko decided not to dwell on issues that are
matters of such urgency for the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, who are clearly losing faith in justice. He
completely fails to mention the systemic problems in the
special services at the Bosnian level, which are giving
two of the constituent peoples reason for concerns
about their independence from political pressure, their
impartiality and their due national representativeness.
We do not agree with Mr. Inzko’s theme of blaming
the Bosnian Serb leadership for undermining Dayton.
In its alternative report to the Security Council, the
Republika Srpska clearly and unequivocally articulated
its commitment to Dayton and the integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, presenting a well-reasoned position
on the country’s key issues that differs from that of
the High Representative. We recommend that Council
members not dismiss this document but rather read
it carefully, especially since it was circulated in New
York in advance of the meeting, in contrast to the report
of the High Representative.

17-3681411/24

S/PV.8089

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

07/11/2017

This issue also applies to the High Representative’s
reaction to the Republika Srpska National Assembly’s
adoption on 17 October of a resolution on military
neutrality, which far exceeded the comments from
NATO headquarters in Sarajevo. We do not see why
the highest representative body of that entity cannot
democratically inform the Bosnian federal authorities
of its position on a very painful issue for Bosnian Serbs
that is also one of the most hotly debated questions in
Bosnia and Herzegovina — its rapprochement with
NATO. It should not be ignored.

which are becoming increasingly urgent, especially in
the light of the terrorist threat in Europe.

In the light of all of this, one thing is clear. The
external protection mechanism, in the person of the
High Representative, has outlived its usefulness. It is
not playing a positive role in the settlement process
but is rather introducing unnecessary tension and
engaging in matters unrelated to his mandate under
the pretext of advancing Euro-Atlantic integration. We
propose considering the practical aspects of shutting
down the Office of the High Representative, including
taking into account the 5+2 programme. That proposal
was approved in 2008, but the Office continues to
function. Major steps to reduce its budget and staff are
clearly required.

Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia welcomes the report
(see S/2017/922, annex) presented by Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
the Security Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution
2384 (2017). The Council’s support for the extension
of the European Union-led peacekeeping force Althea
operation shows its willingness to defend security and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina and respect its
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity,
as well as its support for the Dayton Agreement. We
hope that Althea will continue to cooperate closely with
Bosnia and Herzegovina and to play a constructive role
in maintaining peace and stability in the country within
the framework of its mandate.

We should be focusing on the future agenda for
Bosnia and Herzegovina rather than on protectorate
forms of influence. That focus should be on an
unconditional transfer of all responsibility, without any
exceptions, to the local authorities. That should include
the judiciary, where there are still three foreign judges
presiding over the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which calls the sovereignty of the
country into question; promoting an equitable and
mutually respectful internal political dialogue, as the
only possible path to genuine national reconciliation;
ensuring that international presences refrain from
interfering in local affairs, as happened in the recent
decision of the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council
on vetting judicial officials; and rejecting unilateral
sanctions as a tool for putting pressure on objectionable
individuals, which only increases tension. Those are the
things that the Security Council should be discussing.
Russia has traditionally maintained friendly
relations with all the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the Balkans generally. The region should be a
platform for collaboration and constructive cooperation
on goals that unite us all, such as strengthening peace,
security and stability in the country and region, and
12/24

In conclusion, we would once again like to express
our gratitude to the authorities, political stakeholders
and civic organizations of the Republika Srpska for their
unveiling of a memorial to Vitaly Ivanovich Churkin,
who, first as Special Representative of the Russian
President and then as Permanent Representative of
Russia to the United Nations, made a tremendous
contribution to the stabilization of the situation in
the region.

We also commend the positive political developments
in Bosnia and Herzegovina during the reporting period,
particularly, the steps taken to implement the reform
agenda and the signing of a transport community treaty
by Bosnia and Herzegovina, the European Union and five
other Balkan countries. Those efforts are a testimony
to the commitment of the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to continuing to undertake the reforms
needed to foster stability and contribute to initiatives
aimed at achieving the development and stability the
country wants. In that regard, we urge the authorities to
focus on those aspects and to intensify their efforts to
implement the 5+2 agenda, which is a prerequisite for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative.
While we also welcome the progress that Bosnia
and Herzegovina has made with economic development,
we are concerned about the continuing challenges
on the political front, which represent a major threat
to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s territorial integrity and
sovereignty whose repercussions could put not just the
country but the entire region of the Balkans at risk. In
that regard, we encourage all the country’s political
17-36814

07/11/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

leaders to put the interests of the Bosnian people before
their own ethnic political concerns. We appeal to all
those leaders to deal with these challenges in a spirit of
consensus and in an atmosphere of inclusion in which
all Bosnian political parties are full participants, in line
with the Dayton Peace Agreement, which remains the
legal basis and benchmark for stability and the peaceful
resolution of disputes between the parties in their quest
for lasting peace. In that regard, we should emphasize
the importance of ensuring that all the parties respect
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity and Constitution, as well as the decisions
handed down by its judiciary with regard to the rule
of law. We also urge political leaders and all parties to
refrain from engaging in divisive nationalist rhetoric.
Lastly, we reiterate our support to all the peoples
of Bosnian and Herzegovina in living together in
harmony for their shared development. We call on the
international community to heed the concerns of all the
parties concerned by taking a neutral, fair approach
with a view to leaving the divisions of the past behind.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
We would first like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his briefing today and for his most recent report (see
S/2017/922, annex) to the Council. We also thank the
Italian presidency of the Security Council for convening
today’s debate.
We welcome the Council’s adoption today of
resolution 2384 (2017), renewing the mandate of the
European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR)
Althea in Bosnia and Herzegovina for another year.
We appreciate the work that the Office of the High
Representative is doing on the ground to promote the
implementation of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the
efforts of EUFOR Althea to ensure the country’s political
and social stability. The international community must
continue to support the process of consolidating the
Dayton Agreement.
As we have often said, Uruguay is a firm believer
in strict respect for the principle of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. Today, in that spirit, we reaffirm
our support for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s unity,
territorial integrity and sovereignty. Respect for State
institutions and for the rule of law represents the path
to achieving a stable Bosnia and Herzegovina whose

S/PV. 8089

constituent communities can live side by side in peace.
In that regard, Uruguay considers the rule of law and
the authority of the institutions established under the
1995 General Framework Agreement for Peace to be
crucial, and respect for them the road to stability and
peaceful coexistence for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s political stakeholders
must act responsibly and participate in a constructive
dialogue that will enable them to overcome their
differences, focusing on national reconciliation and on
achieving the shared goals that can make Bosnia and
Herzegovina strong and prosperous. Ensuring stability
and development for Bosnia and Herzegovina and
peaceful coexistence among all of its ethnic groups will
benefit the international community generally and the
region in particular.
I would like to make a few comments on some
aspects of the High Representative’s report and recent
events. As the previous report did, it indicates that the
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities have made only
limited progress towards meeting the requirements of
the five objectives and the two conditions established
by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council as a prerequisite for the closure of the Office
of the High Representative. It is therefore essential
to underscore the importance of working to make
headway on full compliance with the 5+2 agenda.
Despite the lack of progress in some areas, we should
also emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina has taken
some measures aimed at implementing its reform
programme, which is a positive step, making progress
in carrying out the July 2015 reform agenda, which
focuses on socioeconomic issues that directly affect
citizens, and taking some steps towards integration with
the European Union. However, there is still much work
to be done to strengthen the rule of law and improve the
country’s overall political climate.
It will also be essential to tackle these reforms
before the start of the election campaign scheduled for
October 2018. The parties concerned in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the international community must
all support every effort to promote peace and stability
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that regard, Uruguay
reiterates its desire to see a stable, sovereign Bosnia
and Herzegovina where all of its citizens can live in
peace and work for the common good.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): My delegation
welcomes the Council’s renewal of the mandate of the
European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR)

17-3681413/24

S/PV.8089

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Althea in Bosnia and Herzegovina for another year, and
would also like to thank High Representative Valentin
Inzko for his update.
While the transition process is still ongoing, some
progress has been made in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
terms of building strong State institutions, inclusive
dialogue and democratic procedures, as well as in
working towards progress and an impartial judiciary.
The focus must also remain on the economy, as it
will be important to attract foreign direct investment
and create jobs and to formulate common strategies
for energy, agriculture and employment. Kazakhstan
therefore welcomes Bosnia and Herzegovina’s signing of
a transport community treaty with the European Union
(EU) and five other States of the Western Balkans,
which opens up major opportunities for the securitydevelopment nexus in, for example, the infrastructure
and transport sectors, and for doing business with large
regional and international partners and stakeholders
and moving consistently towards integration in the EU.
We believe that for socioeconomic reforms to be
successfully implemented, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
strategic development depends directly on the political
climate and on guarantees of peace and stability. In
that regard, I should add that the country’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity should never be challenged.
The country is preparing for the main elections in
October 2018, and all parties must focus their efforts
on continuing a political dialogue to discuss potential
amendments to the election laws, with further adoptions
on agreed dates. We call on the leaders of all the parties
concerned to implement the General Framework
Agreement for Peace and observe all provisions and
procedures that are integral to that settlement, including
the rulings of the Constitutional Court.
We welcomed the political will shown by the
Serbian leaders who visited Sarajevo in September.
We also believe that direct contact with the leadership
in neighbouring States is the most effective way to
promote dialogue and trust between the parties. As a
general principle, my delegation welcomes the positive
ongoing dialogue between the Governments of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Serbia, with regular high-level
contacts, and encourages the parties to continue.
On other fronts, efforts must also be focused
on converting defence properties into State
and civilian structures, ensuring greater fiscal
responsibility and sustainability, strengthening the
14/24

07/11/2017

Parliamentary Assembly and developing media and
broadcasting communications.
The country needs further support in improving
its energy system and infrastructure, foreign trade,
economic relations and other areas of social and
economic development. The issue of returning and
resettling refugees and displaced persons will also
have to be addressed. Most of all, the engagement of
civil-society organizations and grassroots movements,
and the participation of women, young people and
representatives of other vulnerable groups, will also
be critical to swiftly achieving social harmony and
building intercommunal trust and confidence.
Finally, the noble task facing Bosnia and
Herzegovina is that of improving the daily lives
of citizens and promote reconciliation. We believe
that the progress achieved on the European Union
integration track will be a catalyst for reconciliation
and help to resolve long-standing issues and address
the various reforms.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered later today on behalf
of the European Union (EU).
I thank High Representative Valentin Inzko for
his briefing and report (see S/2017/922, annex), which
is as objective as usual. I also reiterate Ukraine’s full
and continued support for his efforts to assist the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina in overcoming
the challenges they face, including implementing the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The role of the High Representative,
while always pivotal, will be particularly important next
year, in view of the upcoming 2018 general elections.
Ukraine would like to take this opportunity to call on
the Government of the Republika Srpska to resume its
cooperation with the High Representative and refrain
from intimidating his team.
Ukraine welcomes the Security Council’s unanimous
adoption today of resolution 2384 (2017). The Council’s
united position sends a strong message of support to
the people and leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as for the activities of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force Althea. Today’s resolution also
represents a united call on Bosnia and Herzegovina to
step up its efforts to complete the 5+2 agenda, refrain
from polarizing policies and rhetoric and continue
to work to implement comprehensive reforms. In our
view, along with further actions aimed at European and
17-36814

07/11/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Euro-Atlantic integration, those steps will contribute to
building a stable and prosperous country for the benefit
of all its citizens.
Ukraine looks forward to the day when Bosnia and
Herzegovina becomes a fully fledged member of the
European Union. We welcome the progress that has been
made in that direction with the signing in September of
a transport community treaty with the EU and five other
Western Balkans countries, as well as the ongoing work
on compiling answers to the European Commission’s
questionnaire. Given the existing support of the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina for European integration,
we sincerely believe that this foreign-policy objective
could unite both entities.
We echo the concerns of the High Representative
about some irresponsible decisions by the Republika
Srpska National Assembly, even if some of them have
recently been reversed. On a positive note, we are glad
that the threat of holding a referendum on the status
of the Republika Srpska has reportedly been taken
off the table for the time being. I would like to take
this opportunity to reiterate Ukraine’s full support for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and to underscore that its entities have no
right to secede. Ukraine strongly supports the position
of the High Representative on the resolution on the
protection of the constitutional order and assuring the
military neutrality of the Republika Srpska, adopted by
the Republika Srpska National Assembly in October.
We are also concerned about the possibility that this
resolution would, in effect, favour a division of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and we cannot support attempts to
undermine the General Framework Agreement and
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s constitutional order.
Next year will be a very challenging one for Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Preparations for the upcoming 2018
general elections have already started a full year ahead,
with very divisive actions and rhetoric. Despite the
existing problems related to indirect elections, the
parties in the State Parliament have not yet begun
a serious political dialogue to discuss potential
amendments to the election law addressing that issue.
Other potential or actual problems include the rejection
of the authority of the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and its Office of the Prosecutor in the Republika Srpska
and the continued attempts by its authorities to make
decisions on foreign policy, as well as many others. If
those challenges are not addressed in a comprehensive
and consensual way, with the participation of all sides,

S/PV. 8089

the political gains made since the conclusion of the
Dayton Agreement will be undermined.
I therefore call on the political leaders of all sides
to refrain from divisive rhetoric and to concentrate
on the real issues, where progress is so desperately
needed. It particular, it will be vital to continue efforts
to implement the reform agenda, which include social,
economic, rule-of-law and public-administration
reforms. It will also be important to show progress in the
functioning of the judiciary, in combating corruption
and organized crime and in countering radicalization
and terrorism. As we enter the third decade of the peace
process, the Council has an obligation to provide all the
necessary political support to ensure further peace and
development in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is crucial
to ensure that any attempts to encroach on Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s independence, unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity are resolutely addressed
and prevented.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I would
like to thank High Representative Inzko for his update
on Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Office of the High
Representative has played a critical role for more
than 22 years in helping Bosnia and Herzegovina
move towards peace and prosperity and promoting
the security and stability of the region. I would like to
thank the High Representative sincerely for his great
service and excellent and impartial reporting, and to
convey our continuing support for his Office’s mandate,
as the final authority for interpreting the civilian
implementation of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We welcome
the language in resolution 2384 (2017), adopted today,
reaffirming his mandate. His role continues to be
pivotal, especially as Bosnia and Herzegovina looks
towards general elections in 2018 and contends with
political divisiveness that threatens to undermine the
gains made under the Agreement.
The continuing challenges highlighted in the
most recent report of the High Representative for
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina (see S/2017/922, annex) underscore
that the Council must remain vigilant in the face of
those who seek to weaken the constitutional order of
the single State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The United
States remains dedicated to upholding the Dayton Peace
Accords, respecting the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and promoting its
continued European and Euro-Atlantic integration.

17-3681415/24

S/PV.8089

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

07/11/2017

We commend the continued work of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Althea and NATO in
promoting security and capacity-building in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We fully support the renewal of Althea’s
mandate and the important mentorship role that NATO
headquarters in Sarajevo plays in helping to implement
the defence review and modernization plans.

European integration”. But that day has not yet arrived.
We encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders and
all members of the international community to support
the actions and reforms needed to reach that milestone.
Until that time, the international community must
deliver on its commitments to the Office of the High
Representative to help ensure that it fulfils its mandate.

The United States urges for continued progress
towards integration with both NATO and the European
Union (EU). It will require vision and political will. It
will also require real follow-through on commitments,
such as defence property registrations and full and
timely completion of the EU questionnaire. We urge all
parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to stay focused on
the much-needed reforms, including on the political,
socioeconomic and electoral fronts. The Government
must work to enhance the rule of law, tackle corruption
and improve the overall political climate in the country
for the benefit of all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Tackling such reforms now, before the 2018 election
cycle, is critical. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders must
do everything possible to ensure that the electoral code
complies with the relevant rulings of both the European
Court of Human Rights and the Constitutional Court.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Italy.

In advance of next year’s election, we also
urge all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to avoid
divisive rhetoric that hardens political differences
and exacerbates ethnic divisions. We share many of
the concerns raised by the High Representative about
the actions of anyone who seeks to erode State-level
institutions, whether by ignoring the decisions of
the Constitutional Court or by acting outside the
established decision-making process. United States
sanctions against Republika Srpska President Milorad
Dodik should serve as a warning to those who seek to
undermine the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Council should remain united behind the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
its two entities and three constituent peoples. Likewise,
it should support those who seek to protect the State
Constitution and the tenets of the Dayton Peace Accords.
Once again, we look forward to the day when Bosnia
and Herzegovina meets the objectives and conditions
established by the Peace Implementation Council for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative.
We look forward to a time when we can say with
absolute confidence that Bosnia and Herzegovina has
fully implemented the Peace Agreement and is now
a “peaceful, viable State, irreversibly on course for
16/24

I thank the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing and
his work.
Italy also aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Today, the Security Council unanimously renewed
not only its support for the European Union-led
peacekeeping force (EUFOR) Althea, but also its
appeal to Bosnia and Herzegovina to speed up the
pace of reforms, in line with European integration
perspective. Italy firmly supports the European
Union (EU) path chosen by Bosnia and Herzegovina
and will continue to assist the country in achieving
that goal. Important progress has been made thus far,
demonstrating the commitment of all parties to reach
that common goal. Authorities at all institutional levels
have been working on the European Union Commission
opinion questionnaire this year, which is the first step
towards achieving the status of candidate member of the
European Union. We encourage them to redouble their
efforts so as to ensure coordinated and harmonized
answers to the questionnaire.
We regret that the pace of social and economic
reforms has been slowing down rather than accelerating
over the past several months. The demands of all citizens
for a better future deserve to be met, and urgently. The
leaders of the country have already showed their ability
to deliver when working together in the best interest of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Devisive actions and rhetoric
rooted in the past are not serving that interest. On the
countrary, they are stalling a reform process that had an
encouraging start.
Regaining momentum in the implementation of the
reform agenda is needed now more than ever to unblock
the assistance of the International Monetary Fund and
the European Union, which remains crucial to shoring
up the process and to substantially improving the lives
of all the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That
17-36814

07/11/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

being the main priority, we call on all parties to discuss
seriously and in a spirit of dialogue and consensus the
measures needed to improve the electoral framework
pursuant to the ruling issued by the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina in December
2016. It is paramount that next next year’s election
be conducted smoothly and allow the formation of
renewed democratic bodies able to resume the reform
process effectively and immediately and to steadily
move towards the European Union.
Many challenges still lie ahead — strengthening
the rule of law justice, the fight against corruption and
the prevention of radicalization being some of the most
significant — but through political will and unity of
intent, they can be addressed successfully. Citizens’
trust in institutions must be restored by offering,
especially to young people, real opportunities to build
a future in their home country. We commend recent
efforts aimed at consolidating regional relations, and
welcome Bosnia and Herzegovina’s decision to sign
the Transport Community Treaty — an important step
towards regional integration achieved at the summit on
the Western Balkans, which Italy hosted in Trieste last
July. All Western Balkans countries should continue
working in that direction, which we deem to be essential
as they move closer to the European Union.
I will conclude by recalling that our support for
Bosnia and Herzegovina is grounded on the respect for
its sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity enshrined
in the Dayton Peace Agreement. We urge the country
to take forward the 5+2 agenda established by the Peace
Implementation Council for the closure of the Office of
the High Representative. We reiterate our full support
for EUFOR Althea and look forward to it strategic
review. We stand ready to discuss, in the appropriate
forum, a possible reconfiguration of the international
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina as its stability
continues to be consolidated and the country moves
forward in its European Union integration process.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Mr. Vukašinović (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At
the outset let me congratulate you, Sir, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November, and wish you and your delegation
every success.

S/PV. 8089

We welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and have
taken note of his report on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2017/922, annex), covering the period
from 22 April to 21 October.
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the adoption
of resolution 2384 (2017), extending the mandate of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR)
Althea for an additional 12 months. It is important
to emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a host
country, has enjoyed respectful and constructive
cooperation with EUFOR Althea, particularly in
capacity-building and the training of the armed forces
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which have contributed to
strengthening national ownership.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
peaceful and calm for a long period of time, which
has been regularly reflected in the reports of EUFOR
Althea and in the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. EUFOR Althea is mandated to support
the implementation of the military aspects of Peace
Agreement and to ensure compliance with annexes
1-A and 2 of the General Framework Peace Agreement.
Over the past few years, in order to correspond to
the situation on the ground, EUFOR Althea has been
reconfigured, while its primary focus has shifted from
deterrence and activities in providing a safe and secure
environment to the capacity-building and training of
the armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bosnia and Herzegovina takes note of the readiness
of the European Union (EU) to further calibrate the
EUFOR Althea presence, bearing in mind the progress
made in its EU integration process and taking into
account the security situation on the ground.
In the reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina
continued vigorous work on implementing the
socioeconomic reforms necessary for its integration
into the European Union. Bosnia and Herzegovina has
further intensified its efforts to ensure the effective
implementation of the reform agenda, in accordance
with its action plan. Bosnia and Herzegovina has made
significant progress in the EU integration process
following last year’s conclusion of the EU Council,
inviting the European Commission to submit an opinion
on the merits of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s application.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities at all levels
have coordinated their activities in the multifaceted
labour of preparing answers to the questionnaire of the

17-3681417/24

S/PV.8089

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

European Commission. In that regard we reiterate our
appreciation to the European Union for its unwavering
commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s membership
in the EU.
One of the most important goals of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s foreign policy is the advancement of
friendly and constructive cooperation among the
countries of the region. The perspective of integration
into the European Union continues to drive the
transformation and modernization of the region
through political and economic reforms. The EU
perspective remains the crucial factor not only for
regional cooperation but also for the stability of the
Western Balkans. Cooperation within framework of
the Berlin process, which provides assets for traffic
and energy infrastructure, is particularly important to
regional development.
The countries of the Western Balkans continue
to hold regular meetings at the highest level, which
generate a positive political atmosphere. At the latest
Western Balkans summit, which took place in Trieste,
Italy, on 12 July, leaders of Western Balkans States
and high-level EU representatives adopted concrete
measures to deepen cooperation in the field of economy,
infrastructure and transportation. In that connection,
we would like to stress that in September 2017 Bosnia
and Herzegovina signed the Transport Community
Treaty with the European Union.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has intensified its efforts
to strengthen the rule of law in several key areas.
In the reporting period, we continued to fulfil our
international obligations with regard to countering
terrorism, violent extremism and the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters. Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
accordance with provisions of its amended penal code,
continues to process individuals involved in fighting
on behalf of terrorist organizations, as well as those
facilitating the recruitment of terrorist fighters.

07/11/2017

progress in combating organized crime, corruption
and money-laundering. In that regard, we thank the
European Union for providing significant support
in capacity-building to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Agency for the Prevention of Corruption and the
Coordination of the Fight against Corruption.
With respect to the international migrant crisis,
the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have
undertaken a set of comprehensive measures, including
in the humanitarian and security fields. Bosnia and
Herzegovina has implemented its strategy in the field
of migration and asylum, as well as a plan of action
for the period 2016-2020. This document has specified
Bosnia and Herzegovina policy in the field of migration
and asylum, in accordance with the highest European
and international standards.
As for processing war crimes before domestic
courts, we would like to reiterate that fighting impunity
at the local level is vital to Bosnia and Herzegovina
as a complex and multinational State. In that context,
implementing the national strategy for processing war
crimes, regardless of the national or religious origin
of the perpetrators or the victims, is essential for
reconciliation and a long-term stability.
With regard to the economic situation, it is important
to stress that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s economy, like
other economies of the region, has been affected by
the global economic slowdown. However, Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s economy has grown at a solid pace. In
the period from January 2016 to January 2017, Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s economy grew by 2.7 per cent. The
current inflation rate is -0.2 per cent, which means that
consumer prices have fallen slightly in comparison
with the previous year.

Bosnia and Herzegovina’s judicial and security
institutions have been implementing our strategy
for preventing and combating terrorism. It is
important to emphasize that the strategy, alongside
security measures, includes preventive activities for
deradicalization, undertaken by national stakeholders
such as religious communities, educational institutions,
civil society organizations and the media.

It is important to mention that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is actively contributing to international
peace and security by providing its military and police
personnel to United Nations peacekeeping missions.
At this moment, we have around 40 personnel serving
in United Nations peacekeeping missions worldwide.
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a current member of the
Economic and Social Council, supports United Nations
activities with regard to the promotion of the 2030
Sustainable Development Goals and encourages the
mutual exchange of experiences in various aspects of
the implementation of the Agenda.

During the reporting period, Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s rule of law and security institutions made

Finally, we would like to express the readiness of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities to continue their

18/24

17-36814

07/11/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

work to secure a better and prosperous future for its
citizens. At same time, we would also like to express
gratitude to our international partners for supporting
Bosnia and Herzegovina on that path.

S/PV. 8089

concrete reforms in order to move the country forward
on its EU integration path.

Ms. Adamson: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its 28 member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, as
well as Ukraine, align themselves with this statement.

The initial implementation of the reform agenda
has provided the first steps of structural adjustments
to the economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but much
remains to be done. Delays in the signature of the
Transport Community Treaty — belatedly signed last
September — and continuing uncertainty around the
adoption of excise legislation, to name only two issues,
have undermined the possibility for the country to
receive further international financial assistance.

We thank the Security Council for unanimously
adopting resolution 2384 (2017), renewing the mandate
of the European Union-led peacekeeping force Althea
in Bosnia and Herzegovina for one year. I join other
speakers in welcoming High Representative Valentin
Inzko back to the Council and in assuring him of the
European Union’s continued support. I also welcome the
Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and thank him for his statement and his kind words
about European Union support.

Still a year away from the general elections, the
European Union continues to urge the authorities
to step up the implementation of comprehensive
reforms in an inclusive manner, to the benefit of all
citizens. Additionally, the European Union calls on
the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina to step up
efforts regarding the functioning and the independence
of the judiciary, the fight against corruption and
organized crime, and the fight against terrorism and the
prevention of radicalisation.

The year 2016 was an important one for the EU
perspective of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Following the
submission of the membership application by Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the EU Council decided to ask the
Commission’s opinion regarding the membership
application. This decision followed the commitment and
readiness of Bosnia and Herzegovina to take difficult
political decisions in order to deliver on the country’s
EU integration path, including by ensuring further
meaningful progress in the implementation of the reform
agenda — an ambitious set of socioeconomic, rule of
law and public administration reforms. Together with
our international partners, including the international
financial institutions, we provided clear incentives to
move forward with the necessary reforms aimed at
progressively tackling the structural challenges that
hold back the country’s development. This year was
thus expected to be marked by a continuous momentum
in the reform process.

Political authorities ought in this respect to
refrain from undermining the judiciary of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and from commenting on sensitive
judicial proceedings, for electoral purposes. It is their
responsibility to create a dispassionate environment
in which the judiciary can adjudicate effectively and
independently. In turn, the highest judicial authorities
of the country have to uphold appropriate standards
of integrity and independence. The EU also reiterates
our calls on all levels of governance in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to ensure the effectiveness of the
coordination mechanism, including for the purpose of
ensuring harmonized and consolidated answers to the
Commission’s opinion questionnaire. In this respect,
Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to continue the work
done to answer the questionnaire.

The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.

However, a year later, the EU regrets that divisive
rhetoric rooted in the past and an early preoccupation
with upcoming elections have, for most of 2017, slowed
down the pace of reforms and affected the political
climate. The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
at all levels of governance, including in both of the
country’s entities, need to translate commitments into

As mentioned, the general elections are 12 months
away. While acknowledging that the Constitution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina lists Bosniaks, Croats and
Serbs as constituent peoples, along with others, the
European Union reiterates that the principles of equality
of all citizens and non-discrimination shall be fully
warranted. The European Union underlines that no
legislative or political steps should be taken that would
make the implementation of the Sejdic-Finci ruling and
related rulings more challenging.

17-3681419/24

S/PV.8089

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

In addition to the outstanding recommendations
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights (ODIHR) to further improve the electoral
framework, the European Union expects Bosnia and
Herzegovina to address, within the necessary deadlines,
the December 2016 ruling of the Constitutional Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina concerning specific electoral
provisions on the Federation House of Peoples. The
European Union considers that electoral reforms
should be approached in a spirit of consensus and
dialogue as an important matter, thereby also calling on
Bosnia and Herzegovina to implement OSCE-ODIHR
recommendations in order to move the country towards
European standards, improving democratic processes
for future elections.
The European Union reiterates its unequivocal
commitment to the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a single, united and sovereign country.
The European Union will continue to use all available
instruments to support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
stability and progress. While the overall security
situation has remained relatively calm and stable,
stability has not been fully entrenched. The European
Union welcomes the continued presence of EUFOR’s
Operation Althea, which retains the capability to
contribute to the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities’
deterrence capacity if the situation so requires. In this
regard, as part of the overall EU strategy for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the European Union confirms
its readiness to continue at this stage the executive
military role of Operation Althea to support Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s authorities in maintaining a safe
and secure environment, under a renewed United
Nations mandate.
The European Union has invited the High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
to present a strategic review before the end of the year,
as a basis for internal discussions within the EU on
options for the future of the Operation, also bearing
in mind Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress in its EU
integration process and taking into account the security
situation on the ground.
As the country’s stability continues to strengthen
and further progress is achieved in reforms and on
the EU path, the European Union looks forward to
continuing, in the appropriate forum, the discussion
with the international community on the possible
reconfiguration of the international presence. In this
20/24

07/11/2017

regard, the European Union calls on the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to pursue the reform agenda
and to increase its efforts to meet the outstanding
objectives and the conditions for the future closure of
the Office of the High Representative.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is aiming to advance on its
Euro-Atlantic integration, and, hopefully, all obstacles
will soon be removed in this regard, which would be an
important development for the stability and security of
the entire region.
In conclusion, over the two decades during which the
Council has been discussing the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we have witnessed substantial progress in
the country in all fields: stability, democracy, security,
economic development and EU integration. However,
the significant emigration that continues to affect the
country and undermine its future is a reminder that
citizens demand more changes to improve their daily
lives. While it is important to concentrate on the future,
we urge the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina also
to actively promote reconciliation.
The EU integration process offers an avenue for
tackling the deep-rooted structural challenges affecting
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but it is for its political
leadership to engage with this process and to deliver on
the necessary reforms.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia aligns itself
with the statement that has just been delivered by the
observer of the European Union (EU). I shall make
some additional remarks in my national capacity.
Let me start by welcoming the High Representative,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, and thanking him for his report and
briefing today.
It has been said often during our debates on this
important topic but has to be emphasized once again
that as a signatory to the Dayton Peace Agreement,
Croatia bears a special responsibility for the stability
and well-being of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and it
reiterates its unequivocal commitment to the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign and
united country. Its integration into the European Union
and NATO remains our strategic goal.
The Prime Minister of Croatia has visited Bosnia
and Herzegovina seven times in the past 12 months.
17-36814

07/11/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

In addition, we held a joint session of the Government
of Croatia and the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina at the beginning of July. This speaks
volumes as to how high Bosnia and Herzegovina is on
the list of Croatia’s priorities.
For Croatia, neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina
is much more than a trading partner and the 1,000
kilometres of land border that we share. A stable,
peaceful and united Bosnia and Herzegovina, based on
the genuine institutional equality of its three constituent
peoples and all citizens, is a generator of stability in
South-East Europe and beyond.
Croatia will continue to support Bosnia and
Herzegovina in its EU membership ambition and to
extend its full political support and technical assistance
and expertise. Advancement in this process is of the
highest importance and is not only the best investment
in the country’s future but also a way to help overcome
the difficult burdens of the past.
In this regard, Croatia would like to echo the
European Parliament’s resolutions on the progress of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2015 and 2016, which state
out that the country will not be a successful candidate
for EU membership until the appropriate institutional
conditions have been established, on the basis of
the principles of federalism, decentralization and
legitimate representation.
The entry into force of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement on 1 June 2015 was a groundbreaking step in the country’s process of European
integration, providing Bosnia and Herzegovina with a
contractual relationship with the EU. Two years later,
in spite of the initial implementation of the reform
agenda, much remains to be done. At this juncture,
providing comprehensive, high-quality answers to all
questions contained in the European Commission’s
opinion questionnaire, essential for presenting Bosnia
and Herzegovina with EU candidate country status,
seems to be the most important next step.
What Bosnia and Herzegovina needs today is far
less inflammatory rhetoric and many more reforms
aimed at the strengthening of institutions in general
and of the judiciary in particular, fewer divisions and a
more consolidated approach to present challenges: less
past and more future.
Reform of the election law remains essential,
especially against the background of the upcoming

S/PV. 8089

parliamentary elections, in 2018. The improvement of
the electoral framework should be approached with a
sense of urgency, as requested by the decision of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
Ljubić case and its decision on the city of Mostar. It
should enable the full implementation of the principle of
the equality of the three constituent peoples — Bosniaks,
Croats and Serbs — and their right to legitimate
representation. That is the basic precondition for faster
progress towards a fully functional country that is
focused on its future rather than its past.
Croatia is concerned that the ruling coalition may no
longer be able to push any legislation, such as the vital
amendments to the election law, through the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliament. That is why we should not shy
away from encouraging all political options in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to make serious efforts to address this
extremely important issue.
Some in Bosnia and Herzegovina expect that
the Central Election Commission of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will solve the problem. However, the
Commission is solely administrative in its scope and
nature, and finding solutions to political questions is too
great a burden for a body with no adequate legitimacy
for that particular purpose. Some are also hoping that
the international community might impose a solution,
as it has done in the past, but that is not the right
way forward. Instead, we are interested in seeing the
political ability and administrative capacity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina institutions to deal with challenges
and come up with appropriate and effective solutions.
While fully cherishing the principle of the
independence of the judiciary, we cannot remain silent
regarding some of the recent conclusions of the High
Judicial and Prosecutorial Council of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. To allow for the possibility of dismissing
judges or prosecutors without any prior independent
investigation or disciplinary procedure would be
tantamount to trampling on the basic principle of the
independence and impartiality of judiciary.
The secessionist statements and divisive actions
on the part of Republika Srpska politicians are not
only endangering the very stability and integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but are also derailing the
country off the track towards much-needed reforms.
In addition, they are moving Bosnia and Herzegovina
farther away from its NATO Partnership for Peace
path, to which Republika Srpska representatives

17-3681421/24

S/PV.8089

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

committed themselves in 2005, through the Republika
Srpska National Assembly conclusions, and to which
Bosnia and Herzegovina committed itself in October
2009 by formally requesting activation of the NATO
membership action plan.
On the other hand, it is utterly wrong to try to
compare the secessionist rhetoric and actions of
Republika Srpska leaders and institutions with the
Croats’ efforts to obtain genuine equality with the
two other constituent peoples. The Croats of Bosnia
and Herzegovina have so far demonstrated the highest
level of support for their country and its Euro-Atlantic
ambitions. This fact is often overlooked and certainly
not valued enough by those whose duty it is to objectively
analyse the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Before concluding, I would like to make a brief
comment regarding the High Representative’s report,
in particular the part titled “Glorification of war
criminals”. Considering all the words and deeds of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s politicians in the past six
months, it is surprising, to say the least, that the High
Representative chose a particular situation in Mostar as
the most significant, and the only one, to be reported
under the aforesaid title.
We note with satisfaction the gradual improvement
of the economic situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia’s main trade partner. Last year, the total
commodity exchange between Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina amounted to €1.8 billion. One-fifth of
Croatia’s overall foreign direct investments is flowing
to our neighbour and has already surpassed €1 billion,
making Croatia one of the top three investors in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Although the economy of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is still falling short of the expectations of
its citizens, the positive trends must be followed and
expanded. For its part, Croatia will continue with its
assistance in this domain as well.

07/11/2017

integration. Croatia advocates, and will continue to
advocate, for a strong and permanent focus on Bosnia
and Herzegovina at the European and international
level. It can never be emphasized enough — Bosnia and
Herzegovina deserves our full and constant attention,
and we should spare no effort to untap its vast, yet
underused, potential.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): Before I begin, I would
like to thank the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his report
(S/2017/922, annex).
Regional stability and the development of all-round
cooperation with its neighbours have always been
among Serbia’s foreign policy priorities. A staunch
advocate of cooperation with all the countries of the
Western Balkans, my country has been very active in
promoting these priorities and made every effort to
realize concrete projects and lay lasting foundations
for a better future of the region. Clearly reflecting its
will, Serbia has recognized Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a natural, key partner in these endeavours.
We in the region are aware that enlargement may not
be among the priorities of the European Union (EU) in
the period of consolidation and multiple challenges. We
are heartened, however, by the recent message that the
continuation of the policy of enlargement to the Western
Balkans is a stable process and that EU membership of
its countries may take place even before 2025. Serbia
will make its own contribution to this process, carry
out reforms and promote mutual cooperation. After all,
the process is not only in the interest of Serbia, but of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, too, and of the entire region.

Croatia continues to support the executive mandate
of the European Union-led peacekeeping force Althea.
Its presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina is equally
important for the maintenance of a safe and secure
environment, as it is vital for capacity-building and
training. However, this mission was not meant to
last forever.

Conversely, each and every success of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is grist for Serbia’s mill and gives us cause
to believe that we are a step closer to a common future
in the European family of nations. A candidate member,
Serbia has made considerable progress in the accession
process and we expect new chapters to be opened soon.
In that context, we are ready to make our experience
available to Bosnia and Herzegovina to help it promote
its own negotiation process.

In conclusion, we sincerely hope that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will find the strength and prudence to
overcome the present political impasse and proceed
more efficiently on the path of EU and NATO

Almost 22 years ago to the day, a peace agreement
was signed in Dayton, Ohio, ending the tragic conflict
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. A guarantor of the Dayton
Agreement, Serbia believes that the Agreement

22/24

17-36814

07/11/2017

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

continues to provide a basis for peace and stability and
that it is of crucial importance for reconciliation. That
reconciliation is sometimes hard to come by is evinced
by the persistence of different undertones in the
region. We must not turn a deaf ear to such discordant
messages, which add tension, return us unnecessarily
to the past and burden relations between Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s entities and its constituent peoples. They
have a negative ripple effect on the entire region too. Its
countries’ Governments must be vigilant and make sure
that conditions are created for genuine reconciliation.
Only in this way shall we be able to ensure progress
that will benefit us all.
There is another reason that makes us very
motivated to promote cooperation, strengthen relations
and build mutual trust with Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as with its entities. Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Republika Srpska are home to a large number of Serbs,
and we believe that we can help them improve their
lives and succeed in their efforts to join the European
Union and thereby enjoy the fruits of common EU
membership in the near future.
The sovereignty and territorial integrity of States
are international standards and consistent respect
for them is of paramount importance in international
relations. The past that we experienced in the Western
Balkans is and should be a constant reminder of their
importance for peace, stability and mutual trust and
confidence. My country is firmly committed to the
preservation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in accordance with the
provisions of the Dayton Agreement.
Today, I shall reiterate what I have already said in
my previous statements on this occasion — dialogue
and agreement are the safest and best ways to address
all outstanding issues between the entities and among
the constituent peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This approach has proved its practical validity time and
again. If solutions are to be forward-looking and resultsoriented, they need to be acceptable and implementable
and promote the process of confidence-building in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The questions in respect
of which the entities have different views, such as
the judiciary or the Election Law, for instance, are,
in our opinion, internal questions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. They call for active dialogue within the
country, which is the only way to achieve universally
acceptable solutions. Otherwise, the floodgates will
be open to unilateral acts, misunderstandings and

S/PV. 8089

negative messages, to the detriment of the entities
and all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. All sides
should therefore work on building mutual trust and
strengthening transparency and, as the first major
political undertaking ahead, ensure a smooth holding
of the elections next year. After all, transparency and
responsibility are the all important building blocks of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s common institutions.
High-level dialogue and regular meetings are
instrumental in developing all-round bilateral relations
and closer cooperation between Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina. President of Serbia Mr. Aleksandar
Vučić made his first official visit to Sarajevo in early
September. Open and constructive, his meetings and
other engagements during this visit reflected the need
for the two countries to create a new model of relations
and to invest additional efforts in promoting economic
cooperation and realizing infrastructure projects.
Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Mr. Dragan Cović visited Belgrade recently. In his
meetings with President Vučić, it was again assessed
that the relations between Serbia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina are of key importance to the preservation
of regional peace and stability and for ensuring a better
life for all citizens.
The intensification of the dialogue between the
two countries is evinced by the preparation of the visit
of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Presidency to Belgrade
scheduled for December, and the invitation of Ana
Brnabić, Prime Minister of Serbia, extended to Denis
Zvizdić, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to a joint meeting of the Government
of Serbia and the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to be held towards the end of 2017.
The promotion of economic cooperation with
Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the utmost importance
to Serbia and an almost a daily assignment of its
Government. Trade exchange between the two
countries is in ascendance, and with an investment
of over €900 million, Serbia is among the largest
investors in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The development
of cooperation in the fields of infrastructure, energy,
tourism and trade dominates the agendas of the
meetings between Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
officials. Projects that link us to Serbia’s to-do list and
the participation of third countries in such projects
are welcome, especially in the construction of the
Belgrade-Sarajevo motorway.

17-3681423/24

S/PV.8089

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

At a time of great challenges facing the world
and significant changes taking place in Europe, we
must work harder to improve bilateral relations in
our region. Drawing upon the traditional bonds of
friendship between the people of Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the two countries should make their
relations a role model for good-neighbourliness — all

24/24

07/11/2017

the more so as we continue to be committed to regional
development, mutual rapprochement and an everquicker march towards the European Union. Open
questions from the past should be addressed through
dialogue as we proceed to realize our present
interests simultaneously.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

17-36814
