UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIALRECORDS
THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

ls83rd

MEETING:

iJib! L);BP&[<y
29 JANUARY

1976

JU N 2 9 1984

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/1883)

Adoptionofthe

. .. ... .. .. .. ... ... .. .. .. .. ... ... .. .. .

agenda .,..............................................

1
1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 16 December 1975 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/11918). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .

1

S/PV. 1883

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined’with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security ‘Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of.the.document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1883rd MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 29 January 1976, at 11 a.m.
Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Botha (South Africa)
and Mr. Petri? (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber; Mr. Kamana (President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia)
and the members of the delegation took
places at the Security Council table.

President: Mr. Salim A. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania).
Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan,
Libyan Am% Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
Unit&d Republic of Tanzania and United States of
America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative
of Bangladesh requesting that he
be invited, in accordance with rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, to participate in the discussion of the question now before the Council. Accordingly, if there is no objection, I propose, in conformity
with the usual practice and with the consent of the
Council, to invite the representative I have just mentioned to participate
in the discussion without the
right to vote.

agenda (S/Agenda/lS83)

of the agenda

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 16 December 1975 from the Secretary-(;eneral
addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/11918)
The meeting

It was so decided.

was called to order at 11.20 a.m.
Adoption

3. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the representative of
Bangladesh to take the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Cotincil chamber, on the usual understanding that he will be invited to take a place at the
Council table when he addresses the Council.

of the Agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 16 December 1975 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/11918)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Karim (Bangladesh) took the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on the agenda.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken previously
[1880th-1882nd
meetings]
I invite the. representatives of Algeria, Cuba; .Egypt;
Guinea, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Jordan, Liberia,
Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Nigeria, Poland, Saudi
Arabia, South Africa and Yugoslavia
to ‘take the
places reserved for them al the side of the Council
chamber, on the usual ‘understanding
that they will
be invited to take a place at the Council table when
they address the Council. I also invite the President
and members of the delegation of the United Nations
Council .for Namibia
to take places at the Council
table.

5. . Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(interpretation
@om&Russian):
The delegation of the
Soviet’Union,
at the thirtieth session of the General
Assembly, fully supported the proposal of the African States that the Security Council urgently consider
the matter of Namibia in order to take effective measures to end the illegal occupation of Namibia by the
racist rkgime of South Africa. We did this, first of all,
in accordance with the principle of solidarity with
Africa which, in itself, is totally natural. Solidarity
with the peoples and States of Aftica in support of
their just struggle for the elimination
of the last vestiges of colonialist,
racist rkgimes from the African
continent ,and for the affirmation of the genuine freedom and independance of African peoples is the principled foreign policy course of the Soviet Union.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rahal (Algeria), Mr. Alar&n (Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt),
Mr. Camara (Guinea), Mr. Jaipal (India), Mr. Marpaung (Indonesia),
Mr. Hall (Jamaica), Mr. ‘Sharaf
(Jordan), Mr. Minikon
(Liberia), Mr. Cisse’ (Mali),
Mr. El Hassen ‘(Mauritania),
Mr. Ramphul (Mauritius), Mr. Harrimari(Nigeria),
Mr. Jaroszek (Poland),

6. We have done this, secondly, because the question of Namibia has in recent times become
signifi,
1

cantly more complicated
and the situation there has
deteriorated. The question of ending the illegal domination by force of the racists of South Africa over the
people of Namibia is becoming, as experience has
shown, one of the most serious questions of immediate concern in current international
life the just
solution of which concerns not only the peoples and
the countries of Africa and all the progressive, anticolonialist forces, but all honest people on earth.

fully supports the legitimate demands of the African
States which, more than anyone else, are acquainted
with the real situation prevailing in southern Africa
and fell more acutely than others the danger flowing
[
from this racist regime.
11. It is totally obvious that the major goal of the
South African regime is to postpone its withdrawal
indefinitely,
to slow down the initial development of
the national liberation movement throughout southem Africa and especially in Namibia, and to preserve
in that area a citadel of neocolonialism
and racism
against the peoples of Africa. Working as a strike
force for imperialism
in southern Africa, the racist
regime of Pretoria is pursuing its own goals as well.
As was pointed out on 22 January this year in the statement of the Special Committee against Apartheid,
South Africa’s goal is not only to strengthen its racist
policies but also to extend its harmful policy of apartheid, exploitation and oppression to the entire southem portion of Africa.

7. While the process of detente is gaining strength
and taking on broader scope and when the world liberation movements
have achieved new, outstanding
successes and victories under its favourable influence
-as is acknowledged by those who earlier frightened
African peoples with talk that detente would be an
obstacle to the success of the national liberation
movement-the
problem of Namibia,
like the question of the liberation of the peoples under the domination of the racists in South Africa, cannot cease to
concern the peoples of the world as a whole. The
south of Africa has been turned into the last bulwark
of racism. and apartheid and into a preserve where
human rights are violated and where mass crimes are
committed against mankind, into a hotbed of military
danger for all States in Africa and into a direct source
of threats to world peace and security.

9. Continuing
to ‘plunder
the natural wealth of.
Namibia and mercilessly to exploit its people, the
South African racists have turned it into their own
strategic spring-board for the organization of acts of
aggression and interventionist
provocation
against
neighbouring
African .countries. By disregarding the
many decisions of the Security Council and of the
General Assembly, the racist regime of South Africa
is defying the United Nations, thus proving the unlimited adventurism of the Vorster regime, which still
claims full rights as a Member of the United Nations.

12. As is well known, at its thirtieth session the
General Assembly in its resolution 3399 (XXX) on the‘
question of Namibia strongly condemned that racist
regime’s policy and urged the Security Council to take
up again that question and to take measures for the
implementation
of Security Council resolution 366
(1974) of 17 December 1974. The Security Council
considered the problem of Namibia a little more than
half a_year ago [see 1823rd-1829th meetings]. Unfortunately at that time it was not able to take any decision, because of the obstruction made by three permanent members of the Security Council, who cast.
a triple veto in the voting on the draft resolution submitted by African countries. At that time one member
tried to explain its obstructionist
position with regard
to the decisions of the Council by saying that the situation in Namibia was not a threat to world peace and
security. Can anyone among the friends and kindred
spirits of the racist regime of Africa venture to say
that in that country and around it peace and calm reign
and that the policy of the racist regime of South Africa
represents a poszve development in t&e directTon of*
detente and the establishment
of relations of good
neighbourliness and co-operation with African States?
The answer to that question cannot be equivocal. At
the present time no one, not even the friends of South
Africa and those who think along th_esame lines, can
hide the md%putable fact of the political adventurism
of the South African racists, which has caused a flagrant violation of the United Nations decisions and a
continuation
of the illegitimate
and tyrannical occupation of Namibia.

10. In the light of the foregoing, the African ‘countries were.right when at the twenty-ninth
session of
the General Assembly and at meetings of the Security
Council in- 1974 they proposed to exclude this criminal
regime from the United Nations. The Soviet delegation, as is well known, held and continues to hold a
principled
position with regard to this question. It

13. Moreover, the whole world now knows of the
invasion of South African troops into a neighbouring
African country-Angola.
Efforts are also being made
to put forward the thesis of the so-called defence of
the Western world to act as a smoke-screen and a
justification
for the racist policy of South Africa. In
actual fact, the racists of southern Africa are working

8. The racist regime of Pretoria illegally occupying
Namibia has been flagrantly violating the legitimate
rights of the Namibian
people and stubbornly disregarding United Nations resolutions, including those
of the Security Council, which demand that the Government of South African immediately
put an end to
the illegal occupation of Namibia, withdraw from that
country all its military forces and police, pull out its
admi&tration
and to transfer power to the leg3ymate
representatives of the Namibian people. In answer to
the repeated decisions and urgent appeals of the Security Council, we have received only the cynical replies
of the racists to the effect that they apparently do not
intend to leave the country.

2

rything it needs, firstand foremost weapons, in order
to suppress the national liberation
movements
in
Africa, especially in its southern part, including Namibia and now Angola. Transnational
monopolies
regard the racist rbgime in South Africa as their major
bulwark and as their watchdog in preserving their
investments in South Africa and in Namibia. Through
these corporations great numbers of arms of the most
sophisticated type are being delivered to South Africa,
in violation of the decisions of the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) which
forbid arms deliveries to South Africa and in defiance
of the protests of the African States. These deliveries
have increased, especially in recent times, in connexion with the pursuit by the Pretoria atithorities of
an unprecedented
arms race which brought about a
sharp increase in military
expenditures
in South
Africa. The arms and military supplies entering South
Africa are being used widely by the racist rkgime to
suppress the national liberation
movement
in Namibia and to turn the Territory itself into a base to
threaten and directly attack neighbouring
African
countries. This is a flagrant violation of international
law and. fully confirms the justice of the repeated
warnings of African States that the racist rkgime of
South Africa is a serious threat to peace and security
on the African continent.

as henchmen and agents of the imperialist
transnational corporations.
Those monopolies are interested
in the continuation
of the rapacious exploitation
of
the national resources and the cheap slave labour of
African workers in Namibia,
which secures superprofits for them. The scope of these profits can be
determined according to the data recently published
on 11 January in The New York Times. For the decade from 1960 to 1970, according to the calculations
of that newspaper, the annual profits on the investments of corporate capital in southern Africa were not
less than 20 per cent. In such an important sector of
the economy as mining they were even higher.
14. The report of the United Nations Council for
Namibia submitted to the General Assembly at its
thirtieth
session’ adduces even more recent facts
concerning the rapacious role of the transnational
corporations
in long-suffering
Namibia.
In paragraph 117 of this report, it is stated that by the beg&
ning of 1975 about 50 per cent of the entire gross
national product of Namibia was extracted by foreignowned companies in the form of profits because of
their fast-growing investments in that country.
15. There are other. reasons that explain why the
racists of South Africa have become friends and
kindred spirits of the developed capitalist countries
and reigning monopolistic
capital.
One of these
reasons is the pathological anti-communism
and antisoviet feeling of these racists. Just as the fanatic
racist Hitler once was kind to and became a friend of
reactionaries of all stripes, with his pathological anticommunism
and anti-Sovietism,
so the South Africans here have become the kind friends of all antiSoviet circles. This has been well known for a very
long time. However, very recently as important an
expert in capitalist economic problems as the Assistant Editor of the London magazine The Economist,
Mr. John Greenmount,
also spoke of it. He wrote in
an article in The New York Times in January 1976
that “gold, diamonds and profit-making
investments,
together with colonial relationships
and links and
also flagrant anti-communism
in the strategic situation between the Atlantic and Indian Ocean, have
turned South.Africa
into too important a country for
the West.” From this cynical and very sincere quotations from such an authoritative
source we can see
that the pro-imperialist
forces of the West appreciate
South Africa not only for its gold and diamonds but
also for its strategic situation and because of its malicious, pathological
anti-communism
and its antiSovietism as well.

17. In these, the true international
conditions
of
today, the international
community
and all progressive forces of the world cannot but respond to the
appeal of the United Nations, OAU and all African
States by giving the necessary assistance and support
to the Namibian
people in its just and legitimate
struggle for national freedom and independence.
18. At the Dakar International
Conference on Namlbla and Human Rights, which took place in January
of this year in the capital of Senegal, the representative of the South West Africa People’s Organization
(SWAPO),
the national liberation
organization
of
South West Africa, Mr. Sam Nujoma, rightly noted
in a statement that the Namibian
patriots in their
struggle relied not only on the determination
of the
people of Namibia to defend its freedom and independence, but on the broad support and solidarity of
all the democratic and progressive forces of the world.
That solidarity and support is totally justified and legitimate in contemporary
international
life. It has been
recognized in practice and legitimized by many decisions of the United Nations on the question of Namibia.
19. The efforts of the friends and sympathizers of
the South African rigime to present the view that
support for the just arid legitimate
struggle of the
people of Namibia goes beyond the framework of the
easing of international
tensions are devoid of any
foundation.
On the contrary, the easing of international tensions, or, as it has come to be called, dktente,
‘does not mean freedom of action for aggressors and
oppressors. It does not mean the preservation by the

16. A new affirmation of this anti-communism
and
anti-Sovietism
on the part of the racists of South
Africa is the anti-Soviet statement made in the Security Council on the question under discussion by the
reprksentative of racist South Africa. The explanation
of it lies in the efforts of the transnational iinperialist
monopolies and individuals who are trying to preserve
and to perpetuate this regime and to secure for it eve3

colonialists and racists of the opportunity to continue
and justify their colonial oppression and their rapacious actions in plundering
the national wealth of
peoples and suppressing liberation movements which
have not yet freed their peoples from colonialism.
References made to the effect that the aid given to
colonial peoples in their struggle to achieve national
freedom and independence
can supposedly harm
detente are an effort to conceal and maintain colonialist domination
or to help the colonialists
to retrieve their lost positions by force. The acts of aggression and force by the colonialists,
imperialists
and
imperialist
elements are designed to bring about a
breakdown in the lessening of international
tensions.
They increase tension and are a direct threat to peace
in all areas and particularly
in the southern part of
Africa.

bastion of colonial-racist
tyranny and the violation of
elemental
human rights and freedoms is fully in
keeping with the goals of international
detente .and
with the task of extending detente to all continents of
the world, including the continent of Africa.
24. The delegation of the Soviet Union appeals to
the representatives of those countries, which at the
close of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly from its lofty rostrum called for respect for human
rights, to turn their gaze towards the regime of colonialist-racist tyranny in the southern part of Africa,
and particularly in Namibia, to support the people of
Namibia in its struggle for liberation from that tyranny
and to ensure for that people the opportunity
freely
to enjoy the fundamental human rights and to achieve
freedom and independence.
25. The delegation of the Soviet Union has carefully
studied the working paper on the question under discussion prepared by the group of representatives of
African countries, and offtcially states that it supports
all the provisions which it includes.

20. The many and well-considered
statements on
the question under discussion made in the Security
Council by the representatives of SWAPO, OAU and
African States show convincingly
that the colonial
and racist order in the southern part of Africa, and in
particular in Namibia, is a direct threat to peace and
security on the African continent. This was justly and
convincingly stressed also by many leaders of African
countries at the recently convened twelfth ordinary
session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of OAV. The Security Council, as the principal organ of the United Nations responsible for
maintaining
and strengthening
peace and security
and preventing threats of aggression, has the right
and the duty to take urgent and effective measures
against the main culprit in the tensions and threats to
peace prevailing in the southern part of Africa. The
Council must take measures for the immediate end to
the aggressive adventurist
activities
of the racist
regime in southern Africa, in order to strengthen and
perpetuate peace and security in that area on the basis
of respect for the inalienable right of the people of
’
Namibia to freedom and independence.

26.

Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interp&alion
French):
When the Security Council met six
months ago to consider the question of Namibia once
again there was a new element in the tile. After the
dbmarche carried out at Pretoria in the month of April
1975 by the United States, the United Kingdom and
France, the South African Government made its attitude known. Its statement
included
some rare
positive elements in so far as the South African Government accepted the position of OAU regarding seifdetermination,
independence and territorial integrity
for Namibia and was also prepared to establish contact with the representatives of the Secretary-General
and of OAU.

from

27. But above all it appeared that, despite certain
clarifications,
the response of South Africa was ambiguous in many respects, particularly
with regard to
the unity of the Territory. We especially deplored the
fact that Pretoria rejected any idea of United Nations
supervision during the process of self-determination
for Namibia,
a rejection which was an ill omen for
the fruitfulness of contacts with the South African
authorities
in the extremely
restrictive
conditions
which they set. What has happened since the month
of June last ?

21. The Soviet Union fully supports the decisions
of the Dar es Salaam extraordinary
session of the
Council of Ministers of OAU regarding the immediate liberation of all of southern Africa from racist
tyranny, including an earliest possible end to the illegitimate occupation of Namibia by South African racists.
22. The Soviet Union also actively supported and
continues to support the appeal made by the General
Assembly at its thirtieth session and by all the States
of the African continent to the Security Council to
undertake decisive and effective measures with regard
to the racist regime in South Africa, up to and including the imposition of mandatory sanctions against
that.regime as provided for in the Charter of the United
Nations.

28. On 23 October the South African Government
was again jointly approached by France, the United
States and the United Kingdom,
which once again
emphasized the importance they attached to a speedy
settlement of the Namibian
question. The Government of France, as we stated in the course of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly, considers that
.this settlement should be based on the following fundamental principles:

23. The delegation of the Soviet Union is convinced
that the further struggle of the United Nations and of
the entire international
community
against the last

-First,
within a short time, all Namibians
be able to express their views on the political
4

should
future

and constitutional
structure of the Territory and this
freely and under United Nations supervision.
It is
with that aim that free general elections should be
organized .

represent progress in comparison with the IO-year
period that was envisaged not long ago as being
needed for Namibia to be able to exercise its right to
self-determination.

-Secondly,
provision
should be made for the
transfer of powers and for withdrawal by South Africa
without delay and in accord with the democratic
choice of the population.

32. Those few encouraging elements cannot, however, make us forget the largely negative balance of
the other aspects of the conference, and my delegation can do no better on the subject than to endorse
the conclusions of the nine countries of the European
Community.
The nine members of the Community
consider that, since representation in the conference
was limited to ethnic groups and the political forces
were not all able to participate, that conference does
not appear to guarantee the fully democratic character of the process of self-determination.
Furthermore, the conference still does not appear to provide
for the constitutional
future of Namibia to be determined by the Namibian people through a single referendum organized on a Territory-wide
basis.

-Thirdly,
all political groups in Namibia without
eception-that
is to say, including SWAPO_should
be authorized to campaign so as to be able to express
their opinions and participate
in political activities
during the. process of self-determination.
-Fourthly,
the territory of Namibia should not be
divided in the application of a policy contrary to the
wishes of the population.
The Namibians
must be
able to exercise their right to self-determination
and
independence within the framework of a single State.

33. That means that, on the whole, the Windhoek
meetings do not respond to the concerns expressed
by France on several occasions to the Government
of South Africa within a framework of bilateral and
multilateral
contacts. I am bound to add that the statements made here by the representative
of South
Africa have unfortunately
not dispelled all the outstanding ambiguities.

We consider that the Government
of South Africa
should pronounce itself clearly on all these matters.
These desiderata seem to us in fact to meet the essential concerns expressed in Security Council resolution 366 (1974).
29. As the representative
of the United Kingdom
indicated in his statement [see 188fst meeting], the
nine countries of the European Community
in their
turn felt that they should make known to the Govemment of South Africa their positions on the problem
of Namibia; a de’marche to this effect was carried out
at Pretoria. The main outline is stated in the letter of
26 January to the Secretary-General
from the representative of the Netherlands, on behalf of the Acting
President of the European Community [S/11945].

34. It follows from most of the statements we have
heard so far that the balance-sheet is not encouraging.
We do not challenge that. But it does appear to us
that since South Africa has taken certain initiatives
-even t_hough they do not appear to us to be satisfactory-it
behoves the international
community
to
maintain its pressure in an effort to guide the actions
of the Government of Pretoria. However, as we see it,
pressure should be exercised realistically,
taking into
account what is possible without of course sacrificing
the fundamental
options of the United
Nations,
which the delegation of France endorses.

30. I should, however, like to comment on the criticism of the nine members of the European Community addressed to the constitutional
conference held
at Windhoek. The delegation of France is fully aware
of the condemnations
of the conference expressed by
both the United Nations Council for Namibia and the
General Assembly.
However,
some consideration
seems to be called for on the subject.

35. It is on those*conditions
and with the intention
of supporting and energetically confirming at the level
of this responsible institution,
the Security Council,
the numerous efforts which France has undertaken
for years in other forums that my delegation favourably welcomes draft resolution S/l1950 prepared by
non-aligned countries ‘and others. The concern that
we all share-that
a free and independent Namibia
should come into being as early as possible-should
be
stated in a text which is clear and contains the necessary emphasis.

31. First of all, the very fact that it was held indicates that South Africa-whatever
the reasons that
inspired it-has become aware of the need to abandon
the rigidity which has characterized its policy in respect of Namibia in the course of the last 25 years.’
Further, in the major provisions -of the declaration
which was published at Windhoek on 12 September,
we note the intention of ending racial discrimination
and of guaranteeing the fundamental freedoms enunciated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
We further note that a constitution
for South West
Africa-a
single one-will
be drafted if possible within
a period not to exceed three years. Although that is
still too long, nevertheless that timetable
seems to

36. To conclude with some brief remarks on the
more obviously shared ideas, I should say first of all
that the requirements
for free elections in Namibia
with the participation of all parties, including SWAPO,
meets with the approval of my delegation all the more
since we ourselves proposed it in June last.
5

37. However, there can be no doubt that these elections should be held under United Nations supervision
and with the necessary control by the United Nations.
When the time comes, it will be up to the Security
Council, taking into account the attitude of the Pretoria authorities, to determine how that United Na.tions intervention
should be translated in practice.
The objective participation
of the Organization in the
holding of free elections throughout
the Territory
should ensure that these elections conform to the
normal requirements
of truly democratic balloting.
Furthermore,
it goes without saying that all efforts
should be made to bring the South African authorities
to accept the principle of supervision by the intemational community thereby guaranteeing that the Namibians will in fact be able to exercise all their rights.

42. Mr. PAQUI (Benin) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, my delegation has every reason to
welcome seeing the Security Council once again
dealing with the question of Namibia under your presidency. As we are well acquainted with your devotion to the cause of decolonization,
your skill and your
talents as a diplomat enhanced by your faith in the
future of Africa, your sense of justice and equality,
we are convinced that you will do everything possible
so that this time the legitimate
aspirations of the
Namibian people as a whole, one and indivisible, will
be safeguarded as well as possible.
43. It is with a heavy heart that my delegation is
speaking once again on this question, on which everything has been said and resaid. In my delegation’s
opinion, the question before the Council is not to
determine whether or not South Africa still has the
right to remain in Namibia. It is even less to decide
whether or not its continued and persistent presence
in this international
Territory is legal or not. It is a
question of whether the Council is able to take such
measures as will result in the speediest possible withdrawal from Namibia of this abject apartheid regime
so shamefully championed
by a handful of white
racists installed at Pretoria, so that. this Territory’s
population
may freely exercise its right to selfdetermination
and independence. The question which
arises is whether those who have always been ready
to support the madmen of Pretoria-of
whom we saw
a sad specimen only two days ago-will
be able to
draw lessons from the past, from the insolence and
arrogance of the South Africa racists, and give the
Council a free rein to take decisive action, with the
interests of the Namibian people first and foremost in
mind rather than certain private selfish interests.

38. I have stated the views of my delegation. I said
that we were neither happy about nor encouraged by
the wholly insufficient developments
that have occurred inthe situation in Namibia over so many years.
Mr. President, as the representative of the United
Republic .of Tanzania, you expressed here the day
before yesterday the “hope that... it is possible using
the instrumentality
of the Organization to try to find a
less violent solution to the Namibian problem” [1881st
meeting, para. 2541.
39. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of France,
Mr. Sauvagnargues,
did not express himself very
differently
when on 26 September last he stated
before the General Assembly that “South Africa
must respond to the appeal of the international
community; it must realize that little time remains for it to
satisfy by concrete action the legitimate aspirations
expressed both inside and outside that country’“.

44. Nothing at the present stage of our debate would
allow us to reply in the aflirmative,
especially when
one looks at the conclusions of the debate of May
and June 1975 on- this same question [1823rd-1824th
meetings] when three permanent members of the
Security Council rushed to the rescue of this regime
which nevertheless continues to taunt the Organization and especially the Security Council.

40. The PRESIDENT:
Before I call on the next
speaker, I should like to inform members of the
Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Kenya and Kuwait containing requests
that they be invited, in accordance with rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure, to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. I propose, if I
hear no objection,
to invite the representatives
of
Kenya and Kuwait to participate.in
the discussion, in
conformity with the usual practice and with the relevant provisions of the Charter and the provisional
rules of procedure.

45. It is not ironic to hear one of the mentally retarded members of Vorster’s band come here before the
Council and preach his faith in Africa and his desire
to save the black African from foreign domination,
while in fact he cares little about the fate of the
oppressed blacks of the Republic of South Africa and
while he grants himself the right to remain in Namibia
in spite of the many resolutions of the General Assembly and the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice’, subjects the Namibian people to the
most barbarous slavery ever seen in the twentieth
century and imprisons Namibian nationalists or subjects them to the most ignominious torture in history.
Is it not ironic to see these specimens of a bygone
century coming to tell us that, instead of the United
Nations putting South Africa in the dock, it is rather

It was so decided.
41. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the. representatives
of Kenya and Kuwait to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber on the usual
understanding that they will be invited to take a place
at the Council table when they address the Council.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Maina
(Kenya) and Mr. Bishara (Kuwait) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.”
6

veiled provocations,
Africa has no other choice but
to fight and if necessary to bring war to the very heart
of the South African republic.

the latter which deserves to be attacked by the
South African regime. According to what he says, the
regime he represents is in Namibia by the express will
of the Namibian people-and
what a people!-and
by
their desire to save it on the basis of concrete reality.
If this reality is so palpable, so genuine, why has
South Africa for so many years refused to allow a
United Nations fact-finding
mission into Namibia,
why has this abject regime closed the door to Namibia
to the United Nations Council for Namibia, which has
been legally appointed to administer
this Territory
until it achieves independence
and international
sovereignty?

49. We say this for those who do not wish to understand the danger the aggressive schemes of South
Africa pose for peace in Africa and perhaps also in the
world because of the interests which are at stake. We
say it so that those people will be careful and so that
they should face certain realitie’s. We say it so that
they might understand the incalculable consequences
involved in their wanton support, which they give
without a second thought to the Vorster regime if
only to receive such infinitesimal
concessions from
it or to justify their conduct which is being increasingly questioned’by
their community.
The statement
made by the representative
of France has given us
some encouragement,
and we should like to stress
this.

46. After the offhand attitude of the wraiths that
appeared before the Council two days ago, my delegation feels that those who supported them before
should no longer play the role of devil’s advocate,
because now Pretoria can be indicted on many
counts. My delegation ventures to express its belief
that Pretoria’s traditional
allies were acting in good
faith even if they were in error. However, after the
grotesque show and the insults levelled at Africa and
the international
community
by Botha, whose attitude before the Council only deserves Africa’s disdain, they will no longer have any excuse. They will
no longer have any excuse because the representative
of the South African racists has not hidden the intentions of his Government to confront the Organization
with a fait accompli. They will no longer have any
excuse because they know that, if South Africa has
armed to the teeth, it is not only to protect the route
around the Cape. They know that, if South Africa has
been armed to the teeth, it is not for reasons of simple
internal security, but because it has aggressive and
annexationist intentions and ambitions.

50.’ As was so rightly stated here by our .brother,
Moses Garoeb of SWAPO, Namibians
have never
requested that the South African regime come to their
aid. They want to be left to govern themselves, and
badly if it must be. In such circunstances we might
wonder: What is the South African regime concerned about? The Council must act now. The need for
and the urgency of action by it no longer need to be
demonstrated.
We must achieve, of course with the
co-operation of its traditional allies, the withdrawal of
South Africa from Namibia initially followed by the
organization of free elections, under the supervision
of the United Nations, in which the entire Namibian
population will participate. This means that political
detainees should be freed and that exiles should be
authorized
to return home in order to participate
freely in the electoral campaign.

47. My delegation has as proof-something
which
Botha has himself confirmed here-the
militarization
to the hilt of Namibia,
a Territory which does not
belong to South Africa and from which it does not
have any intention of withdrawing, in order to use it
as a bridgehead to accomplish its ignominious designs.
Everyone knows that yesterday it was Zambia and
certain other acts of provocation against independent
neighbouring
States. Today it is Angola, where the
South African rdgime had the gall to bring in troops
and dares to call for the establishment
of a democratic regime. They no longer stop at anything, for
why do the South African racists dare to interfere in
the young Angolan republic? They no longer have an
excuse because South Africa’s acts of aggression lead
all Africa to wonder whose turn will be next.

5 1. The Security Council must face up to its responsibilities;
even if a certain tendency towards
lethargy was shown in the beginning, since the statement made by Botha we need increased vigilance.
The future and credibility of the Council is at stake,
and consequently
the future and credibility
of the
United Nations because, rightly or wrongly, the
world is wondering if those who helped to create the
Organization want and are trying to have the Charter
respected. If this is so, how then can we not, short
of having to use force, find in the provisions of the
Charter the means of making a recalcitrant Member
listen to reason, especially when it refuses to recognize the authority
of. an organization
of which it
claims to be a member and whose resolutions it continues to trample underfoot. We do not have the right
to undertake a hypocritical
policy, which would be
to shed crocodile tears over the fate of political prisoners in the world while we show little or no fear for
the fate of blacks in South Africa and in Namibia who
have been murdered and who are confined to bantustans or to homelands.

48. We have said, and we cannot repeat it enough:
Africa is not racist. It would have desired a peaceful
solution to the problem of uparrh&f and to the presence of the South African regime in Namibia.
It
would have wished to live in peace and understanding
with this white minority, which unfortunately
is too
blinded today by its chimera to see clearly. But faced
with the exactions of South Africa and its thinly

52. Members of the Council who are determined to
bring unconditional
support to South Africa: How
7

long will you contrinue to remain deaf to the voice of
the overwhelming
majority of the blacks in South
Africa and in Namibia? How long will you put certain
veiled interests before that of the overwhelming
majority of Namibians?
On behalf of human dignity,
and of the safeguarding of human rights, give the
Council, finally, the possibility for effective, immediate and direct action in Namibia so that it may finally be able to rid itself forever of the ignominious
racist regime of apartheid
abhorred by the entire
international
community.

ledge of African politics-I
submit that the policy of
apartheid, underneath the cosmetics, is aimed at the
creation of a reservoir of human resources that provides cheap labour to be exploited for the comfort and
well-being of the white minority. Its motivation is the
creation of submissive
and docile human beings
whose ability to resist is crushed by fragmentation,
Hence we have the revival of mediaeval tribalism,
euphemistically
called by South Africa self-determination, based on nationalism.
One may ask what is
the relation between this inhumane philosophy and
the question of Namibia? I submit that because of this
philosophy of apartheid South Africa rejects the decision of the International
Court of Justice, defies the
authority
of the United Nations in Namibia
and
opposes the notion of the existence of one Namibian
people. On Tuesday afternoon [1881st meeting] the
representative of South Africa in his lament made it
clear that his Government acknowledges no presence
in Namibia apart from that of South Africa and he
contended that everything is milk and honey in Namibia. South Africa is feverishly inviting the apartheid
monster to descend upon the people of Namibia.
It
claims that there is nothing called a Namibian nation,
but only peoples, that there is nothing called the
unitary State of Namibia, but peoples fragmented on
the basis of primitive tribalism and economic interests.
South Africa’s policy, to come to the “nitty-gritty”,
is the creation of buffer zones that surround it and
will serve as an early warning station against any
possible threat from the north.

53. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Kuwait. Accordingly,
I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
54. Mr. BISHARA
(Kuwait): Mr. President, I would
like at the outset, to express the admiration
of my
delegation for the manner in which you handled the
debate on the.Middle
East and for your performance
at the present one. The question of Namibia is acutely
painful and underscores the fact that the United
Nations has become an arena in which general principles are reaffirmed but never implemented.
Member
States nowadays find comfort in reasserting principles
to please their consciences, but have never displayed
the will to implement
the principles in which they
profess to believe. As a result, faith in the Organization has remarkably receded.
55. The Security Council had unanimously adopted
its resolution 366 (1974) calling upon South Africa to
withdraw from Namibia,
but this resolution
was
relegated to the archives of the United Nations without any additional
effort to see it carried out. No
doubt the responsibility
rests on those upon whom
the Charter confers special obligations to fulfil the
will of the international
community.
South Africa is
an abnormal phenomenon in the world of politics at
the present time: It is so not only because of its political philosophy based on apartheid, but also because
of its attempt to isolate itself from the rest of the
world. It wishes to convert itself into an island
encircled by waters. .But being unable to remap the
geography of the world, it is concentrating
instead
on creating buffer zones. It is a cause of great regret
that Namibia should be the victim of this obnoxious
strategy. One should ask why South Africa is frantically working on buffer zones. The answer lies in the
fact that it wants to go ahead with the application of
an odious and obnoxious policy of apartheid, regardless of the wishes of the international
community
or
of the right of neighbouring
States to question this
policy of apartheid. It wants in its pursuit of the application of apartheid to be accountable to nobody, as if
it were plaintiff, judge and jury in its own court. We
all know that South Africa is not only the accused but
the one that has chosen to live outside the pale of
law.

57. The formidable enemy of South Africa is the
pan-Africanism
that exists in the fibre and blood ,of
every African State save Pretoria. This is so simply
because South Africa is not, as presently constituted,
an African State. It exists in Africa by virtue of settlement but certainly not as an African State. Namibia
is a buffer zone that prevents the advent of panAfricanism within the confines of South Africa. This
is the theory of Mr. Vorster and it is the progenitor
of apartheid.
Moreover,
Namibia
provides South
Africa with the required facilities to intercept the infiltration of freedom fighters who have been waging an
armed struggle for the cause of equality inside South
Africa. The adherents to the principle of equality, .
such as the supporters of the Pan Africanist Congress
of Azania and the African National Congress, are
being hunted inside Namibia.
References have been
made to South Africa’s plunder of the natural resources of Namibia. Such references are true but they do
not constitute the fundamental
reason behind South
Africa’s attachment
to Namibia.
That attachment
emanates from the desire to be encircled by sleepy,
weak and haggard territories that have no ability to
question or oppose what goes on in South Africa.
58. The representative
of South Africa was right,
I assume, when he mentioned in his lament the other
day that South Africa has no territorial
claims to
Namibia. But he did not say why apartheid is applied
therein, why the Territory is fragmented, why obso-

56. One may ask, further, what is the policy of apartheid? With all due respect-and
I have little know8

‘lete tribalism is revived, why Namibia as a whole
constitutes precious spoils that South Africa cannot
abandon unless forced to. The intention of South
Africa is to see the fragmented white Bantustans of
Namibia seek protection,from Pretoria, thus enabling
Mr. Vorster to extend his authority beyond the present lines. It is in fact the wind of hberation in reverse.
Instead of the emancip.ating of the people of Namibia,
we shall get fragmentation, .instead of the demolishing
of apartheid, we shall witness its extension.

be forgotten that it has so far failed in suppressing its
people. However, this debate is important. It is true
that all we do here is to breathe out and utter words.
But words are important as they display the intemational indignation at the system of apartheid and its
ramifications in Namibia. Experience has shown that
it is important to go on fighting with machine-gun in
hand and words in mouth. .For the world today is not
very different from the one in which our forebears
lived. It is right that the people of Namibia advocate
their case before the Security Council. They know
much better the fact that when it comes to the question of colonialism, the masters hardly read the writing on the wall. Independence is rarely offered; it is
always forcibly acquired. The people of Namibia
know that., We fervently hope that they will acquire it
soon.

59. What is the responsibility of the United Nations?
In all .faimess, we do not except an unusual ‘act of
bravado from the Security Council. We vividly remember the triple veto to prevent military santions
from tieing applied against South Africa [see 1829th
meeting]. The President of the United Nations Courtcil of Namibia, Mr. Kamana, asked the Security
Council to condemn South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia, call on South Africa to withdraw
from the Territory, terminate repressive and discriminatory laws in Namibia and support the call for free
elections under the supervision of the United Nations
[see 1880th meeting]. .These are worthy and modest
demands. The Council should heed them and act
accordingly. But this is-not the end of the road. In the
absence of action under Chapter VII of the Charter to
compel South Africa to comply with decisions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council, the
people of Namibia will have no alternative but resort
to armed struggle. South Africa should no ,longer
enjoy a Roman holiday in Namibia. Thus, if the Council fails to act, the people of Namibia will realize that
only by armed struggle through Swapo can they
obtain their independence. They know as well as we
do that independence, unlike the quality of mercy,
does not descend from heaven but could be acquired
by force. We in Kuwait support the struggle of
SWAPO. We endorse its cause., We back it in its
endeavours to bring down the sinister edifice ofapartheid in Namibia.

62. Mr. AKHUND (Pakistan): Thirty years ago the
people of Pakistan themselves were engaged in their
struggle for independence and national identity. In
april 1946, a year before that goal was finally attained,
the Muslim League, meeting under its President and
founder of the country, Qaad-e-Azam Mohammad
Ali Jinnah, adopted a resolution on the affairs of South
Africa expressing sympathy for the similar struggle
which was being waged by the majority of the peoples
of southern Africa and condemned the South Africa
regime for denying them every right and constitutional expedient in the regulation and conduct of their
own country. The resolution stated:
“The conscience of the world cannot turn a deaf
ear to the groans of the oppqssed, wherever they
may be located and however closely they may be
guarded, because the rooting out of injustice is not
a domestic affair, but the common business of all
‘the peoples of the world.”
The resolution went on “to recall the white people of
South Africa to a realization of the rules of morality
and decency by which the lives of nations must be
regulated in. the modem world”.

60. We align ourselves with their fight for self-determination and independence. Their plight is not only
African, but surely international. All peoples of the
world embrace their hope and espouse their struggle. It is imperative to arrange for the process of selfdetermination to. take place under the supervision
of the United Nations. But let us bear in mind the fact
that Namibia is the captive of the political system of
South Africa--I mean the .philosophy of aparfheid.
With all due respect to some of the greceding speakers, I cannot imagine the achievement of independence for Namibia by peacefur means without making
a substantial dent in the edifice and structure of
apartheid inside South Africa itself. That is the reason
behind the nature of the links already forged between
SWAP0 in Namibia and the freedom fighters inside
South Africa.

63. Pakistan’s pol$y continues to be guided by the
same principles and considerations as Prime Minister
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto recalled in his message on Namibia Day last year. He said:
“Ever since they achieved independence through
the exercise of the iIght of self-determination, the
people of Pakistan have been .consistently in the
forefront of the historic endeavours to eliminate
colonialism and exploitation from all parts of the
world. Indeed, the very basis of our policy identifies us wholly with the aspirations of the people of
Namibia, and impels Pakistan to assist them morally and materially to secure the independence of
their country and maintain its territorial integrity.”
64. Sixteen years ago the United Nations adopted
its Declaration on the- Granting of Independence to

61. Indeed South Africa has so far succeeded in
hijacking the Territory of Namibia, but it should not
9

Colonial Countries and Peoples. Since then Territory
after Territory
has attained independence;
only in
the south of Africa the rear-guard of settler States and
regimes hangs on tenaciously to its privileges and
possessions, ignoring reality, flouting international
law and disregarding the long-term interests of its own
people. The case of Namibia presents a particularly
gross example of the short-sightedness and insularity
which afflict these regimes. How else could it be that
the representative
of South Africa came here and
painted an idyllic picture of a Territory whose inhabitants are, according to him, living in exemplary
conditions of progress, prosperity and good fellowship and who actually wish the South African regime
to continue its rule over Namibia. Not a word in his
speech about the introcution
into Namibia of apartheid, a doctrine whose perniciousness
is matched
only by ‘its stupidity. No explanation of why South
Africa has to keep great numbers of Namibians
in
detention without trial, why the police resort to floggings and other brutalities, why SWAP0 is not allowed
freedom of political activity and why most of its
leadership has been clapped in gaol.

without imposing a solution on them, Speaking here
the other day, the South African representative
asked: “What can possibly be wrong with this approach?” What is wrong with it is that the facts and
history belie the disinterested and benign character
which he tried to give it. The whole history of South
Africa’s role, what we know of its present machinations and what we are told offtcially by its own representatives of its policies and aims tell us otherwise.
68. The representative of the United Kingdom [see
188lst meeting] saw a step forward in the convening
of the so-called constitutional
conference in the Territory, and he managed even to see some sign of hope
in the fact that the Declaration of Intent [see S/I 1948
and Add.11 talks about “a constitution”,
and not
constitutions in the plural. The statement of the South
African representative here must surely have dashed
any such hopes. He spoke invariably
of “ethnic
groups” and “different peoples” of Namibia. There
are many countries in many parts of the world where
such diversities exist, and not in Africa alone, but also
in Asia, Europe and America. Why does South Africa
make so much of the heterogeneous character of the
Namibian population? Why does it refuse to accept a
straightforward
election in which all the inhabitants
of Namibia can return their elected representatives?

65. The Territory of Namibia fell into the hands of
South Africa in the shape of a Mandate at the end of
the First World War. After the Second World War all
Mandated Territories except South West Africa were
converted into Trust Territories
and few of those
now remain under “Trusteeship”.
The system of
Mandates itself came to an end. Long before that the
South African regime’s disgraceful exploitation
and
misrule had removed any moral title it might have
claimed to keep ‘the Mandate. On the legal plane,
General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) of 1966 formally terminated
South Africa’s Mandate over the
Territory. The opinion handed down by the Intemational Court of Justice in 1971 removed whatever
shred of legalistic pretext South Africa might have
had for continuing
its domination
of the Territory.
Hence the South African representative was reduced
to describing the Court’s opinion as having been the
result of “political
manoeuvring”.
Aware no doubt of
the threadbare nature of this sort of assertion, he
went on to add that the Court’s opinion was in any
case only advisory and did not constitute law.

69. The representative of South Africa said here that
“while the United Nations calls for the territorial
integrity of the Territory-although...
the Charter
does not preclude the peoples from deciding otherwise--South
Africa has declared all options to be
open to the inhabitants”
[1881st meeting, para. 1001.
That sounds most reasonable indeed, but in fact South
Africa has weighted the options heavily in favour of
fragmentation
by making it impossible .for the one
political organization
which stands for the integrity
and freedom of the Territory to participate in political
activity in any meaningful way. It has put behind bars,
as f said, all those leaders of SWAP0 on whom it was
able to lay hands.
70. Nor can one take at face value So.uth Africa’s
solicitude for Namibia’s
ethnic variety when one
looks at the implication
of the so-called “homelands”
policy. The President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia told us in his statement that 43 per cent
of the land, in which were included most mineral reserves, all urban centres and seaports was reserved for
whites. The manner in which the constitutional
conference has been set up and its composition give no
reason to expect that the outcome of the exercise has
not been predetermined.

66. What then is the law? Under what sanction and
under whose authority does South Africa continue to
rule the Territory? We are dealing here not with some
dusty litigation
over property rights but with the
rights, fundamental
and basic, inalienable
and imprescriptible,
of a people whose destiny was placed,
by accident of history and fortunes of war, at the
mercy of a regime which, it should have been clear
even then, was singularly unsuited to attend to their
well-being and development as a “sacred trust of civilization” -to use the quaint expression and notion of
the time.

71. Almost seven years ago, in 1969, the Security
Council, recognizing the Madate’s termination,
stated
in its resolution 264 (1969) that South Africa’s continued presence in Namibia was illegal. It called on
South Africa immediately
to withdraw its administration. It further stated that actions designed to destroy territorial
integrity through the establishment

67. We wete told that South Africa’s role in the
Territory is to promote agreement between its peoples
10

of Bantustans were contrary to the Charter of the
United Nations. It also decided that, if South Africa
failed to comply, the Council would “meet immediately to determine upon necessary steps or measures
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter”.
72. Did South Africa comply? The answer is no.
Has the Security Council met to decide upon necessary steps? Yes, it has, regularly every year. With
what results? None.
73. Subsequent decisions of the Security Council
have been treated with the same disdain and received
with similar equanimity
by South Africa. The latest
is contained in Security Council resolution 366 (1974),
unanimously
adopted on 17 December 1974 in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 3295 (XXIX).
It called on the South African regime to recognize the
territorial integrity and unity of Namibia and to take
the necessary steps to transfer power to its people;
pending such transfer, to release political prisoners,
abolish racially discriminatory
and politically
repressive laws and practices, desist from its policy of creating bantustans and homelands, and accord full facilities for the return of all Namibians in political exile.
The South African response was inadequate and misleading and, as I had the occasion to point out when
I addressed the Council on 5 June last year [1828rh
meeting], amounted to a rejection of the resolution.
74. Everything
that has happened since then has
confirmed- that- opinion. South Africa continues to
flout the decisions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council with impunity,
secure in the knowledge that it will be shielded from censure within the
Council. The three vetoes which were cast here in
June last had the effect of blocking positive action by
the Security Council and may have further emboldened the Pretoria regime in going ahead with its schemes for the Territory.
In. the circumstances,
what
action can the Security Council take at this stage
which would be appropriate and effective?
75. We are glad to see that there is a measure of
agreement on a number ofimportant
points. We attach
particular importance to the declaration of the nine
countries of the European Community
that South
Africa should withdraw from Namibia
as soon as
possible. On this expression “as soon as possible”,
my delegation shares the doubts of others about the use
of this phrase so beloved of diplomats and bureaucrats. One would think that nine years after the adoption of a resolution which terminated the Mandate of
South Africa in Namibia that action was long overdue.
We welcome, none the less, the declaration of the
European Community
that South Africa should withdraw from Namibia and that its inhabitants be given
the opportunity
to exercise their right to self-determination and independence and to pronounce on the
future of the Territory
as a whole through a fully
democratic
process under United .Nations supervi-

sion. The Community
considers the Windhoek constitutional conference as “inadequate”
for the attainment of those ends. We particularly welcome the declaration of the European Community
because of
their economic and other ties with South Africa.
76. We consider that South Africa should be put on
notice against attempts, whatever shape or disguise
they are given, to fragment Namibia.
We must call
on it accordingly to refrain from going further with
the so-called constitutional
conference and make it
clear that the decisions of that conference will, in any
case, have no validity in the eyes of the Council
members, collectively and severally. Provision should
be made instead for the holding of free elections in the
Territory as a whole under United Nations auspices.
77. There is not much reason to hope that South
Africa will listen to the voice of the Council But we
do expect that Council members themselves, specially those upon whom rests the primary responsibility for the peace and security of the world, will not,
by act of commission
or omission, by word or by
silence, in any way make it easier for South Africa to
flout the Council’s authority.
78. In an eloquent and defiant speech from the dock
in 1967, Mr. Toivo ja Toivo, one of the founders of
SWAPO, declared:
“I know that the struggle will be long and bitter.
I also know that my people will wage that struggle
whatever the cost. Only when we are granted our
independence will the struggle stop. Only when our
human dignity is restored to us as equals of the
whites will there be peace between us.”
79. The struggle
of the _people
-_ of southern Africa is
nowhere near its end. It would be a mistake to view
the situation with complacency.
What is happening
in neighbouring Angola should be a warning that considerations of expediency or the greed and cupidity
of some should not be allowed to override fundamental principles and the larger interest. My delegation devoutly hopes, for the sake of the people of
Namibia but also for the sake of the United Nations
and of the international
community
and, above all,
for the sake of all the people of Africa whatever their
colour or race, that the Security Council will not fail
to show the wisdom, the moral courage and the political will to pursue faithfully the implementation
of
its own unanimously adopted decisions.
80. The PRESIDENT:
Before I call on the next
speaker, I should like. to inform members of the
Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Burundi containing a request that he be
invited, in accordance with rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to participate in the discussion of
the item on the agenda. I propose, if I hear no objection, to invite the representative of Burundi to participate in the discussion, in conformity with the usual

86. Yet, despite these encouraging signs, we still
have no clear answers from the South African Government on the four major questions I have posed.
South Africa has remained silent or ambiguous in its
response to these questions. There has been no definitive statement by South African authorities on the
timing
of steps towards self-determination-and
here I would allude to the comment of my colleague,
the representative
of Pakistan, as to the uncertainty
of the term “as soon as possible”. Many Namibian
groups have been excluded from the steps so far
taken. South Africa continues to deny the United
Nations a role in the transition.

practice and with the relevant provisions of the Charter and the provisional rules of procedure.
It was so decided.
81. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the representative
of Burundi to take the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber on the usual understanding that he will be invited to take a place at the
Council table when he addresses the Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mikanagu
(Burundi) took the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.

87. This past September South Africa convened a
constitutional
conference at Windhoek to decide on
the future of the Territory. While representatives of
ethnic groups took an active part in this conference,
significant groups in Namibia were not allowed representation. Political
groups, including
SWAPO, the
Namibian
National
Convention
and others having
the support of significant portions of the Namibian
population,
were not permitted
to participate.
No
United Nations observer was able to monitor the proceedings of the conference. For our part, the United
States finds that this conference as at present constituted cannot be regarded. as a definitive exercise of
self-determination.
We have told this to the South
African Government in clear and unmistakable terms.

82. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
The Security Council has before it four basic questions as it ponders .what constructive
steps it may
take regarding the future of Namibia.
These four
questions are as germane and timely today as they
were a half-year ago-indeed,
as they were almost a
decade ago when, as many of my colleagues have
remarked at the Council table, the General Assembly
declared that South Africa had forfeited its mandate
for Namibia.
83. These four questions are; first, whether there is
a real commitment
by South Africa to a course of
selfdetermination
for the people of Namibia and respect for their rights; secondly, the timing of steps
towards self-determination
once that principle
is
accepted by South Africa; thirdly, the question of
whether all Namibians-of
whatever colour, political
affiliation or social origin-would
have their voices
heard in determining
the future of their nation; and,
fourthly, the United Nations role in the process of
self-determination.

88. However,
the constitutional
conference
at
Windhoek was a start. The constitutional
history of
my own country goes back some two centuries, and
I believe that we have learned from that history to
pay respectful attention to any beginning, whatsoever its patronage, howsoever uncertain. Nor is the
United Nations today comprised of nations whose
Governments
can boast such an impeccable constitutional pedigree as to warrant our collective disdain
for whatever has so far occurred in Namibia. There
is no democracy there. There is no democracy in most
places. Still, in Namibia men an women travel hopefully. This is no small thing. Indeed, it is a great thing,
and the United States, for one, looks forward to weicoming them to the company of free peoples and
devoutly hopes to see their freedom flourish.

84. Over the past year there have been indications
from the South African Government that it is finally
recognizing its international
obligations in Namibia
and the need to implement a process of self-determination in that Territory.
Statements by the. South
African Government
suggest that South Africa may
finally be beginning to heed the international
outcry
against its continuing illegal occupation of Namibia.
The United
Nations
Commissioner
for Namibia
-who is present in the Council chamber-has
told
us that he too senses that the difference over Namibia
have narrowed, are narrowing and can continue to
narrow.

89. We believe accordingiy that now more than ever
it is incumbent on South Africa to announce a straightforward and unambiguous plan by which Namibians
will be allowed to make a free choice of their political
future. The United States believes that a single electoral process should be held throughout
Namibia
with the careful supervision of the United Nations to
allow the Namibian
people to decide on the future
constitutional
structure of their country. Recognizing
the wide ethnic and political diversity of Namibia
-a condition in which that nation is by no means singular, but a condition none the less-such a decision
could come only after a period in which all the people
of Namibia and all the political and ethnic groups were
allowed to elaborate their views and to campaign for

85. For our part, the United States delegation has
every expectation, given the temper and tone of the
debate we have had so far and the constructive nature
of the suggestions that have been made, that we will
emerge in agreement with a resolution that will indeed
constitute a further narrowing such as the Commisio. ner has envisaged, and I would not like to let this
opportunity
pass without expressing the enormous
respect in which the United
States Government
holds the work of Mr. MacBride.
12

their views. Only through an exchange of views and
a discussion of their political future will the people of
Namibia ever be abie to make a genuine choice over
their future constitutional
status. Only through careful United Nations supervision will the international
community
be assured that the self-determination
process has been executed freely without undue
pressure or interference by outside forces. The United
States believes that this supervision could be worked
out as soon as possible between the United Nations
and the Government of South Africa, and encourages
both parties to meet and make the necessary arrangements.

ful resolution of the Namibian problem and to encourage publicly the process of self-determination
in the
area, in that Territory,
in that nation. While it is
indeed discouraging that South Africa has not moved
quickly to bring the people of Namibia to selfdetermination with United Nations supervision, we must
not let up pressing South Africa to make just that
decision. Let us not abandon our efforts to find a
peaceful solution to the Namibian problem, and let us
strive to impress upon the South African Goverment the urgency and the justice of letting the Namibian people decide their own future.
93. The PRESIDENT:
I understand the representative of Saudi Arabia wishes to speak, and accordingly, with the consent of the Council, I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

90. My Government has made this position clear to
the Government of South Africa at the highest levels.
We have tried to impress on the South African Government the urgency of resolving the Namibian question quickly and peacefully. Most recently, on 23 October, my Government,
in co-ordination
with the
Governments of the United Kingdom and of France,
outlined such an electoral process to the South African Foreign Minister.
While continuing
to press
South Africa through diplomatic
channels, we have
also continued to sustain our present policies towards
South Africa. We continue to discourage United
States investment in Namibia. We continue to withhold United States Government
protection of American investments,
as we have done since the 1966
resolution 2145 (XXI) of the General Assembly terminating the South African trusteeship. In addition, the
United States Government continues to prohibit. the
shipment’ of American arms and military equipment
to South Africa. We continue to enforce and observe
this embargo out of our own commitment
to the cause
of ,the people of Namibia,
and not because we are
required to do so by an international
enactment. We
are not. We continue, however, to invite all nations
which so desires to join us in this voluntary policy of
denying arms to the South African Govemement
which is our policy.

94. Mr. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia): I hope that if it
is not too late we could ask the guard to tell my illustrious colleague Mr. Moynihan that I have some words
to say to him. That is why I asked to be allowed to
speak. But I am sure that Mr. Sherer will tell him what
I have to say.
95. It is overdue that someone should make it clear
to our friend Mr. Moynihan that he cannot treat members of the United Nations in such a cavalier manner
as to imply-more
than imply, to say-that
most of
them do not have democratic Governments,
as if to
emphasize that only the United States is a democracy
and that it looks at others, through him, from the high
vantage point of a professor giving us lessons in democracy and in government.
96. He has been using this approach-not
inside the
United Nations but in cables and letters-in
order to
show the American people that only the United States
is righteous. We love the pe~ople of the United States,
but they would be misguided if, by repetition and
through the emotionalism
that Mr. Moynihan has been
arousing, they were finally to end up having their
minds conditioned to such misconceptions.

91. I also wish to put to rest at this point the bizarre
suggestion which we have heard with some frequency
in these halls, though happily not at this Council table,
that the United States is in some way interested in
establishing military bases in Africa, even in that part
of Africa where Namibia is located. These are suggestions that invite incredulity
as a response, but as
they continue to be made they arouse not a little
suspicion that there is some quality of what psychoanalysts call “projection”,
which is to say that there
may be people who, themselves desiring to establish
bases, assume that everyone else does as well. .Well,
the United States does not.

97. As one who has served the Organization
for
about three decades, I think it is high time I put things
in the proper perspective. Democracy is not a monopoly of the United States or the Western Powers or
the socialist countries. or any group of countries for
that matter. Unfortunately-I
shall not cite namesdemocracy has been institutionalized
and ritualized.
In many countries-and
I do not name them-it
has
been reduced to a wooden or metal box and a sheet
of paper that is placed in it by people who are conditioned by the mass media, by the press, to elect representatives, and in fairness to the representatives I
must say that even if they have made certain promises they may, because of the circumstances,
sometimes do exactly the opposite of what they have promised.

92. In conclusion, let me say that the United States
believes that the Security Council has a serious and
unique responsibility
for Namibia,
and a singular
opportunity.
We believe that it is incumbent that the
Council reiterate the shared views of its members on
the future of Namibia. It is our duty to foster a peace13

98. Mr. Moynihan should know that there is no perfeet Government.
I challenge his assumption
that
one Government
is perfect in the United Nations
-meaning
his own. We wish the United States to be
the best Government,
because it wields power. We
wish the Soviet Union to be the best Government,
because it also wields world power. We wish the emerging China to become the best Government.
But
what are Governments? They are constituted by leaders who are human and have all the weaknesses
and foibles of other human beings. We do not set ourselves above them, nor do we allow in the United
Nations-nor
should we allow-any
representative
to say that his leaders are better than the other leaders
of the States Members of the United Nations. All
leaders make mistakes. No one is perfect, except the
Creator of the universe, whom we cannot envisage or
comprehend.

Union does not want a confrontation with the United
States, and that is why both the United States and the
Soviet Union are in the arena surreptitiously-or
a
little more than surreptitiously
sometimes. We read
it in the newspapers. We do not have intelligence services here in the United Nations to find out what is
going on.
101. It cannot go on like this in Namibia. Namibia
should within a year become free. Two years ago in
my draft resolution [ss/1/547[ I said, “two years or
less”. Here is the illustrious gentleman whom we all
concur in praising-the
United Nations Commissioner for Namibia, Mr. MacBride. Let him be the coordinator.
Let the United States and all the major
Powers bring pressure on South Africa to transfer
power in stages and within two years or less bring the
question here to the Security Council, with Mr. MacBride, the Commissioner,
as the co-ordinator.
We do
not trust South Africa. That is why I mentioned that
if they have goodwill they will accept two co-administrators to accelerate the process of self-determination. Otherwise they are fooling not us but themselves. They have lost their credibility.
We cannot
accept anything less than having two co-administra:
tors. Let them be Europeans, white like them, but
honest like the Swedes, like the Austrians, neutral
like the Swiss, we leave it to the sagacity of the Secretary-General
to appoint two co-administrators
and,
if they are honest, South Africa will accelerate the
process of self-determination.

99. I come now to .the technicalities
of the statement of our good friend, Mr. Moynihan. I feel now like
an African, and I think you will adopt me, Mr. President, as an African, because I feel like an African, and
not only like an African but like a human being. Every
human being, whether he hails from Asia, Europe,
Latin America or any continent for that matter, should
identify himself with those who have been deprived
of their liberty. Our friend, Mr. Moynihan, mentioned
that the gap-1 am paraphrasing-was
narrowing. Is
it narrowing by inches or centimetres?
These are
semantics, figures of speech. He says that the United
States and other Western countries have been remonstrating,
sending letters to South Africa, telling
it that they do not approve of its policy. Many of us
lived under mandates and we know those tricks.
Letters can be sent day in and day out to appease the
gullible, but here in the Organisation it is an insult to
the intelligence
of Members to say, “we are doing
paper work, writing letters.” In these days of penicillin-and
this great country is famous for its antibiotics-Mr.
Moynihan
is trying to treat the African
fever by using, instead of antibiotics, the rind of the
watermelon. This is no treatment. This is lip service.
Of course, we do not take issue with his Government. It may have its problems. We know that the
balance of power is still important and power politics
are still prevalent. They shape the policies of the
major Powers. Therefore I appeal to the major Powers
to keep out of Africa; regardless of their ideologies.
Then the African people and we, the Asian people
and the Latin American people, will be happy. We
can manage our own affairs. We may be clumsy but
at least we would be sincere. We cannot beguile the
time with empty promises.

102. Ethnic groups were referred to by Mr. Moynihan. What ethnic groups? South West Africa was a
German colony. It was all African. Not until the Mandate of the League of Nations was transferred-I
think, in 1922 or 1923-by Britain to South Africa did
they come under the thumb of the white man. They
are indigenous people. What ethnic groups?
103. Constitutionality
was mentioned. We know that
during the days of their rule in India the British always
told Gandhi that the constitytional
processes should
be observed, but the British did not have a constituti,on. They ran their country by precedent, by
common law and by statute laws. Whom are they
fooling? Constitution!
Those are Harvard
terms
-political
science and .theory. We like Mr. Moynihan, we revere him, but he cannot fool us any more.
And let him beware not to throw mud and aspersions
at Members of the United Nations and at their form
of Government.
We are entitled to our form of Government. Roes he know, for example, that in Islamic
law the King is subject to the law? He is not above the
law. Mr. Moynihan does not know that because he
is immersed in his American way of life, American
constitutional
law and this and that. We respect the
Americans and we raise our hat to their war of liberation. This is the two hundredth year since 1776,
when the Americans
fought tyranny.
Have they
become smug, rich and wealthy and do not want to

100. Fifty-three years and there is still the Mandate.
I mentioned
that in my speech yesterday. South
West Africa is still under a Mandate. Why is it still
under a Mandate? Because of certain interests. I
mentioned
them: economic,
strategic and racial.
“Racial”
I put at the end. What are the major Powers
doing? Of course, we understand that the Soviet
14

join us in fighting the tyranny of South Africa? This is
the crux of the question.

to invite the representative of Tunisia to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote.

104. I am sorry that I have detained my colleagues
for 10 or 15 minutes at this hour, but it is high time that
someone like me, who respects the United States’and
who is a friend of the United States, should tell the
‘representative of the United States not to take liberties
with things about which we feel deeply-our
traditions, our customs, our way of life, our form of Government. Let me tell him again that we hope that in
many countries democracy will live in the hearts of
people, in their behaviour and in their conduct, but
not as a ritual, and that democracy will not continue
to be institutionalized,
lest it be reduced to the husk,
whilst the worm of abuse consumes the kernel.

It was so decided.
106. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the representative
of Tunisia to take the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber, on the usual understanding that he will be invited to take a place at the
Council table when he addresses the Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Driss (Tunisia) took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.
The meeting

105. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform
members of the Council that 1 have just received a
letter from the representative of Tunisia containing a
request that he be invited, in accordance with rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure, to participate
in the discussion on the item on the agenda. Accordingly, if there is no objection, I propose, with the consent of the Council, in conformity with the usual practice and with the relevant provisions of the Charter,

rose at 1.25 p.m.
Notes

’ Official
Supplement

Records
no 24.

of the

General

Assembly,

Thirtieth

Session,

* See A/10297, annex II.
’ See Official
Records
of the General
Assembly,
Thirtieth
Session, PIen&
Meetings,
23”kh meeting.
4 Legal Consequences
for States of the Continued
Presence
of
South
Africa
in Namibia
(South
West Africa)
notwithstanding
Security
Council
Resolution
276 (1970). Advisory
Opinion,
I.C.J.
Reports
1971, p. 16.

15

.

.

-.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations publications
may bc obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
Consulr your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.

COMMENT

UNITED

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

LJ3S PUBLICATIONS

DES N+lONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Units, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gen6ve.
KAE

IIOJIYVEiTb

Maaanwfl

EI3AAHIIB

OPI-AHHBAUHM

Oprannsaunw

~'b~J.WHeHHbIX
~0 HC~X
pationax
MaramHe
HJIW mmme

3mxax
aaulehs

w arewrcmax
KHHXHONI

Hat&+,

Celcsm

COMO

CONSEGUIR

no nponaxe

maamik,

PUBLICACIONES

OribEANHEHHhIX
HaqwB

HAUHH

KytlHTb
B KHWXHbiX
Mark+
tdwpa.
HaBOAWTe
CnpaBKH
06 HJAaRHRx
13
no anpecy:OpraHH3awiR
06%eAHHeHRbtX

HMO-Tfoprc

ldOrnHO

HIIH Xtenesa.

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estAn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidaras
en
todas partes del mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

oo400

83-60801-May

1984-2.200
