U’VITED

NATIONS

th
MEETING: 6 OCTOBER 1971
NEW

RETURN

WITHOUT

DELAY

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l

S89)

Point of order by the representative

. . _. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . .
. , . . . . . . . . , . . . +. . . .

1

, . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . *. . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , .

5

The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the President of the Security
Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo (Democratic
Republic of),
Dahomey,
Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea,
Kenya, Liberia, the Libyan Arab Republic,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and
Zambia (S/ 10326);
. . . , . . ,, . .
(6) Report of the AdHoc Sub-Committee
on Namibia (S/10330)

5

Adoptionof

theagenda

of Sierra Leone

N;

s/Iv.

I589

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-NINTH

MEETING

’

Held in New York on Wednesday, 6 October 1971, at 3.30 p.m.
Presidcnf: Mr. Guillermo SEVILLA SACASA (Nicaragua).
F?cse!rf: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/I 589)

4. Since this film was shown outside the Security Council,
it cannot form part of the records of the Council, but since
it contains documentary material of inestimable benefit for
the work of the Council, it is my opinion that it should
form part of our records. The only way in which, in my
OpilliOn,
it can form part of the record is for it to be shown
to the Council assembled. It cannot become part of the
record merely by being tendered as a film, nor can it
become part of the record because some representatives
who so desired went to see it outside an official meeting of
the Council.
5. I am therefore raising this point of order formally to
propose that the film on South West Africa-which
we know as Namibia-which
was unofficially shown at
3 o’clock this afternoon, should be officially shown by
United Nations Secretariat personnel to the Security
Council so that it may form part of the documentary
record of the Council.

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central AIrican Republic, Chad, the Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea,
Kenya, Liberia, the Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, the
Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, the
Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and
Zambia (S/10326);
(b) Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Namibia
(S/10330).

6. I do this because Mr. Muller, the Foreign Minister of
South Africa, tried to make us believe that conditions in
South West Africa, as he called it-Namibia, as we know
it-were as he described them. He gave the impression that
everything was rosy in Namibia. Indeed, it has come to my
knowledge that a day after Mr. Muller made his intervention before this Council /1584th meeting], no less a
personage than the President of Uganda made contact with
Mr. Muller’s Government, offering to send a delegation to
go and see for itself the benefits of apartheid. Of course, we
can judge for ourselves South Africa’s sincerity. We know
that the offer was immediately turned down. All that South
Africa was interested in was getting some form of international African recognition for the Head of State himself or
for some Ministers of his Government.

Point of order by the representative of Sierra Leone
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I cd
on the representative of Sierra Leone, who wishes to speak
on a point of order.

7. It is particularly disturbing that only today TIIe New
‘York Tinles carries an article concerning South West Africa
which shows that the South African rdgime is perpetrating
against Zambia acts of hostility almost like the Portu@cse
actions in Guinea and Senegal,

2. Mr. PRATT (Sierra Leone): Yesterday, before the close
of the meeting, I raised a point of order requesting that the
opportunity be given for representatives who so desired to
view a film on Namibia so as to determine its admissibility
as documentary evidence to assist the Council in the task in
which we are now engaged.

8. It is therefore necessary for us to correct the balance by
seeing this just and equitable film and by ensuring that it
forms part of our records. I therefore formally propose that
the film on Namibia which we saw today at 3 o’clock
should form part of the documentary records of the
Council on the agenda item now before us.

3. This film was shown today at the Dag Hammarskjiild
Auditorium and, in company with other representatives, I
saw it. I am satisfied that it represents a balanced view of
what can be called responsible opinion in the Territory of
Namibia. I am further satisfied that it provides adequate
visual aid to assist us in arriving at a just and equitable
position in relation to the matter under discussion.

9. The PRESIDENT (irrterpretation from Spnnish): Representatives have heard the proposal made by the representative of Sierra Leone in his point of order-namely, that the
1

film on Namibia which we had the pleasure of seeing he
made part of the official documentation of this meeting.
DOCS any representative wish to speak?
10. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORJZET (France) (int.yperurion
I believe that the Security Council has
already been very liberal on this subject. For my part, I
have no assessmentof the film to make. I suppose that after
all a documentary film could, if necessary, be included
perfectly well in the documentation of a Council. However,
I do not feel that I am in a position to pronounce myself on
that kind of a document. who made this film? mat
guarantees does the Security Council have regarding this
film? What is its specific nature? At least there should be
some kind of preliminary investigation. On the other hand,
I must warn the Council that if we start admitting this kind
of document, then perhaps other delegations, including
furthermore that of South Africa, and other Member
States, will also wish to produce films as Council documents, and the Council will then become a kind of cinema
club. I think we are venturing on a very dangerous course. I
have nothing against the film itself, but nevertheless to have
this kind of document made official in the present
circumstances seems to me a bit frivolous. Accordingly, I
for my part am not able to accept the proposal made to us,

from Rench):

11. Mr. PRATT (Sierra Leone): I note that the representative of France has nothing at all against the film itself.
Indeed if we had to make an assessment of whether we
agreed or disagreed, or whether we thought somethingwas
constructive or not constructive in the interventions that
arc made, it would become so subjective that the Security
Council would not be able to do its work.
12. One important point is whether the film concerns
Namibia and another important point is whether it would
assistus in reaching just conclusions.

this, because, while in principle I have no objection at all to
this film, it is not just with this particular film that I am
concerned. After all, in the last two weeks we have dealt
with five different subjects in this Council, and if there is to
be the possibility of films being shown and we have to
judge whether they are suitable evidence to place before the
Council, we may find ourselves with rather a lot of work. I
should really like to think about this myself just a little bit
more, and perhaps some of my colleagues would too.
16. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (fnterpre&ztion
fium Spanish): The delegation of Argentina was present
when the film was shown at 3 o’clock this afternoon and
we followed the entire showing with the utmost attention
and interest.
17. I can understand very well the feelings which
prompted the Foreign Minister of Sierra Leone to raise his
point of order, but the fact remains that under the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council there
is no provision made for such a case.Accordingly, I wonder
whether, as a compromise solution, it would not be
possible-in order to make that film official, that being the
purpose of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra
Leone-for the Council to decide to incorporate the film in
its files and, in accord with the thought behind rule 49,
make it available to Council members. In other words,
those Council members who are interested in seeing the
film could in due course request the Secretariat to have the
film shown 10 them, ejther individually or in groups. But it
would then become a matter for the Council’s judgement
whether that film should be included in the files of this
Council and be available to members who ask to seeit, just
as Council members are entitled to ask to see the verbatim
records of any statement, in accordance with rule 49 of the
rules of procedure,
18. I believe that if we followed that course we would
avoid a procedural debate and we might then go on to the
substance. At the same time, I believe that we would
thereby safeguard the legitimate concern of the Foreign
Minister of Sierra Leone, who wishesthis documentary fdrn
not to be forgotten.

13. As to the questioa. of who made the film, it is
necessaryfor us to inquire into that in order to determine
its authenticity. I have informatjon at my disposal, which
may satisfy the representative of France, that the film was
made by no less an institution than the BBC. That is the
information at my disposal, Perhaps the representative of
the United Kingdom would wish to add to that-although it
is very difficult for films like this to have their father’s
name tacked on to them, for obvious reasons.

19. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): I just want to
express our aelegation’s opinion, and to say that we are
concerned about the precedent. I understand that the film
was made available and wilI be shown again in the Fourth
Committee as evidence that will help people make a
decision. But I worry about fdms put together to make a
point. Our country is filled with them; you can get them
ranging from one side of an issue to another. I love to
watch movies; I think it can be very pleasant. But I worry
about establishing a precedent. And though our distinguished and most articulate colleague from Sierra Leone-I
think in a great spirit of openmindedness and fairness-said
that he would welcome films that might present the other
side of the picture, our experience, which perhaps is just
drawn too exclusively from our own television and movie
media, is that this could be carried to very far extremes and
that it could lead to a precedent that I think all of us would
regret.

14. As to the suggestion that if we accepted a film like this
there would be nothing to stop any other delegation from
submitting another film, I would say there is nothing wrong
with that. If South Africa wishesto show a film that would
assist us, why should we gag it? South Africa would be
perfectly at liberty to show its film, and if we were satisfied
that it would assist us, then I would be prepared to make
the same type of proposal in connexion with that film.
That would not make us a cinema club, any more than the
Council is a library because we receive documentary
evidence.
15. Sir Colin CROW (United Kingdom): I am afraid that
I did not see the film myself, but I am prepared to accept
that it, was produced by the BBC. However, I wonder
whether we might perhaps pause a moment and reflect on

20. I would think that maybe the best thing would bc for
the Minister to describe and put into the record, in his own
2

words, his view of the rcsdts of the film. And I would urge
upon him consideration, not of this particular incident, but
of what would happen if we once opened up the Council
Chamber itself to the showing of iilrns, long or short, that
tried to make a point, because I fear we would start a film
war. I think somebody else would be in here the very next
day with an expensive’ documentary trying to represent the
other point of view.
2 I, I for one should like to see US restrict ourselves, as
much as possible, to the verbal approach. It is not always
possible, but 1 would certainly like. to urge that at this
particular time.
22. Mr. NAKAGAWA (Japan): Before forming any opinion on this proposal, I should like to hear the views of the
Secretariat on two points. First, is there any provision in
the ruIes of procedure enabling a fdm to be made a part of
the officiiil records of the Security Council? And, sec.
ondly, is there any precedent for such a procedure?
23. Mr.

MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(trfZmhted
from Russian) I should like to reiterate the view
I expressed yesterday f1588th meeting],, namely that we
seem to be heading towards complications. The matter is, it
seems to me, rather simple and straightforward. If in the
Practice of the Security Council there is no such precedent-and I do not recall any offhand-the practice of other
United Nations bodies, in particular the Committee of
Twenty-Four,!
shows that films have been projected on
serious occasions. Films have also been shown in the
Fourth Cornmittee. What is more, there was a case when
the United States delegation in the Third Committee tried
to stage a show in connexion with a statement of its
representative there concerning some social question.
24. SO there have been precedents. But does that compel
every member of the Security Council to see this film? If
you do not want to, do not see it. This is definitely a case
where the principle of free choice applies. As I understand
the proposal of the representative of Sierra Leone, he
would like to have any discussion about this film included
in the verbatim record. In that sense it will be a document
of the Security Council. It is impractical, on the other
hand, to distribute a film as a document of the Security
Council or of the General Assembly, However, every
representative is free to see the film if he wishes, or not to
see it if he does not wish to.
25. Today a group of members of the Security Council,
including myself, saw the film, and I did so with pleasure; it
was instructive
and added to my knowledge of the actual
state of affairs in Namibia, and of racism and apartheid in
South Africa. Seeing documentary films is useful, and there
is no reason to object to it in this day and age when so
many films are being produced. However, that must be
governed by the principle of free choice. Judging from the
attendance at today’s fh, some members of the Security
Council were not there, Well, what of it? No one will
denounce them for that, since it is a matter of choice.

26. That is why I suggest that we should not complicate
the question: if there is any need, occasion or desire to see
a documentary film in connexion with the consideration of
a particular item, it is certainly a matter of free choice, Let
those who wish to see it do so, and if some prefer to stay
away, that is their business.
27. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spot&h): It
seems to me that we can sumrnarize the situation in the
following manner. The representative ‘of Sierra Leone
yesterday invited us to go and see a film on Namibia, which
we have just seen. He has now requested that it be
incorporated into the official documentation on this item
to help the Council in its task. Of course, the representative
of Sierra Leone has the right to make any comments he
wishes at this meeting regarding the film on Namibia,
precisely so that his statement will be included in the
official record of this meeting. Naturally, this is a right he
has.
28. On the other hand, there is apparently no precedent in
the Security Council in regard to incorporating films as
official records
29. But what the representative of Argentina has just said
is very important. He asked whether a compromise solution
would be possible, to make the film official, whereby the
film would be incorporated into the archives of the
Secretariat so that any member of the Council could see it
whenever he wished, in order to be able to form a
judgement on it. This proposal of the representative of
Argentina might possibly solve the problem.
30. The representative of Japan put the question to the
Secretariat whether there is any provision in the provisional
rules of procedure which would allow the film to be
considered an official record of the Security Council. He
also asked whether there was any precedent. The President
has been informed that there is no precedent for incorporating a film as an official Security Council document. I
would therefore suggest that we should adopt the following
procedure: that the film should be placed in the tiles of the
Secretariat and be available to any member of the Council
who wishes to see it, and that the representative of Sierra
Leone can answer questions as to the legitimate character
of the film, its origin, etc. It is possible that, if we all maki
an effort to co-operate we may be able to arrive at a’
solution, so that we may move forward on the substance of
the item.
31. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I should like to add that rule 39
of the rules of procedure provides that members of the
Secretariat, or other persons whom the Security Council
considers competent for the purpose, may be invited to
supply the Council with information. In this case we heard
a statement by the President of SWAPO. I do not think
anyone will wish to challenge his competence in the matter
we are considering. As an additional element of the
information he was supplying to the Council, he kindly
offered to let fhe members of the Council see a fdm-a
documentary, not an artistic film. Those who wished to see
it, did so.

1 Special Committee on the Situation with regardto me JmPlementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independenceto
Colonial Countries and Peoples.
3

32. J remembera casein which evidence of a material
nature waspresented.On one occasion,during the coldest
times of the cold war, the United States representative in
the Security Council, the late Senator Austin, displayed a
Soviet automatic weapon.He simply gaveit to membersof
the Security Council to look at and handle, assertingthat it
had been found in South Korea. ‘Die Sovjet representative
at the time succeededin explaining that after the Secand
World War,during which a largequantity of Soviet weapons
had fallen into the hands of the enemy-the HitJerite
aggressors-onour territory, it would not be surprisingif a
Soviet automatic weaponshould appear anywhere in the
world. For that reason,suchevidencewas highly questionable. Nevertheless,the United Statesrepresentative deemed
it necessary and appropriate to display that particular
object as evidence. That too was a special kind of
information, evenif different in form from the usualkind.
SO what J am sayingis not that every object offered as
evidence, or every documentaryfilm, should he regardedas
a document of the Security Council, but that the rulesof
procedure of the Council do not prohibit proposalsthat
members of the Council should see a film. And the
members of the Council who have received that Jcindof
information will decidefor themselveswhether or not the
information in questionis convincing. Consequently, I do
not think we needto go any deeperinto this matter,
33. Mr. JOUEJATI (Syrian Arab Republic) (btterpretafion
fro?)? Fre!zchj: My delegation sees some merit in the
proposal of the representativeof Argentina which you
clarified, Mr. President,with your usual eloquence. However, if this proposal by Argentina gives rise to any
COntrOVtXSy,
J suggestthat we hold private consultations
outside the official meeting of the Council and discuss
among ourselvesthe proposalof the Minister for External
Affairs of Sierra Leone, and that for the time beingwe go
on with the debateon Namibia. I am convinced that the
Minister will not object to this suggestion.
34. Mr. FARAH (Somalia):My delegation had the good
fortune to seethe film inquestion, and we were very much
enlightened by it about Namibia.The value of this film lies
in the fact that it refutes to a large extent many of the
sweeping claims that were made in this Council by
Mr. Muiler of South Africa whenhe addressedthe Council a
few days ago [1584th meeting]. In the opinion of my
delegation, it is necessarynot only that this film be
acquired by the United Nationsbut that a transcript of the
dialogue, of the questionsposedand the answersin the
film, should be madeavailablein the form of a document,
so that ah may readit at their leisure. It would be much
more convenient to have a written record before us, rather
than having to have access
to a fh to know what it is all
about.
35. Mr. PRATT (Sierra Leone): I believe that all the
representativeswho havespokenhave testified to the value
of the film and its importancein helping us to form the
right conclusions.Wehave reservationsouly about precedents and procedure.As far as that is concerned, I chose
my words carefully when I made my point of order
concerning procedure.If the Council will remember, I said
that I was formally movingthat we request the Secretariat
to
obtain this film and show it to us so that it could

become part of our records. 1 had in mind rule 39 of our
provisional rules of procedure, which enablesthe Security
Council to invite membersof the Secretariat,among others,
to give assistancein examining matterswithin its competence. I thought my suggestionwaswell within rule 39.
Anyway it appearsthat we needto think this matter over.
The representative of the United Kingdomsayshe wants to
think further about it. It alsoappearsthat other delegations
would Jike to do so, inchrding those of Somaliaand Syria.
36. I would therefore accept the suggestionthat we leave
this matter of procedure for a while, proceed with the
agenda item before US, hear those who wish to make
statements, and perhaps have informal discussions,and I
reserve my right to bring it up againat the next meeting.
This doesnot detract from the proposalwhich I have made,
whether we agreeto deal with it today, tomorrow or next
week, aslong aswe take a decisionabout the procedure in
question.
37. I would conclude by sayingthis: the Security Council
js master of its own procedures,and we must all remember
this, The fact that there hasbeen no precedentshould not
be placed in the way of the Council’sexamining a matter
on its agendaso asto reach correct conclusions.
38. Mr, SIMBANANJYE (Burundi) (interpretation from
French): Far be it from me to try to delay our debateson
this matter, but I should like to speakabout the problem
we arc debating.
39. ‘J’h.isis a particularly abnormalcase,for the Security
Council cannot send United Nationsmissionsta that part
of the world, which is illegally administeredby South
Africa. The Ad iir>c Sub-Committeecannot even go to
Namibia to inform itself about what is happening.
40. This is why, when the Minister for External Affairs of
Sierra Leone agreed that South Africa alsomight presenta
film to the Security Council, jr thought that he was really
most understanding. And I think that this precedentshould
be created today since the Council does not have the
necessaryinformation, cannot go to Namibia, cannot
send
United Nationsmissionsto Namibia.
4’1. Further, rule 39 of the rulesof procedureauthor&s
this and one” can say that there were precedents-not
exactly the same, but a film is a means of securing
information, and the Security Councilhasto inform itself
and to do this through modern media.
42. If the proposal of the Minister of Sierra Leone is not
adopted today, my delegationwill reserveits right to speak
to that matter. But I accept the ideathat there should be
consultations, as proposed, becausethis is a rather important matter,

43. The PRESIDENT (irderpretation from Spanish): I am
pleasedthat, becauseof the generousco-operation of the
representativeof Sierra Leone, our work this afternoon has
been facilitated. He must be pleasedthat the exchange of
views we have had here has shown the importance we
attach to the possibility of havhrgthis film asa part ofthe
archives of the Secretariat or havingit appearin the records
4

of the Council, I shall therefore proceed with informal
consultations in order to reach an appropriate decision.
Adoption of the agenda
The ugenda was adopred.
The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, the
Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Egypt, EquatedaL
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya,
Liberia, the Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the
People’s Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, the
Upper Volta and Zambia (S/10326);
(b) Report of the Ad ffoc SubCommittee
on Namibia
(S/l 0330)
44. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with previous decisions taken by the Security
Council and with the consent of the CounciI, I shdl
proceed to invite the representatives participating in this
debate to take the places rescrvcd for them in the Council
chamber, on the understanding that they will he invited to
be scatcd at the Council table when they are to speak.
45. I invite the representatives of Sudan, Ethiopia, South
Africa, Liberia, Guyana, Chad, Nigeria and Mauritius to
take the places reserved for them in the Council chamber. I
irlvite the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the &&dent,
Mr. E. 0. O&u,
President of the United Nations Council for Nanzibiu, took
a place at the Security Council table; and A4r. M. Khulid
(Sudnn), Mr. T. Makonnen (Ethiopia), Mr. H. Muller (South
Africa), Mr. J. R. Grimes (Liberia), Mr. S. S. Ramphal
(Cuyuna), Mr, B, Hassane (Chad), Mr. 0, Arikpo (Nkeria)
and Mr. R. Ramphul (Mauritius) took the places reserved
for them i?zthe Council chamber.
46. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): The question of
Namibia-South West Africa-has
given my delegation
difficulty ever since the debates leading up to the adoption
by the General Assembly of resolution 2145 (Xxi) and
even before. On the face of it, certain propositions look so
simple. As Mandatory, South Africa undertook certain
commitments. For example, it undertook to promote to
the utmost the material and moral well-being and social
progress of the inhabitants of the Territory. Some social
and economic progress may have been made. But by
contrast, South Africa has introduced into the Territory the
evil policies of apartheid.

48. But it is not as simple as all that. Leaving aside for the
moment tfte question of the powers of the General
Assembly to make decisions rather than rccommcndations,
as laid down in the Charter, it was the view of my
Government
at the time resolution 2145 (XXI) was
adopted that neither the League of Nations nor the United
Nations, as the inheritor of the supervisory powers of the
League, had any power unilaterally to terminate the
Mandate. This is primarily a legal matter. In a matter of this
sort the United Nations cannot act on the basis of moral
indignation and emotion, however deeply felt and however
justified-as
indeed it is. Before we take up a position
vis-a-vis a Member State, and a fortiari before we contemplate action in its regard, we must all be fully satisfied that
we are doing so on a basis which is fairly and squarely in
accordance with the law.
49. In this spirit, my Government has given close and
careful study to the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice, which was delivered in June this year-a I
think I owe it to the Council and to the Court to explain
frankly-but
I hope not at too great length-the conclusions
we have reached, especially since my Government did not,
as some other Governments did, intervene in the proceedings of the Court.
50. There is one point of legal interpretation in the
advisory opinion that raises issues far beyond the confines
of the present question of Namibia. I should therefore like
to deal with it first. I refer to that part of the advisory
opinion which asserts that certain resolutions adopted by
the Security Council in this matter were legally binding.
51. This part of the majority opinion seems lo my
delegation to be open to the most serious legal objection.
Some delegations may have wished the Council to take
decisions of a binding character; in order to acllievc this,
indeed, they proposed Bndings which would have brought
the situation within Article 39 of the Charter. Hut these
proposals were not accepted. My Government does not
beheve that the course of events in the Security Council
and in the consultations among its members supports the
conclusion of fact asserted in the Court’s opinion, And, as a
matter of law, my Government considers that the Security
Council can take decisions generally binding on Member
States only when the Security Council has made a
determination under Article 39 that a threat to the peace,
breach of the peace or act of aggression exists. Only in
these circumstances are the decisions binding under Article
25. No such determination exists in relation to South West
Africa or Namibia.
52. I beIieve we would all agree that this question is one
which affects the whole working of this Council and
concerns all Members of the United Nations and indeed
almost every question that comes before us. It has been
referred to in another issue which came before us only two
weeks ago. It is essentiaI that we should get it right,

47. In these circumstances it seems and seems clear that
the South African Government has ignored the moral
obligations undertaken by it under the Mandate. This is
established beyond doubt; on this I think we are all agreed.

2 Lega! Conscqttcnces for States of the Continued Presence of
South

Africa

in

Nmibia

Securit)! Cowkd
resohrticw
Reports 1971, p. 16.
5

(South
West Africa)
2 76 [1970),
Advisory

rlotwithtatrding
Ophtion.
J.C.J.

53. J think it is fair to say that some of the arguments of
the COW-f on the question of the force of Security Council
decisions came as a surprise not only to my delegation, but
to Members of the United Nations generally. Members of
the Cow-d have in the past formed their positions on draft
resolutions on the clear understanding that the CounciJ
could take decisions binding on Member States geflemJJy
only if there had been a determination under Article 39. Jf
tJis is no longer accepted, the working basis which results
from a clear understanding of the legal effects of what the
Council does may be seriously prejudiced, As a practicaI
matter, therefore, it is surely in the interest of all of us that
we should continue to operate on the understanding, well
founded on the Charter, to whjch I have referred, Ctherwise, Yet a new source of uncertainty and potential
disagreement WiII complicate the already difficult tasks
which the. Council faces.
54. J come now to the other important aspects of the
advisory opinion. Let me say again that my Government is
fully conscious of the historical complexity of the legal
issues and it is also fully alive to, and sympathizes with, the
impatience of those who feel frustrated by delay in
achieving objectives inspired by the most understandable
humanitarian sentiments. We do not minimize these factors,
but I hope before I close to suggest a remedy, a possible
way forward.
55. The crucial question in legal terms concerns the
termination of the Mandate. As the opinion of the Court
recognizes, any powers of the United Nations to terminate
the Mandatc depend upon the position under the Leagueof
Nations, since the Mandates System was established by the
Versailles Peace Conference within the framework of the
League of Nations, The first question. therefore, is whether
the League of Nations had the power
to terminate the
Mandate unilaterally. As to this, neither Article 22 of the
Covenant of the League nor the Mandate itself contains any
Provision conferring such a power of termination in any
circumstances. The notion of revocability was indeed
discussed when the Manrates System was established, but
objections were raised to it and it was not incorporated
either in the Covenant or in individual mandates. In these
circumstances, it is not possible, in our view, to infer a
power of uniIateral termination. Moreover, the suggestion
of the existence of such a power does not accord with the
nature of the Mandates System. The System gave no
executive powers to the League, but only a Power to
receive and examine reports.

in fact the Position.
A number oflimited exceptions to
the rule of unanimity are contained in the Covenant. There
is, however,
no PrOViSiOn
which could have deprived a
Mandatory Of its vote so as to enable the Council to
WWJjse any powers in relation to the Mandate without the
Mandatory’s consent, including a power of revocation if
one had existed. It is surely not without significance that
the Leagueof Nations never did revoke a Mandate, or even
try to do so, ever1though accusations of breach of mandate
were made during the Leagueperiod.
WS

57. I come now to General Assembly resolution
2145 CxXJ).The GeneralAssemblyis an organcreatedby
the Charterand canact only within the powersconferred
upon it by the Charter.TheCharterexpIicitIy confersupon
the GeneralAssemblypowerswhich, with certain exceptions, arerecommendatory
only. Thesevery limited exceptions reiateto matterssuchasthoseto whichthe Secretary
of State of Liberia referred/15&M
meeting/ ,, tike the
admission
of newMembers,the approvalof the budgetand
the apportionmentof expenses.
There is no provisionin
them or elsewherein the Charterwhich would give the
Assemblythe powersnecessary
for the terminationof the
Mandate.The exceptions,therefore,arenot of relevancein
the presentcontext. The GeneralAssemblyhasno general
competenceof an executive character, and, with the
exceptionsto which J havereferred,thereis no basisin the
Charterfor the attribution to it of a competenceto adopt
resolutions
whichareotherthanrecommendatory
in effect.
It was for this reasonthat, during the discussionof
resolution 2145(XXI) in 1966, the United Kingdom
delegation,together with a numberof others,expressed
seriousreservationsas to the legaleffectivenessof that
resolution. The argumentbefore the International Court
went into the mattermoredeeplythanhadpreviouslybeen
done; but I am bound to say that, havinggiven the most
careful considerationto the question,my Governmentis
not Persuaded
by the reasoning
advancedin the advisory
opinionto sustainthe validity of resolution2145 (XXI).
58. To sumup, therefore,for my Governmentto be able
to agreethat there wasa power of termination of the
Mandate, certain propositionsof law would have to be
established,It is our considered
view that thesepropositions have not been established
either in relation to the
Leagueor in*relationto the GeneralAssembly.Sincethe
United KingdomGovernmenthasreachedthe COnChSiOn
that the Mandatehas not been validly terminated,we
cannot acceptthe legalconsequences
deducedby the Court
from different premises;
andaccordingly,we cannotaccept
the conclusions
of the Courtsetout in paragraphi 33 of its
advisory opinion. Whateverwe may all feel about South
Africa’s actionsin its administration
of the Territory-and I
have madeclearmy own Government’s
view on this-we are
still facedwith a questionof law; and the seriouslegal
difficultieswhichmy Governmentencounteredearlierhave
not beendispelled.

56. Furtltermore, even if the Mandate over South West
Africa as such was understood as implying some possibility
of revocation in the case of breach, the Council of the
haguc, working within its own constitutional framework,
would not have been in a position to exercise that Power
without he consent of tile Mandatory. Article 5 of the
Covenant provided that the Council of the League must
take its decision by unanimity “Except Where Ot~uXW~~e
expressly provided”. BY Article 4, the Mandatory was
entitled to be present and to vote at meetings of the
Council concerning the Mandate. The Mandatory was thus
in a position to block any resolution seeking to assert and
exercise a power to revoke the Mandate. Whatever our
views on the drafting of the Covenant in this respect, that

59. Jt hasbeensuggested
on variousoccasionssincethe
advisoryopinionwasdelivered,andindeedin the courseof
our own deliberations
in this Council,that the advicegiven
by the Coufi is now bindingon the whole international
community. This, of course,asthe Secretaryof State Of
Liberia hasrightly said,isnot so.Whilean advisoryopinion
6

given by the Court is entitled to be, and must be,
considered with the greatest respect, and while no Govcmmcnt could fail to take it fully into account in assessing
what the legal position is, such an opinion is in law not
binding. The fact that the Court has given its advice cannot
absolve Governments from themselves considering very
carefully all the relevant legal factors, forming their own
view of them and then, honestly and seriously, reaching the
legal conclusions which in their judgement‘flow from that
PrOCeSs. This is what my Government has done.
60. It is in the light of my Government’s position on the
legal aspects that I turn now to the recommendations of the
Ad HOC SubCommittee on Namibia contained in paragraphs18 to 20 of its report /S/IO330/.
61. I shall confine myself in the main to parts A and C. 1
do not think I needto explain why the proposalsin part B
are unacceptableto my delegation; indeed many of the
proposalsin part B do not seemto have any basisin the
position taken by the Court in its advisoryopinion, even if
it were accepted.
62. Rather different considerationsapply when we come
to the proposalsin part A. Even though my delegation is
unable to accept the basic premise on which they are
founded, nor therefore to support the proposals, we
appreciate the considerablerestraint and spirit of compromise which hasbeenshownin drafting them. Wefully share
some of the sentimentsexpressed,My Government agrees
on the importance of the unity and territorial integrity of
Namibi;i and deploresany measuresthat would tend to
destroy them againstthe wishesof the people. It accepts
that all matters affecting the rights of the people of
Namibia are of immediateconcern to all Membersof the
United Nations; and indeedwe agreewith the Ministry for
External Affairs of Sierra Leone that the essentialraison
d’e^tre of the United Nations concern with Namibia, as it
should be of South Africa’s administrationof the Territory,
is the furtherance of the rights and interests of its
inhabitants. It is the interestsof the peopleof the Territory
that should be uppermostin our mindsas we debate this
question. On this we all agree. But as I have suggested
earlier, it would surelyalsobe agreedthat if we aregoing to
take up a position visl-vis a Member country we must be
absolutely sure that the position is soundly and lawfully
based: the implicationsare obvious. Unfortunately, it is
precisely this legal basis that, in the opinion of my
Government, isnot proven.
63. Part C of the proposals,however, appears to my
Government to be a constructive thought and to contain
the seedsof a move forward. Whatever the legal position,
the Government of SouthAfrica is in fact administeringthe
Territory. Realismdictates that it is only by negotiation
with the South African Government that any advance can
be made in the well-beingof the people of the Territory.
And we agree that the essentialpurpose of discussion
should be to ensurethat the people of Namibiaare able to
exercise their right to selfdetermination.
64. We have consistentlysaid, and my Secretary of State
has reiterated this in his speechin ihe General Assembly
/194&h plenary meeting], that it is by dialoguerather than
7

by confrontation that progress can be made: Progress in the
interest above all of the people concerned
I who are human
beings and should not be used a~ pditkd
Fawns0
This,
it
seems to my delegation, is the pat11 we &dd
take. IJI a
complex and difficult situation this does at least offer SOme
prospect of moving towards he goals we wish to attain.

65. There are plenty
of subjects
for disc&on
and
negotiation. They could concern al1 apprwfiate
ways of
reaching agreement on a programme
that would enable the
people of the Teetory to exercise
their right to selfdetermination, a ri&t which is acknowledged
bY all.
Suggestions have been made which are surely worth further
exploration. We can onderslsnei that the terms in Wkll
%some
of thesesuggestions
have been formulated may have
proved unsatisfactoryto many. Neverthele% 1am surethat
therearc variouspossiblemeanswhereby self-determination
could take place and the wishes of the People of Namibia
be ascertainedunder proper arrangements and in such a
way
asto day legitimate anxieties. or again, could we not
follow up the suggestionthat the Secretaryccneral or his
representativemight visit the Territory?
Perhaps some
people will find this hard to reconcile with what they
regardas the legalpositionof the Territory.
Nevertheless,is
it not a possibility sufficiently LntefeSting to warrant
further investigation, without prejudice to the le6sl Psition?
66. My delegationfor its part would be more than ready
to join with other delegationsin urging the South African
Government to enter the path of negotjation-and we
considerthat the Government of South Africa, for its part,
is in duty bound to respond to such an approach and to
co-operatein ensuringthat the peoples of Namibia may
freely and fully exercisetheir just, due and inalienableright
to self-determination,
67. No one, of course,can guarantee that any negotiation
is going to be successfulor 100 per cent satisfactory to
either side. Nevertheless,progress along these lines does
seemto be the most positive of the options that areopen to
us. Whateverour opinionson the legal aspects, can we not
agreethat we should explore every possibility of steering
away from a collision course which would be unlikely to
alter, except for the worse, the present de facto position?
In the opinion of my delegation we ought to make the
attempt.
68. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
&VTI Spmish). The
next speakeron my list is that of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of South Africa. I invite him to be seatedat the
Counciltableand to makehis statement,
69. Mr. MULLER (South Africa):
I wish to comment
briefly on certain cardinal aspects of the debate, without
traversingmattersof detail.
70. With regard to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,Somespeakers have urgedthat this
Council should take the opinion as its point of departure,
Others have seemedto suggest that the Members of the
United Nations and membersof this Council arc in some
way precludedfrom disputing or doubting the correctness
of the majority opinion. Any such suggestion would of

come, be compleiely untenable. An advisory opinion is, as
its name indicates, advisrzy unly. T’he weight to be attached
to it depends, ultimately, on the cogency of its reasoning,
And, for the reasons I have given, the South African
Government cannot accept that the reasoning of the
majority is in the least persuasive.
71. It js important to note that no single speaker in this
debate has answered my criticisms of the opinion. In this
regard I shallrefer briefly to the three main points which 1
raisedin my earlieraddress.
72. The first related to the powers of the General
Assembfy. I said that, “apart from some immaterial
exceptions which were never in issue,the Charter confers
upon the hsscmbly only the power to discussand the
power to recommend” /1584th
meding, pura. 981. On
what basis then could resolution 2145 (XXI) be justified
under the Charter? The Court itself could not indicate any
basis.
73. Nor hasany acceptableCharter basisbeensuggested
in
this Council. For it does not avail to say that the Assembly
can take binding decisionsin respect af the admissionof
Members,the approvalof a budget or the apportionment of
expenses.Expressprovision is made for thesemattersin the
Charter--they are Some of the immateri:d exceptions to
which I referred. But where is the provision which could
provide authority for resolution 3145 (XXI)? We have
askedthe GeneralAssembly. we have askedthe Court, WE
have asked the Sccunty Council. But WCII:IVZ receivedno
rePly ,
74. flow then can we justifiably be accusedof defiance?
Is it reasonable to expect us to accept resolution
2145 (XXI) and the resolutions to which it gave risewhen
we are sincerely convinced that they are legally invalid and
when nobody has answered our arguments in thi conncxion?
75. My secondmaig criti&m of the opinion related to the
powers attributed by the Court to the Security Council.
Memberswill recall that, with a very minimum of reasoning, the Court gave an extremely wide interpretation to
Article 24 of the Charter. Although speakershere have
defendedthis finding of the Court, it is significant that they
did not in any way make good the lack of reasoningin the
opinion.
76. I turn now to the Court’s censureof South African
policies in the Territory. My criticism here was that the
Court’s commentswere irrelevant to its conclusions-that
they were made after the Court had refused to hear
evidence and had spurned the evidence which could have
been obtained by the holding of a plebiscite.Ilu’s criticism
remainsunanswered.

speakers
havesought to convey, that South Africa considers
that it “owns” or ~pos~esses*~
the Territory, and tJfat it
intends, come what Inay, to “‘keep hold” of the TerrltorY
until at leastthe next ckntury. Others have stated that the
reasonfor thjs js the economic benefit which they allege
South Mi-ica is ,&-jtig
from the Territory. It has “Vep
been statedin the &bate that this is why South Affia Is
spendingsomuch on development in the Territory.
79. Let me state categorlcalfy here and now that these
allegationsare not true. South Africa does not claim, and
never hasclaimed,to possessthe Territory. Our PurPase in
the Territory is not our own aggrandizement or enrichment-territorial or otherwise. In fact, Government expenditure on the Territory far exceeds revenue. Our Purpose if
to guideeachof the peoples of South West Africa along the
road to self-determination according to its wishes and, by
developmentin all fields, to bring it to full self-government
and eventualindependence,if this is what it desiresI For we
know
that only by doing this can we ensure the Peaceful
developmentof the Territory, which is essential for the
peaceandthe stability of all of southern Africa.
80. It flasalso been alleged that the various pressreports
which I cited in my earlier address were, “practica&-’
without exception, dictated by the voice of South Africa,
even though they appeared to be the hands of foreign
correspondents.”
81. I mentionedthe other day the namesof only some of
the news agencies,magazines and newspaperswhich had
recently reported on conditions in South West Africa.
There were others from which I could equally well have
quoted to support my statements. AlI those reports
emanatedCorn someof the best-known news media in the
world.
82. J can only say that I am flattered that some should
think that South Africa is able to dictate to media as
powerful asthese-to dictate, moreover, not only that they
must report on South West Africa in the first instance, but
alsowhat they shouId report and how they should report it.
83. Finally, I was asked why, if what 1 say about
conditions in Zhe Territory is true, South Africa did not
co-operatewith the Council for South West Africa and
allow its members to visit the Territory and satisfy
themselves
asto the true facts of the situation.
84. I think that the answer is we11known to everybody
here. We refusedto deal with the Counofl because we did
not accept the validity of resolution 2145 (XXI) and the
establishmentof the Council to which it gave rise. It was
not becausewe had anything to hide. we have on Various
occasionsin the past invited representatives and di@ta&s
of this Organization to visit the Tenjtory and to see
conditions for themselves. We have also invited heads of
foreign miSSiOns
to visit the Territory, and several have
availed themselvesof the opportunity. fie invitation sta
standsfor the others t0 go if they sowish. We haVe invited
the International court of Justice to do the same.And the
other day I repeatedour invitation to the Secretary-General
of the UnitedNations or his representative.

77. The questionof a plebiscite has also been referred to
in this Council. Somespeakershave rejected the idea,while
others have given it their qualified support. Of course,
should the Security Council itself adopt a resolution on this
issue,it would be referredto my Government.
78. There are certain other matters to which I shouldalso
like to refer. The first of these is the idea, wllich certain
8

85.
Notwithstanding these attempts on our part to make
krrnowrt the true situation in South West Africa, the charges
against
us are regularly repeated. They arc founded not
upon any objective evidence but upon the reports of those
who do not know the Territory and have never beenthere
or elseof thosewho, for motives of their own, misrepresent
conditions in the Territory. Distortions and misrepresentations, the evidenceof interestedpetitioners,and films such
as the one shown today-ah are acceptedwithout question
aS the truth.
86.
On the other hand, the views and commentsof those
whose impartiality and integrity cannot be doubted, who
have been to the Territory, who have seenconditions for
themselves
and who have no axe to grind, are summarily
dismissed or simply ignored.
87.
I repeat: we have nothing to hide. On the contrary, on
a variety of occasionsover the past few yearswe have made
information
on conditions in the Territory freely available
to,
irrrer did, the United Nations and the International
Court
of Justice. That information, backedby statistics, is
contained in hundredsof pagesof written documents.Just
the
other day J outlined to the Council someof the more
important
developmentsthat had recently taken place in
the
Territory. And J gave up-to-date and irrefutable
statistics to illustrate the progressbeingmade.
88.
What hasbeenthe reaction in this Council? Instead of
objective
discussion,1 have met with vituperation and have
Ixen
accused of distorting facts and figures. Instead of
cortstructive
criticism, I have heard our very real achieverrlen ts in the Territory being scornfully disparaged.And
when
I ask for answersto fundamentallegalquestions,I am
told
that 1 am indulgingin “legal pyrotecfmics” in order to
becloud
the issues.The information and the statisticswhich
I have given are brandedas false,asclever propaganda.But
not one speakerhassubstantiatedtheseclaims.
139. When all is said and done, it is the interests of the
?eopIes of the Territory which are of paramount impor:am cc.. It is their future and their welfare which are at stake.

>u.

We, for our part, have made a real and significant
:ozltribution
to the material welfare of the inhabitants of
he
Territory and we have promised them independenceif
hat is what they desire,It is our purposeto seethat they
,ealize
their ambitions to the full by way of peaceful
levclopment .
IIOne further comment aproposof the discussionhere
rrr the showing of films to the Security Council. I should
cry
much like to put it on record that South Africa may
Iso in due coursewish to avail itself of an opportunity to
how
a film on the Territory of South West Africa to
Iembers of the Council.
2.
Mr. NAKAGAWA (Japan): First of all, Sir, I wish to
ongratulate
you on your assumptionof the high post of
resident of the Security Council. I alsowish to assureyou
lat
my delegationwill be most happy to participate in the
ztivities
‘of the Council under your most able and
xp erienced leadership.I thank you alsofor your very kind
,ords
addressedto me as the out-going President. I also

wish to thank Mr. Malik, the Ambassadorof the USSR,for
hisvery generouswordsabout me.
93. My delegationconsidersit significantthat the Council
is requestedto considerthe questionof Namibiain the light
of the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice. My Government welcomedthe advisory opinion,
which, in effect, confnmed the validity of the United
Nations decisionto terminate the South African Mandate
and to assumedirect responsibilityfor the Territory until
its independence.Japan has consistently supported this
decisionof the United Nations.
94. Although we do not fully agree with all of the
reasoning,particularly with regardto someinterpretations
of the Charter, underlying the Court’s opinion, we haveno
doubt as to the rightnessof the conclusions of the opinion.
We considerthat the Security Council, in its new efforts to
find a peacefulsolution of the Namibianproblem, should
respect those conclusionswhen formulating ways and
meansto implementthe relevantresolutionsof the Council.
95. Before dealingwith the questionof what action the
Council should take for the peacefur settiement of the
situation in Namibia,1 shouldlike to statebriefly the basic
position of my Government with regardto the continued
presenceof South Africa in the Territory of Namibia.
96. The situation prevailing in Namibia causesUS grave
concern, particularly in view of the reported accelerationin
the extensionand enforcementof South African lawsin the
Territory-moves designedto destroy the national unity
and territorial integrity of Namibiaby a continuing process
of racial and tribal partitioning, along with the over-all
incorporation of the Territory into the South African State.
Japan does not recognize South Africa’s authority over
Namibia and considers that South Africa’s continued
presencein Namibiais illegal. South Africa, therefore, is
under obligation to comply with the decisionsof the
Security Council demandingimmediatewithdrawal from
the Territory.
97. It is further the position of my Government that the
United Nations has direct responsibilityfor Namibiauntil
such time asthe peopleof Namibiacan freely exercisetheir
inalienableright to freedom and independencein accordancewith GeneralAssemblyresolution1514 (Xv).

98. We have no diplomatic, consular, trade or other
official representationin Namibia. Neither have we any
official institutions in any other area that may imply
recognition of South Africa’s authority over Namibia.I aIs0
wish to stressthat no investmenthas ever been made in
Namibia by any Japaneseconcern. Furthermore, the
Government of Japan has not entered into any bilateral
treaty with South Africa which acknowledgesor might
imply the authority of South Africa over Namibia,and has
no intention of doingsoin the future.
99. Turning now to the questionof the action to be taken
by the Security Council, I shouldlike to emphasizethat the
overriding considerationmust be the well-being of the
Namibian people. The advisory opinion of the Court also
makesthis point in paragraphs122,125 and 127.

9

100. I also believe in the wisdom of adopting a realistic
and gradual approach with regard to the full attainment of
the rights of the Namibian people. Certainly, in order to
ensure the effective transfer of administration to the people
of Namibia, there shouId be a civil service corps capable to
performing administrative responsibilities in the Territory,
It was with that consideration in mind that Japan actively
supported the idea of establishing a United Nations Fund
for Namibia to provide assistance to Namibia in various
fields, and in particular to finance a comprehensive education and training programme for Namiiians.
IO]. It is in the light of these considerations as well as of
the basic position of my Government as explained before
that my delegation will study the proposals contained in
the report of the Ad ffoc ‘Sub-Committee on Namibia or
any other proposals put forward before the Council.
102. I should like to take this opportunity to commend
the work accomplished by the Ad Hoc SubCommittee. In
my view, the proposals contained in the report could
usefully serve as the basis of our consideration.
103. My delegation is in general agreement with the ideas
expressed in part A, on which there seemed to be a large
measure of agreement in the Sub-Committee. These proposals, although they do not represent a drastic departure
from past decisions of the Council, are useful and significant in view of the recent advisory opinion of the Court.

on your assumption of the Presidency for this month,
which is likely to become as busy as, if not busier than, the
last two months. If I do break the rule it is because I fee1
that all of us here around this table are indebted to you for
your effective and skilful discharge of the many difficult
tasks entrusted to you by the Council. We are fully
confident that your Presidency will add even more laurels
to the many you have earned for yourself and for your own
country, Nicaragua, in your exceptional, eventful and
brilliant diplomatic career.
109. I wish, furthermore, to pay tribute to Ambassador
Nakagawa for the able and effective manner in which he
conducted our business during one of the busiest sessions of
this Council.
1 IO. Before addressing myseIf to the item under consideration, Mr. President, I wish to inform you that my
delegation is prepared to hold consultations on the question
of the film which was shown today to all members of the
Council who wished to see it. I should like at the same time
to place on record that a member of my delegation went to
see the film and that I myself would have gone personaIIy if
I had not been detained in the plenary meeting of the
General Assembly until 2 o’clock to listen to the statement
of my Foreign Minister, and if I had not been further
detained by a later lunch and other commitments with my
Foreign Minister.

104. My dclcgation can also support some of the ideas
expressed in part B. Above al], we recognize the significance
of the arms embargo with regard to the Territory and
people of Namibia. However, certain other proposals in that
part of the report require further study, particularly
regarding their practical implications, if and when they are
put into effect. We consider it advisable to request the Ad
/foe Sub-Committee to continue its consideration of these
proposals.

]]I _ The question of Namibia-formerly
South West
Africa, a Territory placed under United Nations Mandateis a matter of great concern for the United Nations.
Nowhere, perhaps, has a Member State been more at odds
with this Organization, with its Constitutional principles, its
collective interests and responsibilities, than in the case of
Namibia, It is not necessary for me at this point to dwell on
the causes and consequences of this controversy. The
matter has been dealt with in depth over the years, in the
General Assembly and in this Council. Italy has on many
occasions voiced its opinion and stated its position.

105. We are also in favour;af the proposal contained in
part C: namely, the idea of inviting South Africa to enter
into immediate discussions with the SecretaryGeneral or an
appropriate United Nations organ with a view to ensuring
that the people of the Territory arc able to exercise their
right to self-determination. I should like to stress, however,
that the clear objective of such discussion should be the
attainment of full freedom and independence for the
people of Namibia. The practical aspects of this proposal
should also be studied by the Ad Ifoc Sub-Committee.

112. Nor is it necessary for me today to go deeply into the
deveIcpments that led the United Nations to adopt resolution 2145 (XXI), which terminated the Mandate of South
Africa over the Territory. My country voted for that
resolution. We st8nd firmly by it; all the more so since the
International Court of Justice has confirmed, by its
advisory opinion, the validity of that decision of the
Genera] Assembly.
113. I shall speak onIy briefly about the negative repercussions that the policies of South Africa produce throughout
the African continent. Having had the privilege to listen
during our previous meetings on this subject to the
eloquent exposds made by the President of Mauritania,
Moktar Ould Daddah, acting in his capacity as President of
the Organization of African Unity, and by many distinguished speakers, members of African Governments, I
found those repercussions clearly reflected in what we
heard from some of the most authoritative voices of Africa.
We had, however, long been aware of those negative
repercussions. More recently, the Italian Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Moro, had the opportunity, during his
visits to several African capitals, to observe personally, in

106. I should like to reserve any further comment I may
Ilave until a later stage of our proceedings.
107. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish}:
Personally I am grateful to the representative of Japan for
his expression of praise for me and my conduct of the
Presidency. His courtesy comes as no surprise, because it is
consistent with the proverbial gallantry of the Japanese.
108. Mr. VINCI (Italy): Mr. President, breaking for a
nloment the rule my delegation has folIowed since taking
its seat in this Council-that is to say, to abstain from
complimentary expressions-I wish to congratulate you, Sir,
10

meet% the African leaders, the deep feelings which the
situation in Namibia arouses in Africa. The justified
reactions of African Governments and public opinjon are
one aspectof the questionthat is of growing concernto us.
114. We reahzethat the situation prevailing in Namibiais
unbearable, especially for the young and justly proud
African countries, which
basetheir independenceon the
principle of self-determinationand on the well-founded
=Virations of all African people to shape their future in
accordance with their own free will, to play a role in
international affairs on an equalfooting and to maketheir
own original contribution to the progressof mankindin all
fields. It is, indeed,a shockinganachronismthat, whenthe
process of decolonization is approaching its completion,
when vast-and I should add, short-lived-African colonial
empires have vanished,Namibia, with a few other Territories in that samepart of the continent, should remain
under colonial rule; and, what is more, one of the most
archaic colonial rulesthe world hasever witnessed,basedas
it is on the manifold injustices of racial discrimination,
economic exploitation and exclusionof the native population
from the mainstreamof international life andprogress.

exercisedunder the control of the international community, tluough,the United Nations,in which that cornITludtY is IlOw organized and in accordancewith the
obligationscontainedin the San FranciscoCharter, Wesee
no alternative.
118. The Mandate has a specificinternationalstatusand
cannotbe conceivedof in a vacuum,It cannotexist outside
the international community and outsideany control by
that community; nor canit produceits effects,so far asthe
rights of the Mandatory Power are concerned, while
remainingsuspended
and with the establishmentof obfigations and proceduresto control the fulfilment of those
obligationsparalysedfor ever, unlessSouthAfrica wantsus
to find groundsfor its administrationof the Territory ia
somesort of divine right.
119. It is in order to avoid sucha situation,which could
not have any legal justification, that the Chartercontains
provisionsin Articles 73, 77 and 80, paragraph2, for the
conversioninto Trusteeshipsof the old Mandatesentrusted
to Member States.South Africa is the only MemberState
which hasrefused to comply with the above-mentioned
provisionsandwith the obligationsarisingfrom the Court’s
opinionof 19503andhasrefusedto negotiatein goodfaith
to convert the Mandate over South West Africa into a
Trusteeship.

115. I do not think there is any need at this stageto go
into the many legalaspectsof the question. That hasbeen
done by previous speakersin a very learned manner.
Furthermore, since there is a very wide measureof
agreement on the illegality of South Africa’s presencein
120. The subsequentconduct of South Africa hasclearly
Namibia, the legalaspectsof the question are no longerof
been in violation of the obligations flowing from the
overriding importance.
Mandate,sinceit hasbeen acting to faSteli its grasponthe
Territory by the extension of repressive
legrslation,by the
116. We agreewith the conclusionof the advisory opinion applicationof the policiesof racialdiscriminationandby
of the International Court of Justiceof 21 June 1971. We the partition of Namibiainto ‘native Homelands”, leaving
think that its reasoningon the main question put to it is the developedmodem sectorto uncontestedwhite control.
sound. The Court also deemedit necessaryto pronounce
itself on various other questions,someof which involve 121. In its resolution 2 145 (XXI), the.GeneralAssembly
delicate constitutional problems.The opinion expressed
on drew its inescapableconclusions,and the overwhelming
those problemsmight raise,in our view, very controversial majority of the Member States today recognizethat the
issues,which are not essentialfor dealingwith the question administrationof Namibiaby South Africa has no legal
of Namibia. To give only one example,the Court offereda basisany more. The Security Councilhas,in the preamble
far-reaching interpretation of Articles 24 and 25 of the to its resolution 276 (1970), adopted in January 1970,
Charter-an interpretation which is highly controversial reaffirmedGeneralAssemblyresolution2145(XXI). If we
followed the reasoningthat thoseresolutions
have no effect
and, I must say, not sharedby my Government. Wethink it
is for the Council to decide when its resolutionshave a whatsoever, 1 am afraid that it would amount to an
acceptanceof the view that the United Nationscannotact
mandatory character. But, asI have said, we must look at
the essentialpart of the advisory opinion, concerningthe andis impotentbefore a defiant MemberState.
validity of resolution 2145 (XXI) and the termination of
122. we have noted, on the other hand, that the Minister
the Mandate.
for Foreign Affairs of South Africa spokeat length in an
117. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa has effort to persuadeus that his country hasnot violatedthe
reiterated all along-and again today in a detailed critical obligationsof the Mandate, that the South African Adminexamination of the Court’s Opinion-that South Africa still istration is promotingthe well-beingandthe progressof the
has the right to administerthe Territory. What is the source inhabitants of the Territory and that the South African
of that right? What is the title to it? The answeris not
Governmentis pursuingthe goalsof the Mandate,namely,
controversial. The right to administerNamibia stemsfrom
to bring the people of Namibia to self-governmentand
the Mandate entrustedto South Africa in 1920 by the
fmaUy to the stageof full self-determination
and indepeninter-national community, at that time organized in the
dence.Whilehe wasspeakinga questionhauntedmy mind:
League of Nations. If it is acceptedthat-as South Africa
Was he giving all this abundant information on the
has often contended-the Mandate lapsedwhen the League Territory’s economicand political progressas a way of
reporting to the United Nations asrequiredunder Article
of Nations was dissolved,then the right to administerthe
Territory is also extinguished.If, on the contrary, it is
3 ftjtertlatiotlo[ Status of South WestAfrica, Advisory OPinion,
accepted-as any sensiblepersonaccepts-that the Mandate
survived the Leagueof Nations,then the Mandate mustbe I.C.J. Reports 1950. p. 128.
11

73 c of the Charteri He even invited the Secretary-General
..-.or his representativeto visit the Territory and lo see for
himself the conditions that prevail there, Should this be
consideredan invitation to visit the Territory in the spirit
of Article 87 of the Charter? It seemsto me that these
questionsarejustified, sincewhatever evalution, if any, this
Organization gives of the explanations and information
provided by South Africa dependson the answerto them.
We do not see the purposeand usefulnessof the statement
we have heard, or how the Organisation can take the said
information into consideration, if the rights, the interests
and the authority of the United Nations areto continue to
be totally deniedand opposedby South Africa. Theseare
questions that should be answered in order for us to
understandwhether South Africa is still defying the United
Nations or is trying-as would be sensibleon its part-to
relieve itself of the burden of a dangerousconfrontation
with practically the whole international community.
123. f-lovingsaid this in order to reaffirm our position
once more, J shouldlike to turn now to what we can do to
surmount the presentdeadlock and what stepsWCcan have
recourseto in order to attain our common goal, namely,
that of bringing Namibiato independence.Let me, however, first of all recall that, whatever courseof action we
decide upon, it is of paramount importance that we
maintain complete unity and solidarity. We know that
consensus
is for the United Nations, at this difficult, critical
stageof its life, a precondition of success.We know that
unity hasbecomeeven more imperative now in the face of
the politics pursuedby South Africa in blatant opposition
to the will of the international community. Wemust give a
crq’stalclear demonstration of such a unity of purpose
which will never abate until Namibia is free from colonial
rule.
124. There is no point, I believe, in minimizing or
concealing the many complexities of the question before
us. If we sincerely intend to lay the basis for future
constructjve action by tl&. Organization, we shall be well
advised to appraisethe difficulties fully and to study in
depth the variousproblemsthe situation is confronting US
with. The questionof Namibia is hardly one that we might
expect to solve overnight with hasty or so-calledradical
moves. The United Nations will have to deal with this
questionfor a very long time to come: it mustbe prepared,
therefore, for a long, gradualand persistentaction, which in
the first placeshould be carefully consideredin the short
term and in rhe long run and in the secondplace should
follow different linesand be pursuedby different meansto
enablethe United Nationsto come to gripswith the various
difficult aspectsof the question.
125. For the presentand for the immediatefuture I think
the Council might proceedon the excellent basisprovided
by the suggestions
containedin part A of the report of the
Ad Hoc Sub-Committeeon Namibia. Theseproposalshave
two main objectives:first, to reaffirm in very clear terms
that Namibia is the direct responsibility of the United
Nations, which meansmakinga solemncommitment not to
abandonthe peopleof Namibiato colonial rule nor to shirk
our tasks by contenting ourselves with extreme magic
formulas, radical in words only, that would create more
difficulties or would put the entire burden on the African

States alone; and secondly to establish,following the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice, a
preliminary set of steps that States could envisageas
stemmingfrom the termination of the Mandate.
126. We think that the Ad HOC SubCommittee should
continue its study of the various aspectsand developments
of the question,taking into account the various proposals
made by Member States and particularly the very useful
work done by the Committee of Fourteens set up by the
General Assembly to suggest ways and means for the
implementation of resolution 2145 (XXI). The Italian
delegationplayed an active role not only in the adoption of
that resolutionbut also in the meaningfulwork carriedout
by the Committeeof Fourteen. Many of the ideasdiscussed
in that Committee might be considered again by this
Council’s Ad Hoc SubCommittee on Namibia. The Italian
delegation has also tried to contribute in a constructive
manner to the work of the Ad HOCSub-Committeeon
Namibia and we are ready to continue to give our
cooperation in the future in the samespirit.
127. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fiotn Spanish): I
thank the representative of Italy for his kind words
addressedto me. They pleaseme evenmore becausethey
come to me from an illustrious son of the Italian nation,
one of the belovedLatin motherlandsof my own country,
and AmbassadorVinci is an outstandingpersonality in the
international world.
128. 1havejust received a letter from the representativeof
Saudi Arabia /S/l U353/, requesting, under rule 37 of the
provisional rulesof procedure of tfle Council, to be allowed
to participate in our debate. Following our usualpractice, I
intend to invite him to participate in our deliberations,
without the right to vote.
At the imitotiotl of the President, Mr. J, Baroody (Saudi
Arabia) took a placeat the Security Council table.
129. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I thank you,
Mr. President,and the membersof the Council for granting
me permissionto participate in the debate. Looking at the
President of the Council, who hails from a smallcountry
and who has proved his ability to presideover this body, it
gives representativesof smaJ1nations like my own hope
that, after all, we may have ideasthat are constructive, in
spite of the fact that we do not exerciseworld power.
130. You wilI note from what I am going to say on the
item before the Council that my statementwill in no way
be predicated on solidarity. Nor would it be useful, I
believe, for me to contest legal opinions or juridical
decisions,including the opinion of the International Court
of Justice. I shall do my best to avoid swervingfrom one
point of view to another regarding proffered solutions;to
what may appearan intractable problem.However, I hasten
to say that it is indeed difficult not to be upsetby policies
of racial discrimination, one brand of which, in South
Africa, is known asapartheid.
131. However, I ShalJnot be emotionally involved in my
statement regardingapartheid becausewe are here to find a
4 Ad Hoc Committee
on SouthWestAfrica.

12

solution rather than to incriminate and to hurl invectives or
cast aspersions at others. My approach to the problem will
be, if I may say so, a little avarzt-garde in some of its
aspects.

-I-,. ^.._ I..
L. -..J---^.J
“..At,..^,A +l.,.
..I..,” pupv
“.“,....,O AC”
,L:J GLlU”IxxI
L‘1G .Wlt”lF
“L II
LO ue e”““rseu,
former German colony over to South Africa. By what right
was that done? There is no use crying over spilt milk: what
was done cannot be undone.

132. Some members of the Council might say: why should
Saudi Arabia be so concerned about the Mandate of South
West Africa-which
was christened Namibia by the United
Nations in 1966? Remember that many of our brothers,
our Moslem brothers, are Africans, and the Moslems are one
community. We have bonds with the Africans-not through
religion, although many of them were indeed Arabized, and
we belong to the same culture, So is it astonishing that 1
should ask for the floor, when some who hail from Europe
or the new hemisphere concern themselves to such an
extent as to appear as if they were the arbiters of problems
like the one which confronts us.

136. The Republic of South Africa, as I said, had the
Mandate transferred to it-but
on certain conditionsthrough the United Kingdom. In fairness to the United
Kingdom, we must say %nder certain conditions”, under
specific terms of the League of Nations.

133. Let me say that during the first two decades after the
founding of the United Nations almost all the colonies,
mandated Territories and other nonselfgoverning
Territories emerged as independent States, which were subsequently admitted to membership of the United Nations. In
fact, all that is left for the Trusteeship Council nowadays is
to handle such small geographical entities as New Guinea,
administered by Australia, and the Trust Territories of the
Pacific Islands.
134. But let us go to the root of the matter, the reason
why this problem seems to be insolubIe-although, if South
Africa does not heed the warnings of African States that do
not exercise enough power to dislodge South African
authorities from the erstwhile Mandate, I would only ask
our South African colleagues to delve not into books of
ancient history, but rather into those of relatively modern
times. Why should there be such a Territory as South West
Africa, or Namibia, which still presents us with a problem?
And I must be very frank here. The difficulty all started
with what happened in the Congo. The dispute among
major Powers regarding the serious situation in the Congo
at the end of the fifties paved the way to the creation of a
subsidiary body, namely, the anti-colonial Special Committee of 17 members,5 which was created for the purpose
of helping to liquidate the remnants of colonialism which
still existed, mostly in the African continent. The membership of that Committee was later increased to 24. I believe
that it is now 22, two major Powers having withdrawn from
it I And then we find another subsidiary body established by
the Genera1 Assembly in 1967, which came to be known as
the United Nations Council for Namibia.
135. I am not going to state who or what countries
suggestedthat the Committee of Seventeen-later TwentyFour-should be created or who created or persuadedusto
create the United NationsCouncil for Namrhia.Suffice it to
say that they were major Powers. I do not want to
embarrasspeopleby citing names. I submit-and I said so
from the rostrum of the General Assembly in 1966~that it
wdsa grave mistakeon the part of the GeneralAssemblyto
terminate the Mandate over South West Africa granted to
the Republic of South Africa. The Mandate was granted
originally to the United Kingdom; and, as if it were a
5 Seefoot-note1.

13

Llltx,“(:

137. I lived in an area that had been part of the Ottoman
Empire and was divided into Mandated Territories-and
Mandated Territories are colonies in disguise. HOW do I
know? I lived in one and I rebelled in another; and I had to
leave the Territory in 1929 and I had io go back. We know
what Mandates are. However, prinra facie, the Mandated
Territories were Territories that were granted by the Treaty
of Versailles to certain Powers-they
happened to be the
victor Powers-by an agreement known as the Sykes-PicotSazonov Agreement. When the Revolution broke out in
1917 Sazonov was forgotten, so the agreement became
known as the Sykes-Picot Agreement. The United States
was not a Power to contend with in those days.
138. Mr. Wilson, President of the United States, proclaimed the Fourteen Points at Versailles-and I was a
contemporary of that era; I am not talking from the history
books. We were personally involved in Versailles, those of
us who were young men in their twenties. I must say the
Russiansgave that secret agreementto the Germansand
dropped out of it; they did not want any territories-they
had enoughterrito? in the Soviet Union. It becameknown
asthe Sykes-Picotagreement, and all of a suddenwe found
ourselvespartitioned into British and French Mandated
Territories. The British had the lion’s share,including the
Mandate over Palestine. They even tried to dislodgethe
French from their Mandate over Syria in 1920, but they did
not succeedbeceuseone of the emirs-and I do not want to
mention his name-who had been placed by them played
the British game,and the French oustedhim.
139. Weremember those days. We were the victims, the
powerlessvictims under the Mandate. But there wasa good
feature too about those Mandates. In accordancewith their
terms, the Mandatory Powers took upon themslevesthe
responsibility of preparing the peoplesof those Territories
for ultimate independence.The Mandateswereclassifiedas
A, B, C, and so forth. South West Africa was classified,I
believe, as a C Mandate-Mr. Muller, the Minister for ForeignAffairs of South Africa, whom I seesitting here, could
tell me which it was. That is how they grade peoplesin
schoo1s-A, B, C, D. But we, the AMandates, were
rebelling.I participated-peacefulry-in a rebellionin 1925,
in Damascus.We demonstrated in the cities of the Middle
East. But it took a second world war to liberate us from
the Mandatory Powers, becausewe ourselvesdid not have
sufficient power. We organized bands and harassedthe
Mandatory Powers, and then they would crushthose that
we called nationalists but that they called terrorists.
Nothing haschanged;today, anyone who is againsta great
power is a terrorist, a rebel, but the peoplewho arefighting
for their independencecall him a nationalist. The nomenclaturedcpcndson which sideyou are on,

140. NOW, I must say something that will not sit well with
many of my colleagues who suffered under the Nazis. Had
it not been for Hitler, we might still be rebels and terrorists.
Not that Hitler liberated us, but the Second World War
accelerated the liberation movement in our territory. I do
not wish to go into details, but this is by way of a preface
to what may take place in South West Africa, alias Namibia.
What’s in a name? What we call a part of Africa others may
call either a Mandate or Namibia.
141. When the Mandate was terminated in 1966, I warned
the United Nations that we were committing an error by
cutting the legal cord-the umbilical cord, if you want to
call it that-that tied South West Africa to the United
Nations, the heir of the League of Nations; this @a&ation, as far as the Mandates are concerned, is the heir of the
League of Nations. We should never have cut that cord. I
think our colleagues from South Africa were quite pleased,
because we gave them a free hand. And now we critic&
them. Wetell them we do not consider them the Mandatory
Power, and then we ask them why they are doing this, why
they are doing that, in Namibia, Where is the logic in our
asking them these questions?

of Namibian passport or identification document for
travelling. That is all right for refugees.But we have a High
Commissioner for Refugees in Geneva, who could have
furnished papers for that purpose.
143. As I said, all these things were lollipops that were
given to us by certain Powers to pacify us, as if we were

children, those Asians and Africans who thought that by
christening South West Africa with the name of Namibia,
by creating a passport for it, by making speeches in the
General Assembly and the Security Council, we would, as I
said, throw the mantle of freedom over the people of South
West Africa.

’

144. The liberation of Territories like South West Africa
or Namrbia cannot be attained by petitioners abroad or by
leaders who chose or were compelled to leave, if they do
not risk their lives by becoming activists for true independence jnside the mandated Territory itself. Such a style of
activity, assumed by expatriates, some of whom are genuine
leaders end others self-styled leaders, has boomeranged in
the past. I am speaking from personal experience. The
struggle for independence should be carried out from
within in order to be effective. Independence cannot be
gained by vociferous speeches carried out by political
emigres from without,

142. For an organization such as ours to give a Territory a
name and declare it independent, without implementing its
decisions, has proved to be futile, if not ludicrous.
145. Hence the United Nations should wake up and take
Decisions which are not bolstered by the collective power
some drastic steps to rectify the error that it has made by
of the United Nations have proved to be most ineffective,
thoughtlessly terminating the Mandate and concurrently
to say the least. The mere fact that the United Nations
Council for Namibia has no power whatsoever to influence
creating an academic Council, which, incidentally is costing
the policies of the Republic of South Africa should be
the Organisation unnecessary expenditure, while we are on
carefully pondered. In effect, that Council is only a
the brink of insolvency, as all members know. And some
glorified committee-and I say this with all due respect to
countries which cry out to high heaven-mostly countries
its members, who are friends of mine. They constitute,
which are able to contribute to the United Nations
rather, a committee on Namibia in the United Nations. And
budget-are even speaking of creating a new post of High
why was the Council created? I submit that it wascreated
Commissioner for Human Rights, with an initial expense of
as a pacifier for those African, Asian and other Members
$300,000, which will reach $3 million in a couple of years.
who, without let-up, raised their voices in the General
I do not understand how some people can rationalize with
Assembly and the Security Council in the hope that by so respect to such posts when we are on the brink of
doing they could throw&he mantle of freedom over the
bankruptcy. I think man is not so much a rational animal as
people of the Mandated Territory of South West Africa,
he is a ration&zing animal. We find excuses for posts we
which has been christened Namibia. It would have been far
want to create. But a remedy should be found for dealing
with this unfortunate situation, which developed from our
better if the Members of the United Nations had followed
own errors here.
certain practical suggestions that were submitted in a draft
resolution in the General Assembly in 1966,* stipulating
146. With thi permission of the President, I should like to
that the Republic of South Africa should be persuaded to
make a few suggestions. I believe that private negotiations
accept either observers or one or more co-administrators to
may be carried out with the Government of South Africa
accelerate the process of SeIfdetermination and subsequent
for placing the erstwhile Mandated Territory, currently
accession to independence of the Mandated Territory, just
known as Namibia, under the Trusteeship Council. I believe
as all the other Mandatory Powers were supposed to do.
the ice was broken by our illustrious colleague, the
Instead, after the creation of the Council for Namibia,
representative of France, in his intervention yesterday
decisions were taken by the General Assembly and the
[1588th meetirrg] which I have read very carefully. Do not
Security Council that have proved to be quite abortive.
underestimate the sagacity of the French intellect for
Petitioners were invited amongst us-some of them very
finding practical solutions. The French are logical. They
respectable petitioners: some belonged to churches, others
have always been dubbed logical, and sometimes the world
were genuine political figures. They were invited to testify
does not go by logic. It is not true. They are both logical
before us, after which rhetorical statements were made by
and practical, as we can see from solutions such as those
representatives-sometimes including me-year in, year out,
without achieving any tangible results. The Genera1 Assem- contained in the intervention of the representative of
France. The Ambassador of France said:
bly even went so far as to take decisions for creating a sort
6 See Olficial
Session, Plenary

Records
Meeting,

of the

General

Assembly,

“It is the obligation to negotiate in good faith with the
United Nations for the establishment of an international

Woenty-first

1449th meeting, paras.164-178.

14

,

rkgime enabling the, people concerned freely to choose
their destiny.“’ /15881I1 meeting, para. 22./

made that it would like to see Namibia independent in the
future.

And 1 liked what he said when he spoke of legal polemics,
There are not only political polemics; there can also be legal
polemics, and there can be just polemics. Polemics do not
solve anything. The representative of France also said :

147. That is a gentle warning by one of the four major
Powers, and that is why 1 think the ice is broken. I believe
that in his statement today the Ambassador of Italy
mentioned something to that effect. Those statements tally
with my suggestions.

152 i I must say a few good words about Powers that
administer Trust Territories. Australia’s record and that of
the United States have been quite satisfactory, to the
extent that in the Pacific Islands the United States has been
criticized for pouring in so many funds that the people do
not want to work any more and they are importing labour
from outside. Sometimes they go too far by accelerating
the raising of the standard of living of people to the
detriment of their own currency. Australia has been
spending, I think, something like $60 to $100 million to see
that New Guinea ultimately gains its independence. Do we
mean to say that the people of New Guinea are more
advanced than the people of Namibia? And here you find
the administering Power-in this caseAustralia-accelerating
the accession to independence of those people who at one
time were thought to be among the most primitive in the
world the people of erstwhile West Irian.

148. My first suggestion is to place Namibia under the
Trusteeship Council, and, let me hasten to say, with South
Africa IIS the major administering Power. We do not want to
create problems by placing a Territory under the Trusteeship Council. That should not imply that we are alienating
the Republic of South Africa. On the contrary, we should
like it to do the administering. But show us your good faith
and accept some observers-civilian observers, incidentally:
no military observers-and accept a couple of co-administrators, stable Africans, because Africans and Asians and
Europeans may be emotionally unstable also, and stable
Scandinavians, who are from the north and are coldblooded. There should not be a monopoly of administration by South Africans.

153. There is no reason whatsoever why South Africa
should not accept the suggested plan of entering into an
agreement with the Trusteeship Council in regard to
Namibia, On the other hand, the erstwhile Mandated
Territory of South West Africa-known as Namibia-is
economically viable. I read a very interesting booklet that
was sent to me by the Republic of South Africa. Today we
saw a film. It showed that South West Africa-or Namibiahas tremendous possibilities. I do not see any hurdles or
any difficulties if South Africa really means Namibia to
gain independence. Let South Africa prove its goodwill.
The Trusteeship Council is doing nothing: let it concern
itself with the remnants of colonialism in the African
continent.

149. This, of course, would involve an agreement between
the Government of South Africa and the Trusteeship
Council, which would define South Africa’s responsibilities
and obligations for paving the way for the autonomy and
ultimate independence of Namibia.

154. I hardly have to draw the attention of members to
the fact that pohtics revolve around economics and finance
in the world, whether we like it or not. It has been
suggested to me time and again that that is a Marxist
theory. It is not a Marxist theory; it has been a theory since
Adam and Eve. Cain and Abel, in the Bible-whether they
existed as such or were mythological-had the whole world
for themselves, and one killed the other out of greed.
Organized society tries to curb greed through law-greed,
ambition for power and even glory.

“If South Africa were to fail to abide by its strict
obligation to negotiate with the United Nations for a new
international regime for South West Africa, Prance would
draw its own conclusion about the illegality of an
administration maintained under such conditions.“7
[ibid , para 27.1

150. The Government of South Africa may well be
advised to admit observers, as I mentioned, chosen by the
Security Council-which would be in conformity with what
Ambassador Malik always says, namely, that the Security
Council is the responsible body-or by any other instrumentality that may be agreed upon, so that we may not be
exclusive, in order to check on the reports that the
Government of South Africa would be requested to submit
periodically to the Trusteeship Council. Then and only
then, it may be hoped, Namibia would gain ultimate
independence through the process of self-determination.
Otherwise, we shall be going in circles, achieving nothing
worth while.
15’1. By agreeing to consider the erstwhile Mandated
Territory of South West Africa, known as Namibia, as a
Trust Territory, and by taking the necessary measures
towards that end on the aforementioned lines, the Government of South Africa would prove the sincerity of the
various statements and declarations that it has recently

155. South Africa is not like many Member States that
can hardly pay their officials and diplomats abroad and yet
are Members of the United Nations. They have been
admitted to membership, and before they were admitted
they became independent. So by dint of what logic can we
be told that Namibia-or South West Africa-is not fit to
gain independence, comparing it with many Territories that
ultimately became independent? There is no logic that
could tell us that it is not fit.
156. I am going to propose something to our friends from
the Republic of South Africa. They have gold; they have
diamonds-not only ornamental diamonds. Today in the
film we sawbushels of industria1 diamonds too, in Namibia
itself. I do not know where the Oppenheimers or the
de Beers operate, but they must have considerable interests
in Namibia. Then there is Persian lamb. It is called

7 Quoted in Frenchby the speaker.
15

“Persian”, but I think that some of the best lamb the ladies
wear as fur coats Comes from that part of Africa. We saw
ranches in the film and breeding stock, and what not, and a
sparse pophti~~~
and desert. Saudi Arabia is a desert too,
but we are prosperous. It has great possibilities. The
country needs devcloprnent, but when you develop a
country economically you have to educate the people and
wllen you educate the people they begin to clamour for
independence.
157. DOW South Africa want to accelerate the Territory’s
economic development to suit its own purposes, or does it
want to develop it in an orderly fashion that would suit the
Territory until it can afford to give Namibia its independence?
J 58. I submit that one day the Africans, who cannot wield
power now, will be able to activate movements of rebellion
within Namibia. And then a lot of innocent blood will be
shed. Usually it is innocent blood that is shed. The blood of
whites is red, and the blood of blacks is red. A lot of human
blood would be shed. It is a shame to differentiate between
blood.
159, ‘i’hercfore-and this is the al)ant-garde part of my
statement-having witnessed what has happened during the
hst
month or so, since 15 August, to the currencies that
have been floating like feathers all over Europe on account
of what happened in deficits of budgets, balance of
payments, et al., I suggest that it is within the power of
South
Africa to float bonds with a gold parity, and those
honds would be issued strictfy to accelerate the devclopmcnt of Namibia, which would be placed under the
trusteeship of the Security Council. And I submit that, as
Namibia develops, it will want independence. WC saw a few
of its leaders in the film today, but one of them mentioned
that he is not allowed to travel to places that are
isolated-isolated not geographically but politically, by the
administering Power.
160. I am sure that if SL@bondsbasedon a gold parity
were floated, South Africa could use the proceeds for
economicdevelopment-not on showcase
lines, showingUS
a school asin the film, but by building a hundred schools
like the one which they erected and which, I must say,
seemsto be quite modern, with clean and hygienic
facilities. I venture to say that many blacks from the
Republic of South Africa would then flock to Namibia to
find jobs-jobs would be available-andthe pressureof the
blacksmultiplying and overtakingmoreand more the white
population in the Republic of South Africa would be
lessened;the whites would be happy not to be overly
out-numbered,and the blacks would regain their dignity
and have a land. And one day, I predict, if South West
Africa-or Namibia-becomeshighly developed,the whites
will beg the blacksto comeback and work with them-as
hashappenedherein NewYork City.
161. Thirty yearsago, I remember,New York City had a
relatively meagreblack population. But the whites beganto
live on welfare, the politiciansgavethem all they wanted in
order to gain their votes, and they became“bums”, to use
an Americanterm. So the blacksfrom the South who were
strong and willing to work cameand took many jobs in
16

New York City, and I beganto seerepresentativesof the
black community. ‘Ihey multiplied, and now, unfortunately, the politiciansare even putting a lot of blacks on
welfare for their votes. But that is another sftsry; that ia
what is happeningherein NewYork City, which is my city.
Having lived here for 31 years I must know something
about it.
162, I maintainthat through the issuanceof bondsbased
on a gold parity-for which, I am sure, there will be many
customersall over the world, becausenobody can trust a
currency any more which hasnothing to bolster it except
some sort of sclf5tyletl economists
trying unsuccessfulIyto
find a solution-there could be an acceleratedeconomic
development of Namibia;Namibiawould be able to stand
on its own feet as a viable political entity. Then, in an
orderly fashion, the right to selfdetermination would be
exercisedthrough the instrumentality and underthe super.
vision of the United Nations,taking into account the fact
that we do not want to sever South Africa from that
Territory right away and that it would be the administering
Power, with observersand co.administrators,until everybody washappy,regardless
of the colour of his skin.
163, The PRESIDENT (interprclatiorz from Spmisltj: i
thank the representativeof SaudiArabia for his very cordial
referencesto meand to my country.
164. Mr. FARAH (Somalia):Severalrepresentativeshave
spokenthis afternoon about the needto apply the principle
of self-determinationin Namibia.We have heard it men.
tioned in one manner by Mr. Muller, we have heard it
repeatedby the representativeof the llrtited Kingdom; we
have heard it expounqed againby the representative of
Saudi Arabia. Now, it isvery important that we shouldhave
an understandingof what we meanby self-determination
for the people of Namibia, becausewe at the United
Nations have our own conceptof what self&termination
should mean.Wealwaystry to relate it to a certain context,
wItich has been very graphically described in General
Assembly resolution1514(XV).
165. On 30 June 1971 a group of black churchmenin
South West Africa addresseda communication to Prime
Minister Vorster. It wassignedby BishopDr. L. Auala,who
is Chairman of the Church Board of the Evangelical
Lutheran OvahbokavangoChurch. In that letter he proceededto outlinehow the policiesbeingappliedto Namibia
contravened more than ten articles of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. Amongst them arc three
which I feel should be brought to the attention of the
Council. The Bishopandhis colleagues
said:
“The Governmentmaintainsthat by the race policy it
implementsin our country, it promotesand preservesthe
life and freedom of the population. But in fact the
non-white population is continuouslybeing slightedand
intimidated in their daily lives. Our people are not free
and by the way they aretreatedthey do not feel safe.
“In this regard we wish to refer to Article 3 of the
Human RightsDeclaration.
“We cannot do otherwise than regard South West
Afrjca, with all its racialgroups,asa unit .”

166. It is very important for tnc~riher~ to keep that in
mind, because the whole theme of the statements made in
this COUMI and in the General Assembly by Mr. Muller was
that his Government wishes to apply the principle of
s4fdetcr&atjon-but
within the context of existing
multi-national units in South Africll,

167. Now, the people there want to be regarderl a: one
political unit-as one people-not differentiated by their
colour, religion or ideology. When we here thi?k of
selfdetermination we think of it within that context. A
people is one; once people live in a countrv it is their
country, and how it progresses is their dcztiny; you cannot
divide up the destiny of a country on the basis of the
colour or creed of the people constitatjry its population.
168. The letter goes on to say:
“People are not free to express or publish their
thoughts or opinions openly. Many experience l,umiIisting espionage and intimidation which has as its goal that
a public and accepted opinion must be expressed, but not
one held at heart and of which they are convinced. How
can Articles 18 and 19 of the Human Rights Declaration
be realized under such circumstances?
“The implementation of the poIicy of the Government
makes it impossible for the political parlies of the
indigenous people to work together in a really responsible
and democratic manner to build the future of the whole
of South West Afrjca. We believe that it js important in
this connexion that the use of voting rights should also be
allowed to the non-white population (Articles 20 and 21
of the Human Rights Declaration).”

17

169. I do hope that when Mr. MuIler next speaks he will
expand upon how he or his Government conceives of the
principles of the right to self-determination. I wouId also be
interested to know-of course, I am atready aware of the
French experience-how France itself interprets that concept and also how the United Kingdom delegation interprets jt, because I am afraid we shall be using that term so
loosely that we shall be causing unnecessary misunderstanding.
170. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET (France) (interprefution
from Frettch): Yesterday-and now again-Mr. Farah, the
Ambassador of Somalia, asked us a question, In my
statement yesterday /1588th meeting] I spoke of the
people of NamlIia and their right to selfdetermination.
The Ambassador of Somalia has asked how we conceived of
thal right. We have a very clear conception-and we have
shown it by our own example in the Territories which we
administered in the past. It is selfdetermination within the
framework of one Territory, not a fragmentary selfdetermination, for instance at the communal level or at the
level of small entities. Self-determination applies to a
national framework.
171. I shall prot-ably have an opportunity later on to
express other ideas in reply to the various questions asked
of me, but 1 wanted to offer that clarification now to the
Ambassador of Somalia.
172. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I am very satisfied with the
expjartation given by the representative of France.
