UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIR

C&UNCIL

RECbI(DS

T Y-F0 UR TH YEAR

2112th

MEETING:

NEW

15 JANUARY

1979

UN
LIBRA.
RY
MAY

4 1982

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/21 12) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Telegram dated 3 January 1979 from the Deputy Prime Minister in charge of
Foreign Affairs of Democratic Kampuchea to the President of the Security
Council (S/13003) . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

wPv.2112

1
1
1

.

,I.. .-!I%

i,

‘,‘,I :

GE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital &t&s combined
5 I, ‘. y..
figures.. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
“‘!,.,:; i ., ..‘.‘.’ with
d&&nt...-:
r;i:. .“’i
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly SuppZements of the Oflcial Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of .Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

_..

_.

2112th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 15 January 1979, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Donald 0. MILLS

(Jamaica).

3. I wish to advise the Council that I have been informed
by the representative of China that, in view of the efforts
made by the sponsors of the draft resolution put forward on
behalf of the non-aligned countries, China does not press at
this stage for a vote on the draft resolution contained in
document S/13022.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolii, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Zambia.

4. I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution sponsored by Bangladesh, Bolivia, Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait,
Nigeria and Zambia, that is contained in document S/13027.

Provklonal agenda (S/Agenda&ll2)
1. Adoption of the agenda

A vote was taken by show of hat&.

2. Telegram &ted 3 January 1979 from the Deputy Prime
Minister in charge of Foreign Affairs of Dem+
cratic Kampuchea to the President of the Security
Council (S/13003)
The meeting was called to order at 4.20 pm

In favour: Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, France, Gabon,
Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Zambia
Against:
Republics

Adoption of the agenda

Czechoslovakia,

Union

of Soviet Socialist

The result of the vote was 13 in favour, 2 against.

The agenda was adopted.

The &@t resolution was not adopted one of the negative
votes being that of a permanent member of the Council.

Telegram dated 3 January 1979 from the Deputy Prime
Minister la charge of Foreign Affairs of Democratic Kampuchea to t&e Pm&lent of the Security Cmdl (S/l3003)

5. The PRESIDENT:
A number of delegations have
asked to be allowed to speak following the vote. I shall now
call on them.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the:previous meetings, I invite the delegation of
Democratic Kampuchea to be seated at the Council table. I
invite the representatives of Australia, Bulgaria, Cuba, the
German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Indonesia, Japan,
Malaysia, Mongolia, New Zealand, the Philippines, Poland,
Singapore, the Sudan, Thailand, Viet Nam and Yugoslavia
to take the scats reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

6. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (interpretationj?om Chinese):
The Chinese delegation has carefully studied the draft resolution sponsored by Bangladesh, Bolivia, Gabon, Jamaica,
Kuwait, Nigeria and Zambia [S/13027]. In our view, the
draft resolution is not strong enough. But in order to show
respect for the efforts made by the non-aligned States
members of the Council and the draft resolution tabled by
them, we consider that, basically speaking, it in effect condemns the Vietnamese authorities for trampling upon the
Charter of the United Nations and for their crimes of armed
aggression against Democratic Kampuchea and calls upon
Viet Nam to withdraw immediately all its invading military
forces from Democratic Kampuchea. Since the draft resolution contains the basic and minimum elements, we have
decided to support it, and considerthat the Security Council
and the Secretary-General should immediately take effective measures to ensure the speedy implementation of the
aforementioned resolution.

At the invitation of the President, the delegation of Democratic Kampuchea took a place at the Council table; Mr. Anderson ‘(;4utralia), Mr. Yankov (BuIgaria), Mr. Roa Kouri
(Cuba), Mr. Zachmann (German Democratic -Republic),
Mr. HaI& (Hungary), Mr. Anwar Sani @ukmesia), Mr. Abe
(Japan), Tan Sri zairon Ibrahim (Malaysia), Mr. Dashtseren
(Mongolia), Mr. Francis (New ZeaIan~, Mr. Yang0 (Philip
pines), Mr. Jaroszek (Poland), Mr. Koh (Singapore),
Mr. SahIouI (St&n), Mr. Guna-Kasem (ThaiIand), Mr. Ha
Van Lou (Wet Nam) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the
places reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber.

7. The following can be seen clearly through the debate
over the past few days:

2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at this morning’s meeting, the Security Council will
proceed to vote immediately in connexion with the draft
resolutions before it.

--Fit,
all Council members and many non-members,
except for those of the Soviet bloc, have unaminously con1

demned the Vietnamese authorities for the most barbarous
undeclared war on the military occupation of Democratic
Kampuchea, a weak and small non-aligned country, a war
which Viet Nam has launched with the full support of the
Soviet Union for their respective goals of greater and lesser
hegemonism, thus verifying the basic truth as to who is the
aggressor and who the victim of aggression. It should be
stressed that even the Soviet Union and Viet Nam dare not
say that there is no presence of Vietnamese troops on the
territory of Democratic Kampuchea.
-Secondly, the overwhelming majority of the Council
members and the great majority of United Nations membership recognize the Government of Democratic Kampuchea
as the sole legal government and true representative of the
Kampuchean people. They all strongly demand that Viet
Nam must put an immediate end to its crimes of aggression
against Democratic Kampuchea and withdraw forthwith
all its aggressor forces from Kampuchea in order to guarantee the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Democratic Kampuchea and ensure peace and security in
South-East Asia, the Asia-Pacific region and the whole
world.
-Thirdly, the Soviet Union, Viet Nam and a few other
Soviet-directed satellites have been playing all sorts of
tricks, using the most abusive language and seeking all
kinds of pretexts to reverse right and wrong and legalixe
Viet Nam’s crimiil acts of armed aggression against Kampuchea. The more they do so, the more it reveals their ugly
features, and the more isolated they become. As the Chinese
saying goes, they are “watched by all and denounced by
everyone”. By using another veto, the Soviet Union is
revealing its predatory ambition to push forward its global
hegemonism in all parts of the world, in reckless violation of
the basic purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Such conduct will undoubtedly further arouse the consciousness of the people of the world.
8. Over the past few days, the Soviet Union and its followers, big and small, have in their statements shamelessly
slandered and vilified China a number of times. In order not
to be taken in by the Soviet dilatory and haggling tactics, we
refrained from exercising our right of reply right away. Now
I deem it necessary to reply briefly to some of their attacks,
to set the record straight.
9. In the past few days, the Vietnamese representative has
on more than one occasion put forward a number of absurd
arguments to justify Viet Nam’s massive armed invasion of
Democratic Kampuchea and wantonly heaped venomous
slanders and calumnies on China. However, no lies can
cover up the hard truth. It suffices for me to point out the
following.
10. First, the Vietnamese representative has kept on saying that what has happened is not Viet Nam’s massive
armed invasion of Democratic Kampuchea but a so-called
%rsurgence” of the Kampuchean people and a “civil war**
in Kampuchea. These rotten lies have long been exploded
by fair world opinion. These lies concocted by Viet Nam are
so clumsy that they could not even deceive pupils of the
lowest grade, as rightly pointed out by some representatives
in their statements. And so I will not bother to elaborate on
them.
11. As a matter of fact, it is the habitual trick used by all
aggressors in history to produce a puppet in order to put a

legal cloak on their aggression and annexation of a sovereign State. The only thing is that this time the Vietnamese
authorities are even more barefaced and clumsy in their
behaviour. It is reported that an organization consisting of a
handful of puppets who have been brought to Phnom Penh
by the Vietnamese aggressor forces has now changed its
name, calling itself a “republic”. However, a puppet is a
puppet by any other name. Its purpose is simply to pave the
way for the establishment of a so-called “Indo-Chinese
federation*’ under the sole control of Viet Nam and for
further Soviet expansion in Asia and the Far East. Directed
by the Soviet Union, the Vietnamese authorities can invade
Kampuchea today, and the next day do the same to other
neighbouring States. As Foreign Minister Rajaratnam of
Singapore incisively pointed out, “the Vietnamese have
established a United Front for the National Salvation of
Kampuchea. We wonder whether two years from now, it
will be necessaryfor them to set up other salvation fronts for
the countries of the Association of South-East Asian
Nations”. In our view, this kind of worry is not unwarranted.
12. Secondlv. like a thief crvina “catch the thief’. the
Vietnamese representative tried to make it appear that it
was Kampuchea that had “launched” an “aggression” and
a “‘border war” against Viet Nam and not Viet Nam that
had launched an armed invasion of Kampuchea. This is
even more incredible. As is known to all, it has been Viet
Nam’s long premeditated plan to annex Kampuchea. This
is an important step in its pursuance of regional hegem*
nism and in its service to Soviet global expansionism. As its
plan met with firm resistance from Democratic Kampuchea, it did not hesitate to resort openly to military aggression for the realixation of its ambitions. Not long ago, the
Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Nguyen Duy Trinh, brazenly
claimed that Viet Nam could capture Phnom Penh in 24
hours if it so desired. This one sentence has revealed the real
intention of the Vietnamese authorities, not to mention the
conclusive fact that at present over 100,000 Vietnamese
regular troops occupy large tracts of Kampuchean territory,
including Phnom Penh, whereas Democratic Kampuchea
has not a single soldier on Vietnamese soil. This simple fact
alone suflices to show indisputably who is the aggressor and
who is the victim of aggression.
13. Thirdly, the Vietnamese representative also tried to
make it appear that Viet Nam’s aggression against Kampuchea had been “provoked” by China and had emanated
from China’s intention to practise the smiled “expansionist policy” in South-East Asii. This is a most despicable
trick of sheer mud-slinging, which of course can deceive no
one.
14. The Chinese Government and people have always
deemed it their bounden internationalist duty to support all
just struggles against aggression. In this spirit, since the
founding of new China, and when Viet Nam was in dilliculty, the Chinese people ma& the greatest national sacriflees without any hesitation and spared no effort to give
support and aid to Viet Nam. This is a fact well known to
the people of the whole world, including the Vietnamese
people. But when the Vietnamese authorities thought they
had become so powerful that they could push forward
regional hegemonism with the backing of Soviet socialimperialism in a deliberate attempt to annex Democratic
Kampuchea, China repeatedly advised the Vietnamese
authorities to bear in mind the over-all interests and exercise
restraint. Feeling reassured and emboldened, however, the
.:

Vietnamese authorities have clung to their reckless course.
Under such circumstances, it was natural that China’s sympathy and support could only go to the side of Democratic
Kampuchea which is the victim of Viet Nam’s aggression.
That was why the Vietnamese authorities, doing an aboutface all of a sudden, returned evil for good and vented their
anger on China. As a result, they have resorted to all sorts of
contemptible means in pursuance of a series of anti-China
policies. The Vietnamese authorities have brutally persecuted and expelled on a large scale Chinese nationals and
people of Chinese descent residing in Viet Nam. At the same
time, they- have been making ceaselessmilitary provocations along the Sine-Vietnamese border and creating tension there by provoking incidents, encroaching upon
Chinese territory, killing and wounding Chinese border
inhabitants. This situation has developed to intolerable
proportions.

and use the same language in their unwarranted attacks on
China. In view of the fact that the Soviet Union has tried
hard to obstruct the Security Council from considering the
serious aggression committed by Viet Nam against Democratic Kampuchea, and that the current massive invasion of
Kampuchea has been carried out by Viet Nam with the
direct support and abetment of the Soviet Union, the following basic conclusion can be drawn, that is, Soviet socialimperialism is the arch-criminal responsible for the current
massive aggression against Kampuchea by the reactionary
authorities of Viet Nam.
21. This new massive war of aggression against Kampuchea by the Vietnamese authorities has thoroughly
unmasked the regional hegemonism of the Vietnamese
authorities as well as Soviet global hegemonism. It is a
product of collaboration between great and small hegemor&m. To put it bluntly, the Vietnamese authorities want to
use Soviet backing for accomplishing their “grand cause” of
establishing an “Indo-Chinese federation” and seeking
hegemony over South-East Asia, while the Soviet Union
wants to take advantage of the ambition of the Vietnamese
authorities to complete its strategic deployment for seeking
hegemony in South-East Asia and the Pacific region. Such
is the basis for the two of them to come into speedy alliance
and collusion. For this purpose, the Soviet Union has not
only concluded with Viet Nam a so-called treaty of friendship, which is in essence a military alliance, and supplied
Viet Nam with large quantities of weapons and ammunition
for its aggression against Kampuchea but also tried to
compel the Warsaw Pact members to join in assisting Viet
Nam and to extend the obligation of the Pact members from
Europe to Asia. It is a universally recognixed fact that
Soviet social-imperialism is the chief behind-the-scenes boss
and commander of the war of aggression against Kampuchea launched by the reactionary authorities of Viet Nam. It
can be seen that the current Soviet-Vietnamese war of
aggression against Kampuchea is similar to the 1968 Cxechoslovak incident in some basic respects.

15. It must also be pointed out that Viet Nam joined the
non-aligned movement only two years before it concluded a
treaty of military alliance with the USSR. Following that,
the Vietnamese authorities have openly declared that they
share the same fate with Soviet social-imperialism and that
they are ready to be the “solid outpost” for the Sovietcontrolled Warsaw Pact in South-East Asia. On the other
hand, with the full support of the Soviet Union, Viet Nam
subsequently launched a massive war of aggression against
the truly non-aligned Democratic Kampuchea. Is this not
conclusive evidence to show that Viet Nam, under the cloak
of non-alignment, has entered into a defacto alliance with
the Soviet Union and is serving as a shock force for socialimperialism in pursuing its global hegemonism in SouthEast Asia?
16. With regard to the Cuban representative’s abusive
statements against China, I only wish to say a few words.
17. To begin with, Cuba has sold itself out to Soviet
social-imperialism and forced innocent Cuban youths to
serve as mercenaries and cannon-fodder of the Soviet
Union in pushing world hegemonism. This most inglorious
role being played by Cuba is known to everyone in the
world, and it is sad and deplorable indeed.

22. The current large-scale aggression against Kampuchea by Viet Nam is by no means accidental, but is an
important component of the Soviet global strategy of bigPower hegemonism. Ifits ambition to annex Kampuchea is
real&d, not only would the peoples of Indo-China be
subjected to enslavement and a direct Soviet threat posed to
all South-East Asian countries, but the Soviet Union would
be able to link up its drive for hegemony in the Pacific with
that in the Indian Ocean, thus seriously endangering the
peace, security and stability of the Asia-Pacific region and
the world as a whole. The current incident further shows
that Soviet social-imperialiim is not only a vicious enemy of
the Kampuchean people but an arch-enemy of the people of
South-East Asia, the non-aligned movement, the people of
the whole world and international peace and security. All
the countries and people in the world that cherish international peace and security as well as their own national
independence and territorial integrity will certainly get a
broader vision and further unite to form the broadest united
front for a resolute struggle against Soviet world hegemonism and Viet Nam regional hegemonism under its support.

18. Then, Cuba and Viet Nam have in fact entered into
full alliance with the Soviet Union and have become two
Trojan horses sent by the Soviet Union into the non-aligned
movement. They are willingly serving as hatchetmen and
tools for Soviet aggression and expansion, one in the east
and the other in the west, worthy of being called Tweedledum and Tweedledee. And they are unique indeed. Now
they are also working hard to undermine the non-aligned
movement by flaunting the signboard of non-alignment.
For .instance, the ugly deeds of the two of them at the
Foreign Ministers* Conference of the Non-Aligned Countries at Belgrade have been seen through by an increasing
number of non-aligned countries. Therefore, there is hardly
anyone who will buy them.
19. Finally, as regards the most shameful abusive language used by the Cuban representative for personal
attacks on the Chinese people’s respected leaders and Prince
Sihanouk, who commands world respect, it can only reveal
the ,depth to which Cuba has sunk. This cannot be refuted.
To do so would be to downgrade ourselves.

23. At present all Kampuchean soldiers and people, rallying closely round the Government of Democratic Kampuchea, are waging a heroic and tenacious fight to defend their
national independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
against their common enemy, the Vietnamese aggressors.

20. ’ .It is by no means accidental for the representatives of
Viet Nam, Cuba and the Soviet Union to sing the same tune
3

The Kampuchean people’s just struggle is an important part
of the just struggle of the non-aligned and other third-world
countries as well as all the countries and peoples of the
world that cherish their own independence and security in
opposing external domination and hegemony, outside
aggression for the acquisition of territory and in defending
national independence and international peace and security. Therefore, it commands the sympathy and support of
all the countries and people in Asia and the world that
uphold justice. No matter how difficult the present conditions are. for the Kampuchean people, we have firm contidence in them and support them in their effort to carry to
the end their sacred war of national selfdefence. The Vietnamese invaders, supported by Soviet social-imperialism,
may think that by seizing Phnom Penh they have accomplished the grand cause of annexing Kampuchea. But it is
too early for them to rejoice. Many historical facts have
proved that an aggressor’s day of ascendancy is the beginning of his defeat. As the French saying goes, “He laughs
best who laughs last”. what they are treading is precisely
the old path of Hitler and Lon Nol. What awaits them is
undoubtedly a most shameful defeat.

27. At the same time. the delegation of the Soviet Union
believes it necessary to’point out that the discussion in the
Council has been exploited for various slanderous attacks
and provocative fabrications. The absurdity of those fabrications and attacks was so obvious that the delegation of
China even decided not to have the draft resolution it had
concocted put to a vote, since it quite clearly understood
that it could not hope to win the support of the members of
the Council. The submission of such a draft resolution
simply showed the intention to divert the Council’s attention from the true reasons for the tension in South-East
Asia and Asia as a whole, which is the great-Power hegemonistic expansionist policy of the Chinese Government. The
Pol Pot clique that has been overthrown by the people was
just an instrument for the pursuit of that policy.

24. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (inteprtationj?om
Russian): The Soviet delegation voted against draft resolution S/13027 and would like
to explain some further points in addition to what ‘we said
before.

29. In addition, I should like to make the following point.
The most recent statement of the representative of China, as
is customary, contained a number of slanderous fabrications, and we have no intention of entering into polemics
with him. But at the same time that statement is further
proof of the expansionist and subversive lcharacter of
China’s policy in South-East Asia and we feel it necessaryto
draw attention to that fact. It is understandable why the
Chinese representative speaks in defence of the Pol Pot
regime overthrown by the Kampuchean people. The regime
had nothing original, nothing that arose on the soil of that
country. It was, rather, the Chinese model which was
exported to the country. The massive destruction of people
in Kampuchea was the Chinese “cultural revolution” in its
Kampuchean version. The Kampuchean people has now
put an end to that experiment and has opened up the way to
democracy, peace and true independence for the country.

28. The statements of many representatives throughout
the last few days in the Council have contained convincing
descriptions of the dangerous essence-dangerous, that is,
for the peace of the world-of the policy of Peking. There
are certain advantages to be derived from the discussion
that ‘has taken place here.
.

25. From the very beginning the Soviet delegation has
stressedthe artificiality and unfounded nature of the design
for the discussion of Kampuchea in the Security Council.
The true reason for raising this matter was to cover up the
crimes of the Pol Pot regime and to attempt to rescue it from
its imminent doom. Therefore the real intention was in
defiance of the Charter of the United Nations to prod the
Council towards interference in the internal affairs of Kampuchea in spite of the true interests of the Kampuchean
people. There was a particular lack of justification for consideration of this matter because, as a result of a popular
uprising, the criminal Pol Pot clique, which wasmaintained
in power by means of terror and on the basis of outside
support, collapsed under the weight of the crimes it had
committed. A legitimate government was set up, the People’s Revolutionary Council, which enjoys full support
from the Kampuchean people and has received broad international recognition. Thus the Kampuchean people took its
fate into its own hands, and any attempts to prevent it from
.doing so would be in contradiction of the fundamental
principles of the Charter.

30. Obviously, Peking has done everything in its power to
prevent the fall of the puppet regime of Pol Pot. However,
none of its efforts nor the tens of thousands of military and
other personnel, nor the delivery of arms, nor other assistance, were able to keep the crimiil
clique in power. The
more the representative of China attempts to defend the Pol
Pot-Ieng Sary r&ime, the more his delegation associates
itself with the barbarities and atrocities committed by that
r6gime.

26. But inasmuch as, upon the insistence of a majority of
members of the Council, the question relating to Kampuchea was nevertheless included in the agenda, it was the
duty of the Council to invite for participation in the discussion the true representatives of that country-that is, the
representatives of the People’s Revolutionary Council of
the People’s Republic of Kampuchea-particularly
since
many delegations have pointed out that they do not have
reliable information with regard to the true state of affairs in
Kampuchea. Having refused to listen to the true representatives of Kampuchea, the Council was, naturally, not in a
position to produce a decision that would objectively reflect
the current state of affairs in Kampuchea and not distort it.
Therefore the Soviet Union was constrained to vote against
the draft resolution submitted for consideration by the
Council.

31. It has been asserted here that the current events in
Kampuchea represent a danger to the neighbours of Kampuchea. Well, with regard to danger, it flows from the
hegemonistic great-Power ambitions of the Chinese leadership, which, as is very well know& is, through its agents in
the States of that region, carrying out an active campaign
against existing Governments in order to replace them by
r6gimes to the liking of Peking and to put into practice the
ideas of Maoism.
j
32. What is the meaning of the implementation of those
goals in practice? It has been clearly shown by the tragic
experience of the people of Kampuchea under the Pol Pot
regime. This danger definitely does exist, and it is precisely
this danger which should be borne in mind so that 1the
4

i

peoples of other countries do not have to pay such a high
price for their freedom and independence.

free development. The Kampuchean people have already
begun to implement the programme proclaimed by the
United Front for the National Salvation of Kampuchea, a
programme for the construction of a peaceful, independent,
non-aligned State. The victory of the national patriotic
forces of Kampuchea has opened up new favourable prospects for the strengthening of peace in Indo-China in
accordance with the national aspirations of the peoples of
that part of the world without outside interference. There
can be no doubt that the People’s Republic of Kampuchea
will soon occupy its proper place in the international
community and make a valuable contribution to the cause
of the strengthening of international peace and security.

33. It is well known that China is making territorial claims
against practically all neighbouring States. An important
obstacle to the implementation of its hegemonistic plans in
South-East Asia and in Asia as a whole has been the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. A free and independent Viet Nam
is, in the eyesbf Peking, an obstacle to Chinese expansionism. It is precisely for that reason that China’s present
policy ‘has a clearly expressed anti-Vietnamese character.
And that is why over the last few years Viet Nam has been
the target of constant provocations.

37. Mr. HULINSH
(Czechoslovakia) (interpretation
from Russian): The Czechoslovak delegation from the very
outset of this debate opposed attempts to intemationalize
the internal conflict in Kampuchea, which the Council is
not competent to consider. But since, none the less, the
Council did embark upon a discussion, which has gone on
for -several days now, it should, as we have repeatedly
pointed out, have responded to the appeal of the People’s
Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea to hear its representative. For only the properly accredited representatives of
the new government, the People’s Revolutionary Council,
which, with the support of its own people, effectively exercises power in its own country, can represent the people of
Kampuchea in the Council.

34. The Peking leadership is stepping up its pressure on
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. The Vietnamese frontiers are the scene of the massing of Chinese troops. Large
amounts of military ammunition and supplies are being
brought to the border. At the same time the Chinese are
constantly provoking new frontier incidents, sending subversion& intb’the territory of Viet Nam and warships into
its territorial waters. The provocations of China against the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam are assuming an ever more
dangerous character. In violating Vietnamese sovereignty,
the Chinese are giving rise to bloody incidents. The provocative actions of Peking against Viet Nam are being accompanied by a ‘vindictive and slanderous anti-Vietnamese
campaign the purpose of which is to prepare the ground for
new acts of hostility against Viet Nam. By its actions, the
Peking leadership is exposing its own true features. It is not
difEcult to understand the situation that would arise in that
area for other Asian countries were it not for the obstacle
posed by Viet Nam, which is firmly supporting peace and
international security and is opposed to hegemonism and
expansionism.

38. We very much regret that the Council should so hastily and unjustly have responded to that request and thus
deprived itself of an opportunity to acquaint itself with the
true state of affairs. The information which has come in
from Kampuchea cogently demonstrates that the United
Front for the National Salvation of Kampuchea and its
local organs are operating with the full support of the
people in that country. In Kampuchea now there is a
government in power which comprises the patriotic forces
of the country. The very first documents, the very first
actions taken by the United Front demonstrate its democratic, progressive and popular character.

35. I should like to make one more comment. The representative of China made all kinds of empty charges against
the policy of the Soviet Union. He pointed to Moscow all
the time. Listening to what he said, it was difficult at first to
understand who was speaking in the Council: the representative of China or another gentleman who addressed the
Council a few months ago. At that time the Foreign Minister of South Africa, Mr. Botha, spoke with similar hatred of
the assistance which wasbeing given by the Soviet Union to
African countries and national liberation movements which
were waging a just struggle for their liberation from the
yoke of colonialism, racism and social injustice, for their
freedom and for the right independently to determine their
own fate in entire accordance with the appeals and decisions
of the General Assembly. At that time we said that we were
proud of the fact that our assistance to the patriots who
were waging a national liberation struggle had aroused the
hatred of the racists. That could only mean that it had been
effective and was doing its job. But the fact that the Chinese
representative is speaking here from the same standpoint,
the same position assumed by the South African racists, will
not have escaped the attention, I am sure, of the representatives of other developing countries which should give some
thought to the policy pursued by Peking, a policy very
dangerous to their peoples that it clearly intends to pursue
also in other parts of the world.

39. The United Front has done away totally with the
dictatorship of Pol Pot and Ieng Sary and, as a result, the
administrative organs of the overthrown reactionary n5gime
have been replaced by the self-governing organs of the
people which from the very beginning have been paying
close attention to the genuine interests and demands of the
people of Kampuchea, namely, for the renewal of the economic life of the country, for improved health, higher standards of living for the people, better education and, in the
political field, above all, for the restoration of the political
and civil rights of the people. The new government is preserving the historical, religious and national traditions of
Kampuchea.
40. The political orientation of the United Front is
undoubtedly positive. Kampuchea belongs to the number
of independent, democratic non-aligned States which have
adopted a course of socialism. The programme of the Victorious United Front and also its first actions on assuming
control make it absolutely clear who holds the real power in
the country, whose side the people of Kampuchea are on
and whom they whole-heartedly support. The only legitimate representatives of the Kampuchean people are the
representatives of the United Front.

36. i. The victory of the Kampuchean people in its struggle
agamst the bloody dictatorship opens up a new era in the
history of Kampuchea, an era of genuine, independent and
5

philosophy of the non-aligned movement for which they SO
expressly stood. I thank them.

41. The statement of the Foreign Ministry of the People’s
Republic of Kampuchea of 14 January relating to this
meeting of the Council is published in document S/13029. It
says:

46. The PRESIDENT: I am most grateful to the representative of Kuwait for the kind remarks that he addressed to
me. Speaking for a moment as the representative of
JAMAICA, I should also like to thank him-and I know I
speak for others-for the tremendous amount of work
which he has done in contributing to the Council’s efforts in
this matter and for his work as a member of the non-aligned
movement towards trying to get the Council to arrive at an
adequate decision in relation to this very difficult issue.

“The People’s Revolutionary Council of the People’s
Republic of Kampuchea is the sole authentic and legal
representative of the Kampuchean people.
“The Pol Pot-Ieng Sary gang have been overthrown by
the Kampuchean people and therefore represent nobody
and have no right to say anything in any forum on behalf
of Kampuchea.

47. The representative of Democratic Kampuchea wishes
to make a statement, and I now call on him.

“The Foreign Ministry of the People’s Republic of
Kampuchea resolutely and completely refutes all contentions made in the Security Council aimed at distorting the
truth and slandering the Kampuchean and Vietnamese
peoples, and regards all conclusions by this meeting as
wrong and invalid.‘*

48. Mr. THIOUNN
PRASITH (Democratic Kampuchea) (interprefationf
French): First, at the conclusion of
this debate in the Security Council on Viet Nam’s invasion
of and aggression against Democratic Kampuchea, the
delegation of Democratic Kampuchea would like to pay a
sincere tribute to you, Mr. President, for having conducted
the proceedings of the Council with remarkable wisdom
and outstanding experience. Those qualities are based on
the noble ideal of justice, on the principles of non-alignment
and on those of the Charter of the United Nations, to which
your great country Jamaica, our friend, is firmly attached.
It is that attachment which has served to thwart all the
delaying manceuvres, the sophism, the lies,’ the calumnies
and the insults of the Soviet Union, the accomplice in and
instigator of the aggression against my country and of the
massacres of my people perpetrated by Viet Nam.

In supporting the position of the Government of Kampuchea, my delegation was unable to support the draft resolution contained in document S/13027 and voted against it.
42. Finally, I wish to make a few more comments on the
statement of Ambassador Chen Chu. Even in the course of
our preliminary consultations I answered the representative
of China on the attacks he permitted himself to indulge in
against Czechoslovakia. My Government should be
allowed to resolve questions affecting my own country. The
Government of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic has
always considered the problems connected with the longpast crisis in Czechoslovakia in all its aspects as being
exclusively within the province of the internal affairs of my
own country. I should like to add to this that attempts on
the part of the Chinese representatives to intervene in our
internal affairs with the idea of provoking my country and
setting it against its allies are vain and futile. If they think
they will have any success whatsoever in this area, their
attempts in regard to the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic
certainly will not be successful, even though they may have
been successful elsewhere.

49. The delegation of Democratic Kampuchea would also
like to pay a heartfelt tribute to all the non-aligned countries
which are members of the Security Council. The unity of
action shown by all their delegations throughout this debate
has demonstrated the vitality which characterizes the nonaligned movement as an independent force outside the various blocs. It is also a demonstration of the solidarity of the
non-aligned countries in the face of the deliberate violation
and flagrant betrayal of the fundamental policies and principles of non-alignment by Viet Nam, which has usurped the
label of “non-aligned” in order to undermine the movement
from within and serve its regional expansionist and annexation& ambition.

43. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): At the end of this debate I
should like to make the following statement.

50. The high sense of responsibility towards the defence
and preservation of the noble principles of non-alignment
displayed by the representatives of Kuwait, Bangladesh,
Jamaica, Gabon, Nigeria, Zambia and Bolivia, as well as
other representatives of genuinely non-aligned countries
who have spoken here in defence of our just cause, is proof
of the determination of the non-aligned countries to defend
at all costs peace, independence, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and the right of every people to decide its own
destiny and to speak out against any act of aggression,
expansion or annexation perpetrated by Viet Nam, the
Soviet Union and their accomplices.

44. Fist, I should like to congratulate you sincerely,
Mr. President, and to express our admiration for the
manner in which you have presided over this very dillicult
and thorny issue.
45. Secondly, I should like to say that this is a day on
which the non-aligned members of the Security Council
should express pride and regret. Without commenting on
the conclusion of the debate, I wish to say that the nonaligned members of the Council have already vindicated
themselves by their sense of solidarity, by their stand on
principles and by their devotion and dedication to the principles embodied in the Charter and in the philosophy of the
non-aligned movement. They have every reason to rejoice
on this day with pride, in jubilation and with a sense of
purpose. I greet them and I salute them. I salute the spirit in
which they worked with me during these last four or five
days that we spent together negotiating a draft resolution. I
greet ail the members of the non-aligned movement. I salute
their spirit, their dedication and their enhancement of the

5 I. My delegation would also like to pay a sincere tribute
to the United States of America, France, Norway, Portugal
and the United Kingdom, which have shown their deep
sympathy for the struggle of the people of Kampuchea,
their condemnation of the Vietnamese aggression against
and invasion of Democratic Kampuchea and their support
for a democratic, independent and sovereign Kampuchea
with its territorial integrity.
6

52. Finally, my delegation would like to pay a special
tribute and express its deep and sincere thanks to the
friendly People’s Republic of China, which, in the debate in
the Security Council as everywhere else, has always shown
its active solidarity with the just cause of Democratic Kampuchea and its people, on the basis of strict mutual respect,
equality and reciprocal non-interference in internal affairs.

Kampuchea and of the Government of Democratic Kampuchea, and to all the countries whose representatives have
spoken out here in defence of our just struggle and condemned the Fascist Vietnamese aggression, the delegation
of Democratic Kampuchea addresses its deep and sincere
gratitude. The people of Kampuchea and the Government
of Democratic Kampuchea will never forget this act of
justice which they have performed at this the most difficult
time in the history of Kampuchea.

53. Furthermore, both during this debate and outside the
chamber, our neighbours in South-East Asia-including
the countries of the Association of South-East Asian
Nations-and
in Asia, the non-aligned countries and all
countries devoted to peace and justice in Asia, Africa,
Europe, America and Oceania have denounced and
strongly condemned Vietnamese aggression against Democratic Kampuchea and have expressed their support for the
cause of the-defence of the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Democratic Kampuchea. They have
demanded the immediate withdrawal of the Vietnamese
occupation troops from Democratic Kampuchea and
called on Viet Nam to respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Democratic Kampuchea
and the right of the people of Kampuchea to decide their
destiny for themselves.

57. The tight of the people of Kampuchea and their army,
under the leadership of the Government of Democratic
Kampuchea, against Vietnamese invasion and aggression
goes on and is ever more intensified. On 11 January the
Government of Democratic Kampuchea made the following important statement which I have the honour of reading
to members of the Council:
[27ze speaker read out the annex to document S/13032.]

58. It is with that determination and conviction that the
delegation of Democratic Kampuchea will continue to harbour hopes that all the friendly countries of the five continents, the Security Council and the United Nations will
continue their support for the just struggle of the people of
Kampuchea as they endeavour to defend and preserve an
independent, sovereign, neutral and non-aligned Kampuchea with respect for its territorial integrity. It is with those
sentiments that I wish to thank representatives for their
kind concern and attention.

54. The debate in the Council as well as the vote that has
just taken place have clearly shown that the Government of
Democratic Kampuchea, which it is my honour to represent, is the sole legal and legitimate Government of Kampuchea. They have also shown that Viet Nam is the aggressor
against and the invader of Kampuchea and that it is sowing
devastation in my country and death among my people,
scorning the most elementary principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and of international law, scorning the
unanimous condemnation of the peoples of countries
devoted to peace, justice and independence throughout the
world, and in monstrous violation of the most elementary
sacred rights ‘of States.

59. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Cuba has
asked to be allowed to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
60. Mr. ROA KOURI (Cuba) (interpretarionffom Spunish): I wish to thank you,Mr. President, and the other

members of the Council for giving me thii opportunity to
exercise my right of reply.

55. The predictable veto of the large Soviet expansionist
Power has not prevented condemnation of the aggression of
Viet Nam against Democratic Kampuchea. On the contrary, that veto only servesto confirm once again the aggressive, expansionist, warlike, treacherous and ferocious
nature of the Soviet Union. The Vietnamese aggression
against Democratic Kampuchea and the Soviet veto, above
and beyond the question of the existence of Democratic
Kampuchea as an independent, sovereign, peaceful, neutral
and non-aligned country, reveal the real threat posed by the
regional expansionist policy of Viet Nam and the global
aggressive and expansionist policy of the Soviet Union for
all the peoples and countries of the world-and in particular for the peoples of the small countries of South-East Asia,
Asia and the entire world.

61. The representative of the group in power-I do not
know whether it is Hua Kuo-feng or Teng Hsiao-ping at the
moment, because I do not know the latest dazibao-has
attacked the Cuban revolution. A few days ago, he said that
the statements of Cuba, the Soviet Union and Viet Nam in
the Council had been of the same tone; and he repeated that
point today. I am delighted at his perspicacity. Our peoples,
parties and Governments do, indeed, speak the same revdlutionary language, espouse the same Marxist-Leninist
ideology and defend the same internationalist principles.
We have not sailed the beautiful ship of revolution into the
port of the imperialists, into the miserable harbours of
betrayal of the workers’ movement and world communism,
as did the Great Helmsman.

56. The Soviet veto is but the flagrant expression of the
isolation of the Soviet Union and Viet Nam and their
accomplices, in the face of the unanimous condemnation of
all the countries devoted to peace and independence
Members of the United Nations. The debate in the Security
Council is an encouragement for the resolute struggle that
our people and our revolutionary army is waging under the
direction of its legal Government, presided over by Prime
Minister Pol Pot. This debate constitutes for us valuable
moral, political and diplomatic support, To all the countries
members of the Council which have been good enough to
cast their votes in support of the just cause of the people of

62. It is unnecessary to defend the Cuban revolution
against this barrage of foolishness unleashed in the Security
Council by the representative of the new mandarins. As a
New Year’s gift, it is not worthy of the sumptuous banquets
that take place in the “People’s Palace” in Tien An Men
Square and as an example of ideology it shows a lack of
ideas that would make Confucius, his mentor, turn in his
grave.
63. Not having any argument to support his diatribe
against Cuba, the representative of the new mandarins
7

.

.

.,.

.

.

...”

suggests that we are acting on behalf of the Soviet Union.
Accustomed to the hegemonistic relations which that country maintains with its friends, they are incapable of understanding the fraternal bond between equals that binds Cuba
and the homeland of Vladimir Ilyich Lenin. In that too they
are imitating their imperialist allies. They both feel troubled
because a small country like mine, together with the peoples
and revolutionary armed forces of fraternal nations, has
made them bite the dust in Angola and Ethiopia.

68. Now speaking seriously, I never for a moment
believed that Ambassador Richard thought that Cuba
could sponsor a draft resolution submitted by his country,
in the field of human rights, no less. In the last 80 years, the
record of the United Kingdom in this area has been hardly
edifying. One might ask the opinion of the Chinese people
themselves, on whom the British imposed the “Opium
War” and who were humiliated on more than one occasion
by the then powerful Royal Navy, or that of countries
formerly colon&d by the United Kingdom. One need not
go much further than to note that very few days pass
without the press having something to report about the
discrimination being suffered by non-white citizens of the
British Commonwealth, even in London itself.

64. The new mandarins have cheerfully become the Trojan horse of the imperialists and reactionaries. What they do
not use in their anti-socialist and anti-Soviet propaganda
they promulgate in their Hsinhua and Renmin Ribao. They
demand, with unusual ardour-since they lay no claim to
the foreign colonial enclaves in their own country, not even
in Taiwan-an increased United States presence in the
Pacific Ocean; greater military power for NATO and its
infiltration of the socialist countries in Europe; indefinite
continuation of the economic blockade of Cuba and the
maintenance-against
the will of our people and
Government--of the American base at Guan~narno; the
supporting of the criminal Government of Pinochet, which
has become their “intimate comrade-in-arms*‘, and of their
apartheid allies in their aggression against the People’s
Republic of Angola. In a word, they wish to be rccognixed
as the arch-policemen of the world, as the best allies of
imperialism, as persons of the greatest reliability in everything that has to do with maintaining exploitation, colonialism, hegemonism, racism and apartheid. We have no reason
to challenge their merits in these areas. It is the petit bourgeois ways of the “great sun which lights up their hearts”
that has led them to this moral ruin. To each his own.

69. The representative of the United Kingdom says that
he suspects my country’s motives-which certainly is not
responsible for the fact that today the Ian Smith r&imestill
exists in Rhodesia-in condemning the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary
clique. Honi soit qui ma1 y pensef The truth is that his
suspicions are without foundation. We are not given, as are
some, to engaging in political demagoguery. Neither do we
have any investments in Pretoria nor do we support apartheid in any way. On the contrary, on various occasions we
have proposed that the sanctions provided for under Chap
ter VII of the Charter should be applied to Vorstcr’s and
Botha’s South Africa, the illegal occupier of Namibia. Ironically, so far the United Kingdom delegation has not joined
in that demand.
70. And so, when Ambassador Richard, not without a
certain malice, offered us a place in Heaven, I recalled the
question of the native chief Hatuey-the first martyr for
Cuban independence-to the Spanish friar who offered him
the same thing moments before he was burned at the stake:
“DO the conquistadores go to Heaven?” And when the
reply was affirmative, Hamey said, “Then I do not want to
go there.”

65. As far as Cuba is concerned, I hope the heirs of the
Great Helmsman will understand that we continue to sup
port our main principles, that we shall not betray the sacred
cause of international proletarianism, that we arc not dismayed by the technology and financial resources of capitalism, and that, although we, unlike them, do not want to
become a major world Power by the turn of the century, we
do possessan invincible moral strength which is not for sale
to the highest bidder.

71. Finally, I am obliged to make a small friendly correction to the statement of my colleague, Ambassador Bishara,
of Kuwait. When submitting the draft resolution this moming, I understood him to say that it was a non-aligned draft.
In reality, it is the draft of a number of countries members of
the movement, and of an .observer, Bolivia. Neither the
Coordinating Bureau nor any other organ of the movement approved the text or extended any mandate to those
countries to present it on its behalf. Although, of course, I
am not questioning the good intentions of the sponsors of
the draft resolution, I wish to make this point clear because,
as a non-aligned country, Cuba does not feel that its views
are reflected in the draft resolution. In our opinion, the
Council cannot adopt any substantive decision on the subject without fmt having heard the legitimate representatives
of the People’s Republic of Kampuchea-that
is, the People’s Revolutionary Council presided over by Heng Samrin.

66. Our revolution will go forward, regardless of the
obstacles and threats of imperialism and its new allies. We
are proud to have built the first socialist society in. the
western hemisphere, 90 miles from the most powerful imperialist country of our time. We are profoundly and legitimately satisfied with the modest contribution of our
internationalist fighters, of our doctors, our educators, and
our technicians to the development of various fraternal
countries. We shall continue to work tirelessly for the
strengthening of peace and socialism against imperialism,
colonialism, neo-colonialism, racism, chauvinism and
opportunism, and for the victory of the ideas of scientific
socialism throughout the entire world.

72. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): I should like to correct a
misunderstanding which became apparent in the statement
of my friend Ambassador Roa Kouri of Cuba. The draft
resolution which I submitted on behalf of the sponsors was
in the name of the non-aligned members of the Security
council, it was not in the name of the 86 members of the
whole group of non-aligned. It was not in the name of the
Co-ordiiting
Bureau of the non-aligned: only those nonaligned countries which are members of the Council have
their names on that draft resolution. It is always the,practice
in the Coymil that its non-aligned members should make

67. I should now like to refer to the humorous thoughts
that were offered by the representative of the United Kingdom. I suppose that, as a fellow countryman of Bernard
Shaw, he feels obliged to cultivate humour. I do not doubt
that at the end of the meeting his colleagues shook his hand,
congratulated him and in a very British manner whispered
in his ear, “Good show, good show”.
8

-. .

an effort, either jointly, individually, or on a regional basis,
as the case may be, to submit draft resolutions in the name
of the non-aligned members of the Council.

74. The PRESIDENT: There are no fwther speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

73. That is just for the record.

The meeting rose at 5.45 pm

,,

-’

:

I

7

..

,

il.

,.

*
_

,

_

,,

1

I

I\

I’

!.

;

,.:

<

:

_
.?*,I.
.,

.,

;,

;

.”

.

:

:

.,..

.,...

-

_
.I

,.

.

I’\

,../

;

:

.,

.,

,.

_

.

‘..
..;

.“

I

9

).,

.’

:..

I

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite 1 Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNlRS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vents dans les librairies
et les agences
d6positaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
& : Nations Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

IIOJIYPHTb

NSIJ(AHUII

OPI-AHH3AWiN

OE’bEJlHHEHHhlX

HAWiH

H3namw1
OW~HH~~UHH
06zennnenHb~x
HauxR
~oxwo
xynnrb
B xxmxxbrx
stara3nnax
H ~‘BHTCTB~X
so acex pattonax
mapa. Hasonxre
cnpasrm
06 waaxnsx
B
eauteld WHH~~HOY mam3nne
H~H nmunre
no anpecy : Opranm3auxn
06aezumemrbrx
Haunt+. Cexuxs
no nponaxe
HJII~HHR. Hbro-Hopa
unH H(eneaa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACKONES

DE LAS

NACIONRS

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas estan en venta en librerfas
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

SU.S. 1.50

79-70002-November

1981-2,250
