S/2001/614

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 June 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 21 June 2001 from the President of the Security
Council addressed to the Secretary-General
The members of the Security Council, in considering your report of 30
March 2001 (S/2001/331) on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, are of the
view that further advice of the Secretary-General would be useful in the Council’s
consideration of the issues contained in the report. This procedure is being followed
on an exceptional basis.
The members of the Security Council welcome your report of 30 March 2001
(S/2001/331) on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The Council held an
open debate on the report on 23 April 2001, at which a number of practical ideas for
implementation were proposed. The members of the Security Council believe that
the report should be considered more widely within the United Nations system, and
therefore recommend that it be transmitted as an official document to the General
Assembly. Recognizing the sensitivity and complexity of the issues involved, the
members of the Security Council would suggest the following for the SecretaryGeneral’s consideration:
(1) The recommendations on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
contained in the first report of the Secretary-General (S/1999/957) where a
consensus exists, as reflected in resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000), should be
reorganized by the Secretariat in collaboration with the Security Council into
different groups with the aim of clarifying responsibilities, enhancing cooperation
and facilitating their implementation in the context of the Council’s intention to take
into account relevant recommendations contained in the report when carrying out its
work. The recommendations in the second report (S/2001/331) should be
reorganized based on the spirit, principles and approaches of resolutions 1265
(1999) and 1296 (2000), taking into account the different responsibilities and
mandates of the United Nations organs and the need to further strengthen
coordination among the organizations of the entire United Nations system so as to
facilitate the Security Council’s further deliberation on them.
(2) The Security Council encourages the Secretary-General to further ensure
closer cooperation between the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, including by establishing a crosscutting team of the Office and the Department, to facilitate due consideration of
issues related to the protection of civilians in the design, planning and
implementation of peacekeeping operations.

01-42124 (E) 210601

*0142124*

S/2001/614

(3) In order to facilitate consideration by the Security Council, whenever
appropriate, of issues pertaining to protection of civilians in its deliberations on the
establishment, change or close of peacekeeping mandates, an aide-memoire listing
those issues that are relevant in this regard should be drafted in close cooperation
with the Council.
(4) The members of the Security Council would welcome a briefing by the
Secretariat on the status of these initiatives by November 2001, with a view to
finalizing them as soon as feasible thereafter. To further ensure the necessary
interaction between the Council and the Secretariat, it is also suggested to organize
half-day expert-level seminars on specific issues related to the implementation of
the above initiatives. The first of these could be held at a suitable time prior to the
briefing by the Secretariat.
Against this background, and bearing in mind Security Council decisions in
this respect, the members of the Council request the Secretary-General to present a
report no later than November 2002 on the status of implementation of the relevant
recommendations with regard to protection of civilians in armed conflict, and any
other matter he wishes to bring to the attention of the Security Council on this
subject matter.
(Signed) Anwarul Karim Chowdhury
President of the Security Council

2
