Council will continue to examine carefully the mandate
of each operation and, when necessary, vary it in
response to prevailing circumstances.

"The members of the Council consider it of vital
importance that adequate resources are available for the
preparation, deployment and maintenance of the United
Nations peace-keeping operations. This must be underlined all the more in view of the new challenges in
prospect. They urge Member States to respond positively and rapidly to requests from the Secretary-General for contributions of financial, human and material
resources for the operations. They emphasize that the
operations must be launched and maintained on a sound
and secure financial basis and stress the importance of
full and timely payments of assessed contributions. At
the same time, they underscore that the operations must
be planned and conducted with maximum efficiency and
cost-effectiveness.
"The members of the Council also emphasize the
importance of political support by all Member States,
and in particular by the parties concerned, for United
Nations peace-keeping and for the action of the Secretary-General in conducting the operations. They stress
that a peace-keeping operation is essentially a temporary
measure, intended to facilitate the resolution of conflicts
and disputes. Its mandate is not automatically renewable. Peace-keeping should never be construed as a
substitute for the ultimate goal: an early negotiated
settlement. In the light of this, the members of the

"The members of the Council, while recognizing the
principle that peace-keeping should only be undertaken
with the consent of the host countries and the parties
concerned, urge the host countries and all parties
involved to assist and facilitate in every way the successful and safe deployment and functioning of the
United Nations peace-keeping operations in order to
enable the fulfilment of their mandates, including the
early conclusion of status-of-forces agreements with the
United Nations and the provision of appropriate infrastructure support.
"The members of the Council are encouraged by
recent achievements of United Nations peace-keeping.
Bearing in mind the primary responsibility of the Council under the Charter of the United Nations, they express
their determination to continue to work jointly and in
co-operation with the Secretary-General for the prevention and resolution of international conflicts. The members of the Council remain ready to consider launching
new peace-keeping operations as and when necessary in
the interest of international peace and security, in accordance with the principles and purposes of the Charter."

THE SITUATION CONCERNING WESTERN SAHARA 101
Decision

African Unity in the framework of their joint mission of
good offices,

At its 2929th meeting, on 27 June 1990, the Council
discussed the item entitled "The situation concerning
Western Sahara: report of the Secretary-General
(S/21360)". 102

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation concerning Western Sahara, 103
l. Expresses its full support to the Secretary-General
in his mission of good offices, pursued jointly with the
current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity, with a
view to settling the question of Western Sahara;

Resolution 658 (1990)
or27 June 1990

2. Approves the report of the Secretary-General, 103
transmitted to the Council in accordance with resolution
621 (1988) with a view to settling the question of Western
Sahara, which contains the full text of the settlement
proposals as accepted by the two parties on 30 August 1988
as wel I as an outline of the plan provided by the SecretaryGeneral in order to implement those proposals;

The Security Council,
Recalling its resolution 621 (1988) of 20 September
1988, by which it decided to authorize the Secretary-General to appoint a special representative for Western Sahara
and to request the Secretary-General to transmit to it as
soon as possible a report on the holding of a referendum
for self-determination of the people of Western Sahara and
on ways and means to ensure the organization and supervision of such a referendum by the United Nations in
co-operation with the Organization of African Unity,

3. Calls upon the two parties to co-operate fully with
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity in their
efforts aimed at an early settlement of the question of
Western Sahara;

Recalling also that, on 30 August 1988, the Kingdom of
Morocco and the Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de
Saguia et-Hamra y de Rio de Oro gave their agreement in
principle to the proposals of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the current Chairman of the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of

4. Welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to
dispatch, in the immediate future, a technical mission to
the territory and to neighbouring countries, in particular to
refine the administrative aspects of the outlined plan and
to obtain the necessary information for the preparation of
a further report to the Council;

101
Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted by
the Council in 1975 and 1988.
102
See Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-fifth Year,
Supplement for April, May and June 1990.

5.

Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the

IOJ Ibid., document S/21360.

18

which the Council would authorize the establishment of
the Mission.

Security Council as soon as possible a further detailed
report on his implementation plan, containing, in particular, an estimate of the cost of the United Nations Mission
for the referendum in Western Sahara, on the understanding that this further report should be the basis on

Adopted unanimously at the
2929th meeting.

THE SITUATION BETWEEN IRAQ AND KUWAIT
Resolution 661 (1990)

Decision

of 6 August 1990

At its 2932nd meeting, on 2 August 1990, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Iraq and Kuwait to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item
entitled:
"The situation between Iraq and Kuwait:
"Letter dated 2 August 1990 from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/21423); 104
"Letter dated 2 August 1990 from the Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/21424)". 104

The Security Council,
Reaffirming its resolution 660 (1990) of2 August 1990,
Deeply concerned that that resolution has not been implemented and that the invasion by Iraq of Kuwait continues, with further loss of human life and material destruction,
Determined to bring the invasion and occupation of
Kuwait by Iraq to an end and to restore the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Kuwait,
Noting that the legitimate Government of Kuwait has
expressed its readiness to comply with resolution 660
(1990),
Mindful of its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international peace
and security,
Affirming the inherent right of individual or collective
self-defence, in response to the armed attack by Iraq
against Kuwait, in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter,
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter,
l. Determines that Iraq so far has failed to comply with
paragraph 2 of resolution 660 (1990) and has usurped the
authority of the legitimate Government of Kuwait;
2. Decides, as a consequence, to take the following
measures to secure compliance of Iraq with paragraph 2 of
resolution 660 (1990) and to restore the authority of the
legitimate Government of Kuwait;
3. Decides that all States shall prevent:
(a) The import into their territories of all commodities
and products originating in Iraq or Kuwait exported therefrom after the date of the present resolution;
(b) Any activities by their nationals or in their territories which would promote or are calculated to promote the
export or trans-shipment of any commodities or products
from Iraq or Kuwait; and any dealings by their nationals
or their flag vessels or in their territories in any commodities or products originating in Iraq or Kuwait and exported
therefrom after the date of the present resolution, including
in particular any transfer of funds to Iraq or Kuwait for the
purposes of such activities or dealings;
(c) The sale or supply by their nationals or from their
territories or using their flag vessels of any commodities
or products, including weapons or any other military
equipment, whether or not originating in their territories
but not including supplies intended strictly for medical
purposes, and, in humanitarian circumstances, foodstuffs,
to any person or body in Iraq or Kuwait or to any person
or body for the purposes of any business carried on in or
operated from Iraq or Kuwait, and any activities by their

Resolution 660 (1990)
of 2 August 1990

The Security Council,
Alarmed by the invasion of Kuwait on 2 August 1990 by
the military forces of Iraq,
Determining that there exists a breach of international
peace and security as regards the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait,
Acting under Articles 39 and 40 of the Charter of the
United Nations,
1. Condemns the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait;
2. Demands that Iraq withdraw immediately and unconditionally all its forces to the positions in which they
were located on 1 August 1990;
3. Calls upon Iraq and Kuwait to begin immediately
intensive negotiations for the resolution of their differences and supports all efforts in this regard, and especially
those of the League of Arab States;
4. Decides to meet again as necessary to consider
further steps to ensure compliance with the present resolution.
Adopted at the 2932nd meeting
by 14 votes to none. One member
(Yemen) did not participate in the
vote.

Decision
At its 2933rd meeting, on 6 August 1990, the Council
proceeded with the discussion of the item.
104
See Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-fifth Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1990.

19
