VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _2_1_11
by paragraph I of this article. The other States Parties shall not be bound
by paragraph I of this article with respect to any State Party having made
~uch a reservation.
3. Any State Party having made a reservation in accordance with paragraph 2 of this article may at any time withdraw this reservation by notification to the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Article 31

A State Party may denounce this Convention by written notification
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations. Denunciation becomes
effective one year after the date of receipt of the notification by the Secretary-General.
2. Such a denunciation shall not have the effect of releasing the State
Party from its obligations under this Convention in regard to any act or
omission which occurs prior to the date at which the denunciation becomes
effective, nor shall denunciation prejudice in any way the continued consideration of any matter which is already under consideration by the Committee prior to the date at which the denunciation becomes effective.
3. Following the date at which the denunciation of a State Party
becomes effective, the Committee shall not commence consideration of
any new matter regarding that State.
Article 32

The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform all States
Members of the United Nations and all States which have signed this Convention or acceded to it of the following:
(a)

Signatures, ratifications and accessions under articles 25 and 26;

(/,) The date of entry into force of this Convention under article 27 and
the date of the entry into force of any amendments under article 29;
(cl

Denunciations under article 31
Article 33

This Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English, French,
Russian and Spanish texts are equally :uthentic. shall be deposited with
the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
I.

2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall transmit certified
copies of this Convention to all States.

39/102.

Measures to improve the situation and
ensure the human rights and dignity of all
migrant workers

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming once more the permanent validity of the
principles and standards embodied in the basic instruments regarding the international protection of human
rights, in particular in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 62 the International Covenants on Human
Rights, 63 the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination64 and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, 65
Bearing in mind the principles and standards established
within the framework of the International Labour Organisation and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, and the importance of the task carried out in connection with migrant workers and their
families in other specialized agencies and in various organs
of the United Nations,
Reiterating that, in spite of the existence of an already
established body of principles and standards, there is a
need to make further efforts to improve the situation and
ensure the human rights and dignity of all migrant workers
and their families,
Recalling its resolution 34/172 of 17 December 1979,
by which it decided to establish a working group open to
all Member States to elaborate an international conven62 Resolution 217 A (Ill).
63 Resolution 2200 A (XXI). annex.
64 Resolution 2106 A (XX). annex.
6 5 Resolution 34/180, annex.

tion on the protection of the rights of all migrant workers
and their families,
Recalling also its resolutions 351198 of 15 December
1980. 36/ l 60 of 16 December I 981, 37/170 of 17 December 1982 and 38/86 of 16 December 1983, by which it
renewed the mandate of the Working Group on the Drafting of an International Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Their Families and
requested it to continue its work,
Having examined the progress made by the Working
Group during its fourth inter-sessional meeting, 66 held
from 29 May to 8 June 1984, as well as the report of the
Working Group during the current session of the General
Assembly, 67 during which the Working Group concluded
the first reading of the draft convention,
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the reports of the
Working Group on the Drafting of an International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Their Families and commends it for concluding, in its first reading, the drafting of the preamble and
articles. which will serve as the basis for the second reading of the draft convention;
2. Decides that, in order to enable it to complete its
task as soon as possible, the Working Group shall again
hold an inter-sessional meeting of two weeks' duration in
New York, immediately after the first regular session of
1985 of the Economic and Social Council;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to transmit to Governments the reports of the Working Group so as to enable
the members of the Group to undertake tife second reading
of the preamble and the articles during the inter-sessional
meeting to be held in the spring of I 985, as well as to
transmit the results obtained at that meeting to the General Assembly for consideration during its fortieth session;
4. Also invites the Secretary-General to transmit the
above-mentioned documents to the competent organs of
the United Nations and to international organizations concerned. for their information, so as to enable them to continue their co-operation with the Working Group;
5. Decides that the Working Group shall meet during
the fortieth session of the General Assembly, preferably at
the beginning of the session, to continue the second reading of the draft international convention on the protection
of the rights of all migrant workers and their families.
101st p/enar_v meeting
14 December 1984

39/103. Question of the international legal protection of the human rights of individuals who
are not citizens of the country in which they
live
The General Assemblr.
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolutions 1790 (LIV) of 18 May 1973 and 1871 (LVI) of 17
May 1974 concerning the question of the international
legal protection of the human rights of individuals who are
not citizens of the country in which they live,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolutions 8
(XXIX) of 21 March 1973, 68 11 (XXX) of 6 March
66 See A/C.3/39/ I.
67 A/C3/39/4 and Corr.!.
68 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Counc,i. F,(/1•-/,>lmh
Sessim,. Supplement No 6.(Fl,265). chap. XX. sect. A.
••
