General Auembly-Thirteenth Session

Taking note of the important assistance already given
by France to the Trust Territory of Togoland under
French administration,
Considering the useful and constructive role that the
United Nations and the specialized agencies have played
in the past in assisting various countries in their development plans,
RecaUing the recent establishment of the Special
Fund and of the Economic Commission for Africa,
Considering that requests for assistance to Trust Territories deserve sympathetic.consideration by the United
Nations,
Invites the Secretary-General, the Special Fund, the
Technical Assistance Board and the specialized agencies
to give urgent and sympathetic consideration to any
requests for assistance concer:ning Togoland, submitted
through the Administering Authority.
780th plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.
127 4 (XIII). Attainment of sell-government or
independence by Trust Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 558 (VI) of 18 January 1952
and subsequent resolutions on the same subject, inviting the Administering Authority of each Trust Territory, inter alia, to estimate the period of time in which
it would attain self-government or independence, and
recommending that the Administering Authorities take
the necessary measures for the attainment of this goal
at an early date,
Having examined part I, chapter V, of the report of
the Trusteeship Council, 11
l. Notes that by the measures already taken or to be
taken by some Administering Authorities in consultation with the United Nations and the peoples of the
Territories concerned, Togoland under French administration, the Cameroons under United Kingdom administration, the Cameroons under French administration, Somaliland under Italian administration and
Western Samoa under New Zealand administration,
are expected to achieve in 1960 the objective of the
Trusteeship System laid down in Article 76 b of the
Charter of the United Nations;
2. Invites the Administering Authorities concerned
to formulate, in respect of the remaining Trust Territories, early successive intermediate targets and dates
in the fields of political, economic, social and educational
development of these Territories so as to create, as soon
as possible, the pre-conditions for the attainment of
self-government or independence;
3. Reaffirms its resolutions 558 (VI) of 18 January
1952, 1064 (XI) of 26 February 1957, 1207 (XII)
of 13 December 1957 and other pertinent resolutions
on the same subject, and once again urges the Administering Authorities to implement the terms of those resolutions;
4. Requests the Trusteeship Council to report to the
General Assembly at its fourteenth session on the progress made in implementing the present resolution.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.
u Ibid., Thirteenth Session, Supplement No. 4, (A/3822),
vol. J.

1275 (XIII). Effects of the European Economic
Community on the development of certain
Trust Territories

The General Assembly,
Referring to its resolution 1210 (XII) of 13 December 1957,
Noting with concern that the Administering Authorities having thus far submitted no information on the
possible effects of the association with· the European
Economic Community of the Trust" Territories under
their administration,
Considering that the association of Trust Territories
with the European Economic Community may have a
significant impact upon their development towards independence or self-government,
1. Requests again the Administering Authorities to
include in their annual reports information concerning
the effects of the association with the European Economic Community of the Trust Territories under their
administration on the economic development of these ·
Territories and on their development towards independence or self-government;
2. Requests the Trusteeship Council to examine this
question at its next session and to report to the General
Assembly at its fourteenth session;
3. Resolves to resume consideration of this question
at its fourteenth session.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.
1276 (XIII). Dissemination of information on
the United Nations and on the International
Trusteeship System in Trust Territories

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the opinions expressed in its resolutions
556 (VI) of 18 January 1952 and 754 (VIII) of 9 December 1953 that it is essential that the peoples of the
Trust Territories should receive adequate information
concerning the United Nations and the International
Trusteeship System,
Recalling that in resolution 754 (VIII) the General
Assembly, inter alia, requested the Secretary-General
to initiate at the earliest possible date, on the basis of
the suggestions furnished by the Administering Authorities or of his own knowledge of appropriate information channels, or by making use of both of these
sources together, a direct flow of information material
addressed to the general public in Trust Territories,
Noting the report submitted by \he Secretary-General to the Trusteeship Council1 2 under Council resolution 36 (III) of 8 July 1948,
1. Considers that the task of dissemination of information on the United Nations and on the International
Trusteeship System could be substantially facilitated
by the establishment of United Nations information
centres in or near the Trust Territories;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, taking into account the report of the Committee of Experts on United
Nations Public Information 13 and the decision, if any,
12
Official Records of the Trusteeship Council, Twh1ly-second
Session, Annexes, agenda item 10, document T/1378.
11
Official Records of the Grncral Assem/Jly, Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 55, document A/3928.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

taken upon that report by the General Assembly at its
current session,1' to prepare for the twenty-fourth session of the Trusteeship Council a report on the early
establishment of. such information centres in which the
responsible positions would be occupied preferably by
indigenous inhabitants of the Trust Territories, and
further requests the Council to report on this matter
to the Assembly at its fourteenth session.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.
1277 (Xlll). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
Having examined chapter VII, section C, of part I
of the report of the Trusteeship Council11 and the report
of the Secretary-General on offers by Member States
of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Trust
Territories, 15
Recalling that, in its resolutions 753 (VIII) of 9
December 1953, 1063 (XI) of 26 February 1957 and
1209 (XII) of 13 December 1957, the General Assembly recommended that the Administering Authorities
of the Trust Territories take all such measures as would
ensure the greatest possible use by inhabitants of the
Trust Territories of the scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States,
Noting that the major part of the scholarships offered
by Member States remain unutilized,
1. Takes not,e of chapter VII, section C, of part I
of the report of the Trusteeship Council and of the report of the Secretary-General on offers by Member
States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of
Trust Territories;
2. Reaffirms its resolution 1209 (XII) of 13 December 1957, and once again invites the Administering
Authorities to take all necessary measures consistent
with the interests and needs of the Territories and their
peoples to ensure that scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States may be utilized by inhabitants of the Trust Territories, and to render every
assistance to those persons who have applied for or
have been -granted scholarships or fellowships, particularly with regard to facilitating their travel formalities;
3. Requests the Member States offering scholarships
to take into account, whenever possible, the need to
provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to give such assistance as is possible, and as may be sought by the
Member States concerned and by the applicants, within
the framework of the procedures laid down by the
Trusteeship Council ;
5. Reques.t•s the Secretary-General to include, in his
future reports to the Trusteeship Council, detailed information concerning the actual use of scholarships and
training facilities offered by Member States for the
education of inhabitants of the Trust Territories;
6. Requests the Trusteeship Council to resume, at its
sessions held in 1959, the consideration of this question
"See resolution 1335 (XIII).
uofjicial Records of the Trusteeship Council, Twenty-second
Session, Annexes, agenda item 12, document T /1377.

33

and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
fourteenth session ;
7. Decid86 to place this question as a separate item
on the provisional agenda of its fourteenth session.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.
1278 (Xlll). Economic aid for Somalia
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1206 (XII) of 13 December
1957 in which it requested the Trusteeship Council to
explore the possible means of furnishing, after 1960, the
necessary technical and financial assistance to Somaliland under Italian administration,
Noting the special report made to the Trusteeship
Council by the Administering Authority on the extent
of the assistance which will be necessary, and the estimate made therein of an annual budget deficit of $5
million, 16
Bearing in mind the encouraging trends in the economic development of the Territory, and the statement
of the Government of Somalia17 that these trends may
mean that external financial assistance will be required
for a period considerably less than the twenty years
forecast by the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development,
1. Notes from the report of the Trusteeship Council
that the Administering Authority and the Government
of Somalia are continuing to explore possible sources
of financial aid for the Territory after 1960, and that
they will inform the Trusteeship Council, when conditions in the Territory are next considered, regarding
the results of these consultations ;
2. Welcomes the statement of the representative of
Italy9 in regard to the various sources from which assistance has been secured or is in prospect, thus indicating that the problem is progressing satisfactorily
towards its solution ;
3. Expresses the hope that, at the appropriate time,
the authorities of the Special Fund, already established
under General Assembly resolution 1240 (XIII) of
14 October 1958, the Secretary-General, the specialized
agencies concerned and the Technical Assistance Board
will give sympathetic consideration to the requests for
assistance made on behalf of the Government of Somalia,
taking into account the needs of the country and the
principles of the Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance, in accordance with the request made by the
Econor,1ic and Social Council in its resolution 660
(XXIV) of 30 July 1957;
4. Requests the Trusteeship Council at its twentyfourth session to consider the prospects of further assistance from the Special Fund, from the Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance and from the
specialized agencies, and to report to the General Assembly at its fourteenth session so that the Assembly
may have a complete pictun~ of the economic prospects
of Somalia when that Territory achieves independence
in l 9ro.
782 nd plenary meeting,
.
5 December 1958.
1
• See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth
Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/3822), vol. I, part II, chap. I,
paras. 106-127.
17
See Official Records of the Trusteeship Council, Twentysecond Session, 921st meeting.
