S/PV.8688

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8688th meeting

Tuesday, 17 December 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Norman-Chalet. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Adom
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Benaabou
Mr. Licharz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Ugarelli
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Mogashoa
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-41380 (E)
*1941380*

S/PV.8688

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the outgoing Chairs of the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council according to the year
of adoption of the related Council decisions: His
Excellency Ambassador Kacou Houadja Léon Adom,
Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire, Chair
of the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
and Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the Central African
Republic; His Excellency Ambassador Luis Ugarelli,
Deputy Permanent Representative of Peru, Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), concerning counter-terrorism, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014) and Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals; Her Excellency Ambassador
Joanna Wronecka, Permanent Representative of
Poland, Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1518 (2003), Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005),
concerning the Sudan and Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015),
concerning South Sudan; His Excellency Ambassador
Mansour Alotaibi, Permanent Representative of
Kuwait, Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Chair of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural
Questions; and His Excellency Ambassador Anatolio
Ndong Mba, Permanent Representative of Equatorial
Guinea, Chair the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2048 (2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Adom.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Over
the past two years, I have had the honour to chair the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013), concerning the Central African Republic, and
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations. I
would like to take this opportunity to take stock of my
2/13

17/12/2019

tenure as Chair of the 2127 Committee and the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations.
With regard to the work of the Committee, I
would like to share my views on the implementation of
sanctions imposed by the United Nations and to share
some of my experiences and reflections that I hope will
contribute to further advancing our shared aspirations
towards peace and security.
Since the beginning of my mandate, I have sought
to firmly root my role as Chair of the 2127 Committee
in a context of active diplomacy with a number of States
Members of the United Nations, both in New York
and during my visits to the Central African Republic
in 2018 and 2019. In that regard, the main observation
that has emerged is that there is a lack of understanding
of the nature, objectives and context of the overall
United Nations sanctions. In fact, during exchanges
with various interlocutors, specifically representatives
of Member States on which such sanctions have been
imposed, I soon observed that there was an overriding
need to begin by reassuring them before dispelling
misunderstandings, such as the idea that sanctions have
a negative impact on the population. In reality, targeted
sanctions, such as arms embargoes, assets freezes
and travel bans, are geared not towards punishing
the countries and their people but rather towards
contributing to bringing peace and development to
countries and regions afflicted by crisis.
As a citizen of a country that was subjected to
United Nations sanctions, it was perhaps easier for me
to communicate that message to the Bangui authorities.
Many Council members know that Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia
and Sierra Leone were subjected to targeted sanctions
imposed by the Security Council. I am convinced
that the imposition of such measures by the Security
Council played a positive role in maintaining the
peace processes in those three West African countries
and helped to prevent a recurrence of conflict. Those
countries ultimately found their own path to peace and
security, which the Council acknowledged by lifting
the sanctions imposed on each of them.
Today, as my delegation leaves the Security Council
and having visiting the Central African Republic
twice, I am convinced now more than ever of the
importance that the Council and its subsidiary bodies
attach to using targeted sanctions to isolate individuals
and entities that jeopardize peace processes, target
women and children, commit sexual violence, obstruct
19-41380

17/12/2019

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

humanitarian operations and attack schools, places of
worship and even peacekeepers.
We must continue to ensure that these individuals
and entities be isolated and prevented from acting, to the
extent possible. We must put an end to their impunity
and, above all, show civilians, who are the targets of
their acts, that the international community is vigilant.
At the same time, armed actors must be aware
that they will be held accountable. The more they are
concerned about whether their name will appear in a
report of a United Nations group of experts, or what
will happen once it is included, the less time they will
spend attacking civilians. They should ask themselves
whether the fact that their name appears in a report will
result in the imposition of sanctions against them by
the Security Council or by one of its committees. They
should also be concerned about the freezing of their
bank accounts and the possibility of being sent back
to their country when they want to travel. Lastly, they
should consider whether the fact that the international
community is paying them such attention will not lead
to them appearing in The Hague.
Allow me to share some considerations regarding
the main issues I have been working on during my term
as Chair of the 2127 Committee and the Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations.
With regard to sanctions, they have focused on,
among other things, strengthening regional cooperation,
collaboration with the national authorities in Bangui,
the Committee’s mobilization against impunity and the
protection of civilians in the Central African Republic,
in particular women and children.
As Chair of the 2127 Committee, one of my
priorities has been to deepen and strengthen dialogue
between the Committee and States of the region. I
am convinced that the problems currently faced by
the Central African Republic can be better addressed
by strengthening cooperation in the region. Building
the political will and the capacities of those States
can help towards eradicating illicit activities in the
Central African Republic, such as trafficking in arms,
ammunition and natural resources and the movement of
armed combatants in States of the region.
To that end and in cooperation with the Panel of
Experts, we continued the dialogue with those States
by, for example, inviting them to meetings of the
sanctions committee so that their views were heard.

S/PV. 8688

On 26 January and 7 September 2018, the Chair of the
Committee therefore invited States of the region to
inform the Panel of Experts of their comments on its
2017 final report and its 2018 mid-term review. In 2019,
I also held similar meetings with States of the region on
29 January and 6 September.
During those meetings, which were open to all
Member States, States provided comments on the
conclusions and recommendations of the Panel of
Experts and also took note of the progress made and
the challenges faced in implementing United Nations
sanctions, as well as cooperation with the Panel of
Experts. I am pleased to note that States of the region
attached great importance to those meetings, and I hope
that more meetings of the same kind will be organized
in the future.
The members of the Panel of Experts also reminded
me several times that the meetings were very useful for
strengthening their cooperation with States of the region
and for clarifying misunderstandings about information
contained in the Panel’s reports. It is also important to
note that the Permanent Mission of the Central African
Republic was always represented at the meetings and
that it provided valuable information on various aspects
of its cooperation with States of the region by noting
the progress made and the problems encountered.
During my term of office, I also made sure that I
visited the Central African Republic twice, as I have just
said, from 2 to 5 October 2018 and from 1 to 4 October
2019. Those visits were both organized at an opportune
time and enabled me and the members of the Committee
from New York who accompanied me to have an idea of
the problems facing the country and to discuss with the
national authorities means and solutions with a view
to strengthening cooperation, particularly on areas as
complex as the arms embargo, in order to restore peace
in the country.
Following the visits, I informed the members of
the Committee by means of a report and convened
meetings between the Committee and States of the
region in order to make them aware of the results and
conclusions of my visits.
In addition, on 12 September, I encouraged the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Central Africa and Head of the United Nations
Office for Central Africa, the Panel of Experts on
the Central African Republic and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission

19-413803/13

S/PV.8688

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

in the Central African Republic to give briefings
on arms trafficking in the Central African Republic
and in the region and on strategies for strengthening
regional cooperation.
During the meetings mentioned above, particularly
during my visits to the Central African Republic, I was
able to take stock of the degree to which the country is
weakened by the impunity enjoyed by armed groups,
which freely violate the peace agreement and commit
various atrocities against civilians, particularly women
and children.
In that context and in order to continue to shed
light on the repercussions of impunity, I called on the
Committee to remain seized of the issue. On 29 July,
for example, I held joint briefings with the Working
Group on Children in Armed Conflict, during which
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict briefed the members of the
Committee and the Working Group. In their briefings,
the two Special Representatives emphasized that armed
groups continued to commit violence against women
and children in the Central African Republic.
I note with regret that currently, despite the
progress made in reducing violence during the period
following the signing of the peace agreement in
February, the violence has not ceased and impunity still
prevails. It is therefore the responsibility of the Security
Council to continue its work in support of the peace
agreement and to punish those who continue to wilfully
violate the provisions of an agreement to which they
freely committed.
In that regard, I recall that article 35 of the agreement
states the possibility of sanctions against persons who
do not comply with it. The Committee must therefore
assume its responsibilities and consider sanctions
against new individuals and entities. Otherwise,
potential violators will see that no new entries have
been added to the list since May 2017, a sign of the
international community’s decreasing interest in the
Central African Republic.
From January 2018 to December 2019, Côte
d’Ivoire chaired the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations which, it should be recalled, seeks
to promote triangular cooperation between the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries.
4/13

17/12/2019

The efforts of the Working Group during 2018
focused on the following themes: the protection of
civilians under peacekeeping operations in difficult
conditions; the strategic generation of forces in
peacekeeping operations; women and peace and
security in peacekeeping operations; the safety, security
and performance of Blue Helmets in an asymmetric
environment with an integrated approach; and lessons
learned from the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire in order to understand the prerequisites for
successful peacekeeping.
The efforts of the Working Group during 2019
focused on relations between peacekeeping missions
and host States; reviewing the implementation of the
Secretary-General’s peacekeeping reform initiative,
known as Action for Peacekeeping; the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur; and
peacekeeping cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations, in particular
with regard to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the Group
of Five for the Sahel Joint Force.
Concerning the activity report for the year 2019,
Côte d’Ivoire has offered an exhaustive account of the
meetings held, while endeavouring to faithfully relay
the comments made by experts from Member States.
Unfortunately, the report has still not yet been adopted
due to divergent views among certain members of the
Council, linked in particular to problems concerning
the issue of intelligence in peacekeeping operations.
My country will seize the opportunity presented by
the 2019 report to urge the parties concerned to make
concessions so that the report, which will be of even
higher quality, can be published as a Council document.
Côte d’Ivoire reserves the right to publish the document
in its national capacity, if necessary.
Overall, it is worth noting the particular interest of
Member States in the Working Group and commending
the quality of the exchanges therein. Allow me, at
this juncture, to express our deep gratitude to the
Secretariat, the Security Council Affairs Division and
the interpreters, who have worked tirelessly to organize
our various meetings.
As we conclude our term on the Security
Council, Côte d’Ivoire wishes to stress that we will
remain steadfast in our support for United Nations
peacekeeping. From our own experience, we are aware
19-41380

17/12/2019

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

S/PV. 8688

of the decisive role it plays in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding.

down, as well as respond to requests for assistance
and prosecution.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to once again extend my sincere thanks to all those who,
through their efficient work, helped us to fulfil our
mandate, especially our colleagues in the Secretariat.

In that regard, I would like to acknowledge the
significant role played by each of the member States of
the Council in ensuring that the Residual Mechanism
continues strengthening its work, including its
judicial agenda, meeting requests for assistance, the
preservation of historical archives and the monitoring
of cases referred to national courts. We wish the
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam, Ambassador
Dang Dinh Quy, and his team every success in their
efforts to continue developing this firm and constructive
approach to upholding international criminal justice
and the fight against impunity. Moreover, I thank the
United Nations Office of Legal Affairs and the Security
Council Affairs Division for their tireless support over
the past two years.

The President: I thank Ambassador Adom for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ugarelli.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to express my gratitude for this opportunity to share
some remarks on the subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council that Peru had the honour of steering over the
past two years.
I would like to begin with the Peruvian
chairmanship of the Council’s Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, which supports
and monitors the work of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, which is currently
led by Judge Carmel Agius. The work of the Informal
Working Group clearly constitutes an integral
component of multilateralism and international law,
thereby contributing to effectively addressing the
most demanding contemporary global challenges,
in particular the fight against impunity for atrocity
crimes. We exercise those functions being convinced
of the need for the Security Council to remain united
in support of the Residual Mechanism, as well as in the
preservation of its work and its legacy. Not only has
the Mechanism strengthened the fight against impunity
and served to deter the perpetrators of such crimes,
but it has also promoted reconciliation while making a
fundamental impact on the jurisprudential development
of international criminal law.
The Informal Working Group held a series of
informal meetings over the past two years, primarily
to discuss the biannual reports of the Residual
Mechanism, as well as to consider and ultimately adopt
both presidential statement S/PRST/2018/6, which
established the time frame for the review of the Residual
Mechanism’s progress, and resolution 2422 (2018),
which, in addition to appointing the Prosecutor and
renewing the mandate of the Mechanism, approved that
review, taking into account the recommendations of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services. The resolution
also calls for the cooperation of all States, as it befalls
States to execute the sentences and orders handed

Peru assumed the chairmanship of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) convinced, based on our
own experiences, of the need to unrelentingly combat
this scourge in all its manifestations and arenas. I
would like to take this opportunity to share three
specific points in relation to our work in a position of
such high responsibility.
First of all, we wish to underscore the relevance
of assessment visits to Member States, which enable
the Committee to verify, on the ground, weaknesses
and challenges that might require renewed technical
assistance; to take stock of new trends and terrorist
methods; and to identify good practices so that those
can be rendered more systematic. Therefore, over the
past two years, the CTC conducted 31 visits to various
countries, with the participation of the five permanent
members of the Council and Peru. In that connection, we
note the importance of members of the Security Council
being the first to consent to such visits and to participate
actively in the successful development thereof.
Secondly, we consider it essential to foster synergies
among the various stakeholders concerned in the fight
against the scourge of terrorism. That is why, upon
assuming the chairmanship of the Committee, we made
it a priority to establish a close and fluid relationship with
the recently created United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism, as well as with the Executive Directorate
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, which helps
to strengthen the United Nations counter-terrorism
chain. We would therefore highlight the importance of
that cooperation not being limited to United Nations

19-413805/13

S/PV.8688

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

entities, but rather extended to relevant international,
regional and subregional organizations, in areas such
as technical assistance facilitation, the exchange of
experiences and the coordination of collective efforts.
Thirdly, I wish to underscore the opportunities
offered by the CTC as the preferred forum for discussion
on this matter. In that regard, we are delighted to
have convened, with the support of the Executive
Directorate, 22 briefings and events on specific areas of
interest to Member States in the fight against terrorism.
The issues we addressed included maritime and civil
aviation security, including the use of drones; emerging
trends and new threats; and methods of countering
terrorist narratives, inter alia. The Committee also
continued to promote the mainstreaming of human
rights and the gender approach in the fight against
terrorism and violent extremism, while reminding
Member States that any fight against terrorism must
adhere to obligations arising from international law,
particularly international human rights law, refugee law
and humanitarian law. We would like to highlight the
valuable participation and contributions made during
those meetings by representatives of the public sector
and civil society, particularly the world of academia,
and to express our thanks for them.
I would also like to highlight the policy documents
that have been formulated, particularly the Addendum
adopted to the Madrid Guiding Principles on foreign
terrorist fighters (S/2018/1177, annex), which is a
useful tool for States dealing with the challenges of the
return and relocation of fighters and their families. I
will conclude the section on the CTC by expressing our
best wishes for success to the incoming chairmanship
of Tunisia under the leadership of Ambassador
Moncef Baati, as well as our sincere thanks to all
the members of the Committee for their commitment
and cooperation, to the Executive Directorate and
especially its Executive Director, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Michèle Coninsx, for their valuable guidance
and continuous support, and to the Secretariat for its
essential assistance.
Lastly, I would like to touch on Peru’s chairmanship
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014), on Yemen, which Peru has considered
a top priority in view of the impact and scale of
the humanitarian tragedy affecting the country’s
population. That is why, in tackling that very delicate
responsibility, we sought to send a strong message to
the various actors concerned that there was no room
6/13

17/12/2019

for a military solution and that new violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights in
Yemen would not be tolerated. It was in that context,
under Peru’s presidency of the Security Council, that
the Committee paid its first visit to the region, in what
was a valuable exercise in raising awareness of the
purposes of the sanctions and measures imposed by the
2140 Committee and obtaining first-hand information
on their implementation. It also helped to foster greater
interaction, dialogue and cooperation between the
Committee, its Panel of Experts and the States in the
region, and to familiarize us with the latest political,
security and humanitarian developments in Yemen
related to the Committee’s mandate.
We believe that the rapprochement that we have been
promoting with our various Government interlocutors
in the region should not be a one-time exercise but
that we should organize similar efforts in the next few
months aimed at continuing constructive dialogue and
making tangible progress on the process of a political
solution promoted by the United Nations. To that end, I
would like to underscore the importance of continuing
firm support to the Panel of Experts that so efficiently
and professionally supports the 2140 Committee. We
consider it essential to ensure that the Panel continues
to carry out its work independently and impartially,
protecting it from pressures motivated by political and
strategic considerations that might seek to control the
aims and outcome of its investigations.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation’s sincere gratitude to all who supported us
in executing our mandate, especially the members of
the Sanctions Committee that we chaired and the very
efficient and dedicated staff of the Secretariat, and to
express our wish to Ambassador Rhonda King, the
Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, and her team for a productive term as they
steer the Committee’s work.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): For the past two years I
have had the honour to chair the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1518 (2003), concerning Iraq,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005) concerning the Sudan, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
concerning South Sudan. I would like to thank the
Council for the opportunity to reflect both on my role
since 2018 as Chair of these Committees and on the
work accomplished during that time. I would like to
19-41380

17/12/2019

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

S/PV. 8688

begin with a few words about our leadership of the 1518
Committee on Iraq.

in 2020 under the able stewardship of the Permanent
Representative of Estonia.

During my term as Chair of that Committee, I
have been committed to exploring creative ways to
support Iraq in its efforts to recover its assets and
achieve progress with regard to the delisting of entities
and individuals. I conducted consultations with the
relevant members of the Council on new initiatives
aimed at increasing the prospects for asset recovery and
enabling the 1518 sanctions regime to be wound down
in the foreseeable future. In early 2019 I convened two
informal meetings of the Committee, the first time such
meetings had been held since December 2005. During
the first meeting, on 9 January, a delegation of the
Government of Iraq visiting from Baghdad discussed
several issues with the Committee, specifically the
recovery of Iraqi financial assets abroad, the task of
dealing with delisting requests and the delisting of
Iraqi entities from the 1518 sanctions list. The Iraqi
delegation circulated a paper during the meeting on
action mechanisms for recovering assets, subsequently
transmitted as a document of the Committee. At the
second meeting of the Committee, on 12 February,
INTERPOL’s Special Representative to the United
Nations briefed the Committee on a possible cooperation
agreement with INTERPOL along the lines of similar
accords with other Sanctions Committees.

I will now turn to the 1591 and 2206 Sanctions
Committees, on Sudan and South Sudan, respectively,
without going into too much detail. As Chair, I made
every effort to keep the Committees’ work transparent
for the entire United Nations membership and provided
regular open briefings on their work in this Chamber,
held every 90 days for the Sudan and at least once a
year for the South Sudan sanctions. I will now focus
on the implementation of the sanctions regimes, their
effectiveness and my thoughts on their possible future.

This
creative
approach
contributed
to
reinvigorating and advancing the Committee’s work.
In the course of the past two years we have witnessed
incremental progress in the delisting of the entities on
the Committee’s sanctions list. As noted in this year’s
annual report, as of December 2019 there are 76 entities
on the sanctions list, compared to 169 in the report for
2017 (S/2017/1078). That reduction of the number of
entities by more than half in two years was due to the
efforts of the Committee and the Permanent Mission of
Iraq, which submitted a number of delisting requests,
all of which the Committee members were agreed on.
I encourage Iraq to continue to submit requests so
that the remaining 76 entities can be delisted as soon
as possible. Besides this, the momentum generated by
the Committee’s meetings contributed to furthering
the Government of Iraq’s informal engagement with
Committee members. The Iraqi delegation visited
New York for the second time in June this year and
participated in its turn in a series of meetings with the
members of the 1518 Sanctions Committee. It is my
firm hope that the 1518 Committee will remain active

Sanctions should not be an end in and of themselves.
They are a tool that should serve a specific purpose set
by the international community. Sanctions can neither
exist nor be successful in isolation. For regimes to be
truly effective, they should be subject to the Council’s
regular reflection and revision. They must be part of
a broader Security Council strategy and be embedded
in a broader political context. The same applies to the
activities of sanctions committees. It is my firm belief
that if the work of committees are to be effective,
transparency and outreach are of crucial importance.
In that context, I consider it one of the Chair’s main
tasks to deepen the dialogue between the committee
and the Government of the country under the
sanctions regime and to enhance contacts with relevant
neighbouring States. With that aim in mind, I undertook
visits to the Sudan, South Sudan and other countries
of the region in both 2018 and 2019. To strengthen the
engagement of the Committees with the Sudan, South
Sudan and their neighbouring States and to allow for
their interaction with the respective Panels of Experts,
each year I organize Committee meetings open to
the participation of representatives of the countries
under the sanctions regimes and their neighbours. I
also work to enhance the Committees’ contacts with
other Security Council subsidiary bodies, in particular
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya, as well as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
I am convinced that the full implementation of the
sanctions regime established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015) can serve to protect the peace process
in South Sudan and target potential spoilers who are
threatening the implementation of the Revitalized

19-413807/13

S/PV.8688

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan and the formation of the
transitional Government. I truly believe that the arms
embargo introduced by the Security Council in 2018 has
played an important role in reducing the suffering of
the civilian population in South Sudan. In that context,
I would like to remind all Member States, particularly
those neighbouring South Sudan, of their obligations
to observe the implementation of sanctions measures. I
would also like to stress that one option for complying
with and implementing the sanctions regimes is to ask
the Committee for the necessary exemptions to the
asset freeze, the travel ban and the arms embargo.
When it comes to the sanctions regime concerning
the Sudan, I would like to emphasize what I have stated
on numerous occasions in this Chamber, which is that
the situation in Darfur has greatly improved since the
imposition of that regime. There can also be no doubt
that the situation in Darfur today is closely linked to the
political process currently under way in the country.
I am truly convinced that the political changes in the
Sudan present a real opportunity for a comprehensive
and inclusive peace agreement in Darfur. I therefore
encourage the Council to explore the different options
for supporting and acknowledging the achievements
made so far by the Sudanese authorities and people. In
that context, I hope that the Security Council will follow
through on its intention, as expressed in resolution
2455 (2019), to establish clear, well-identified and
measurable key benchmarks that could serve to guide
the Council in reviewing the measures imposed on the
Government of the Sudan.
Regardless of the future of the sanctions regime,
I call on the international community not to lose
sight of the situation of the civilian population of
Darfur. Sanctions, particularly arms embargoes, are
supposed to ensure the security of civilians, but they
cannot replace sustainable development and genuine
political participation. The sources of instability in
Darfur are complex and reflections on the international
community’s future approach should first and foremost
address the question of tackling the root causes of the
conflict in Darfur.
Allow me now to turn briefly to my observations
from chairing the 1518, 1591 and 2206 Committees
and general remarks on the functioning of subsidiary
organs and the role of the Chairs.
8/13

17/12/2019

Over the past two years, I have fulfilled my
mandate from the Security Council with a sense of
great responsibility. These two years have made me
realize that, despite his or her expertise, enthusiasm,
commitment and dedication, the Chair has limited
autonomy and freedom of action. It is no secret that
certain members of the Council openly reject the tool
of sanctions. Given that the Committees reach all their
decisions by consensus, in many instances political
divisions inside the Security Council have made it
difficult to agree on even quite minor actions. It has not
been exceptional for me to find the consensus rule being
abused. At times it has also been my impression that,
despite the adoption of Security Council resolutions
calling for the full implementation of the sanctions
measures, some delegations were not reinforcing those
messages in the respective Committee and were not
fully supportive of the work of the Panel of Experts. Let
me also point out that the lack of a clearly established
practice for co-penholdership of the Security Council’s
resolutions on sanctions regimes curtails the Chair’s
capacity to have a creative impact on the sanctions
regime even further.
However, all in all, my experience serving as
Chair of three sanctions Committees has been a unique
and rich opportunity and a very important part of my
work as head of the Polish delegation to the Security
Council. I wish the best of luck to my successors — the
Permanent Representative of Estonia, who will take
over as Chair of the Iraq and Sudan Committees, and
the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam, who will
chair the South Sudan Sanctions Committee.
Allow me to conclude by thanking the Security
Council Subsidiary Organs Branch and the Secretariat
for their invaluable assistance with the everyday
work of the Chair. I appreciate the professionalism
of the interpreters and the technical assistance
provided by the Secretariat. My special words of
appreciation also go to the Panels of Experts on the
Sudan and South Sudan. One cannot overestimate
the value of the information that they provide to the
Committees — information that is very often obtained
under the most challenging circumstances.
I would also like to thank my fellow members of
the Security Council — in particular the penholders,
the United States and the United Kingdom — as well as
the Permanent Representatives of Iraq, the Sudan and
South Sudan to the United Nations and their respective
Governments for their fruitful cooperation. Last but
19-41380

17/12/2019

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

not least, I would like to thank my own team, which
has worked incredibly hard over the past two years and
whose professionalism and dedication have allowed me
to advance the work of the sanctions committees.
The President: I thank Ambassador Wronecka for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Alotaibi.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): Over the past two years, I
have had the privilege to chair the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would like to use
this occasion to reflect on both my role as Chair of the
Committee over the course of the past two years and the
work accomplished during that time.
At the outset of my term as Committee Chair and
with the support of the Secretariat, a work plan was
prepared, featuring our objectives for each meeting
and the key points of focus that we believed were
of importance.
During my chairmanship of the Committee, we
held meetings with the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the United Nations Mine Action
Service on the neutralization of armed groups, the
monitoring of the arms embargo and the situation with
regard to ammunition and weapons management in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, discussed the
illegal exploitation of natural resources and met with
the Presidential Adviser on Sexual Violence and Child
Recruitment in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict and on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to discuss human rights issues,
focusing on women and children, which provided a
platform for discussing progress and challenges. We
also held open briefings for all Member States, in
addition to meetings for States of the region, to allow
all of them to be heard and relay relevant information to
the Committee and to address their concerns pertaining
to the reports of the Group of Experts.
In May of this year, I had the opportunity to visit
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Republic of
Uganda and the United Arab Emirates to obtain firsthand knowledge of the implementation of sanctions
measures. The visit to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region was my first since assuming the
chairpersonship of the Committee. It provided me and

S/PV. 8688

participating delegations with an opportunity to hold
consultations with high-level officials, civil society
representatives and businesspersons from the Member
States concerned on a number of issues relevant to the
work of the Committee. Following the visit, I sent a report
to the Committee and discussed the report’s findings
and recommendations in a Committee meeting with a
view to further strengthening cooperation with relevant
States on the implementation of sanctions measures.
The past two years have been very constructive.
They have shed light on the challenges the Committee
faces in carrying out its work, while simultaneously
highlighting good practices that should be continued
in the long run. I feel that using all types of meetings
available to the Committee, such as informal informals,
open briefings and informal consultations, can enhance
its effectiveness.
The positive developments remind us that the
Security Council should continue to combat the
rampant impunity enjoyed by armed groups in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and send a clear
message to those who intend to undermine peace
and security in the country and the region. Some
individuals subject to sanctions continue to abuse and
prey on civilians and benefit from the cash generated by
their illegal taxation of the population and exploitation
of natural resources. These individuals succeed in
circumventing the sanctions as they do not travel or
make banking transactions.
Member States should be reminded that the
obligation to notify the Committee before providing
military support to the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo would enable effective
traceability and better monitoring by the Committee and
the Group of Experts, which is necessary for the efforts
of the Council to resolve the crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region. This
is the case because, with less visibility, weapons and
military equipment can end up in the hands of armed
groups that use them to attack civilians, humanitarian
workers and United Nations peacekeepers in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I would like to conclude my remarks and reflections
in this context with two important points. The first is
that continuing to work towards the implementation
of United Nations sanctions should be a priority.
Indeed, I believe sanctions cannot be successful if
they are not properly implemented by Member States.

19-413809/13

S/PV.8688

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Proper implementation entails cooperation with the
Committee, the Secretariat and the Group of Experts by
States, which is why we strived to enhance cooperation
during my tenure as Chair. Secondly, I would like to
emphasize the importance of supporting the work of the
Group of Experts, which has provided the Committee
with a considerable amount of information on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in the most recent period. The experts went to great
lengths to obtain credible information with a view to
identifying spoilers. On behalf of the Committee, let
me emphasize the great value that we place on the work
of the experts, their independence and their security.
I would like to take this opportunity today to convey
my sincere thanks and appreciation to all who have
worked with and supported my chairpersonship over the
course of these two years, most notably the members of
the committees that I have chaired, without whom we
would not have been successful in accomplishing our
objectives. I must express my most sincere gratitude to
our friends and colleagues in the sanctions secretariat,
who have provided us with the utmost support over the
last two years.
Please allow me to say a few words in my capacity as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. As members know, I
assumed the Chair of the Informal Working Group at
the start of 2018, shortly after the adoption of revised
presidential note S/2016/619, otherwise known as note
507, which was facilitated by Japan in its capacity as
former Chair of the Informal Working Group in the
preceding two years. The Informal Working Group
held 11 formal meetings, 5 in 2018 and 6 in 2019. We
also held many informal informals for the purpose of
discussions and negotiations.
During its first presidency of the Security Council,
in the month of February 2018, Kuwait convened an
open debate on the issue of working methods, at which
many Member States stressed the need for continued
discussion and engagement on the enhancement of
the Council’s working methods and decision-making
process (see S/PV.8175). The discussions in the
open debate set the tone for the Informal Working
Group’s programme of work. During the first year of
its chairpersonship of the Group, Kuwait convened
several meetings and informal briefings on various
issues related to the Council’s working methods, many
of which were proposed by Member States during the
open debate. A non-paper containing proposals based
10/13

17/12/2019

on those put forward by the wider membership during
the open debate was also prepared and circulated to
members by the Chair. During the second year of our
chairpersonship, in 2019, we drafted and circulated
eight presidential notes, which included proposals on
co-penholdership, subsidiary bodies, visiting missions,
wrap-up sessions and several other issues. Over the
course of the last year, we discussed these proposals
within the group and received feedback from Council
members by convening several rounds of negotiations
and bilateral meetings. We hope to see these notes
adopted before the end of this month.
Kuwait also held an open debate during its
second presidency of the Council, in June, on the
implementation of note 507 (see S/PV.8539), which
served as an opportunity to update Member States on
the progress made in the deliberations of the Informal
Working Group thus far and also to hear feedback from
the wider membership on the Council’s performance in
the context of its working methods. The meeting also
saw two procedural precedents, namely, the first-ever
joint statement by the 10 elected members, delivered by
the representative of South Africa, and the statement
delivered by the representative of New Zealand on
behalf of more than 20 former elected numbers.
With the assistance of the Secretariat, the Informal
Working Group also came up with a set of indicators
designed to measure the implementation of several
aspects of note 507, including the number of references
to note 507 in Council meetings, the number and
format of meetings held, the number and type of papers
presented in Council meetings, the gender of briefers
and the number of wrap-up sessions held. These
indicators were updated and circulated to members on
a quarterly basis and remained a standing agenda item
at all the meetings of the Informal Working Group. The
selection of subsidiary body chairs was also facilitated
by the Chair, in his capacity as Chair of the Informal
Working Group, in both 2018 and 2019, in accordance
with the provisions of note 507, with a permanent
member also serving as a facilitator both years.
We are currently carrying out the hand-over
to the incoming Chairs and hope to ensure that the
momentum achieved in the last two years will continue
when Saint Vincent and the Grenadines takes over
the chairpersonship next year. To help with a smooth
handover, we are co-organizing a workshop with Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines involving all 15 members,
to take place in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in
19-41380

17/12/2019

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

January. The workshop will focus specifically on the
issue of working methods and the Informal Working
Group. We hope that this workshop will set the tone
for the Group’s work beginning in 2020 and serve as a
forum for Council members to engage with one another
and continue exploring ways to improve the efficiency
and effectiveness of the Council’s work through its
working methods.
As we have mentioned before, it is vital to stress
that improving the working methods of the Council
does not end with the adoption of the revised version of
note 507. The whole process, including note 507, which
we consider as a living document, is dynamic and
evolving. We therefore believe that it requires an open
mind and flexibility and that the issue of enhancing the
working methods is an ongoing process.
In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere
gratitude to all members of the Security Council,
including the former members that we worked with
during our first year on the Council, in addition to
the wider membership and, of course, the Secretariat
for their cooperation over the past two years. I am
confident that the incoming Chair, Ambassador Inga
Rhonda King of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, will
bring her enthusiasm and ideas to further the work of
the Group. I convey my best wishes to Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines and assure that country of our full
support and cooperation from outside of the Council.
The President: I thank Ambassador Alotaibi for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ndong Mba.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I wish to thank the delegation of the United
States for having convened this briefing and for giving
me the opportunity to address the Security Council
as outgoing Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012),
concerning Guinea-Bissau. It has been a privilege
indeed, over the course of Equatorial Guinea’s two-year
term on the Security Council, to serve in this important
organ. I wish to share with the members of the Council
some purely personal observations I have made in my
capacity in the Committee and on behalf of my country,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea.
As Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012),
concerning Guinea-Bissau, our main objective was to

S/PV. 8688

ensure the full implementation of the basic mandates
of that subsidiary body. In conducting the work of
the Committees, Equatorial Guinea endeavoured to
be transparent, as we strictly followed the rules of
procedure and refrained from politicizing the issues.
Guinea-Bissau has been facing a chronic political
crisis for years, and the root causes of instability in
the country have yet to be resolved. International
and regional efforts to find a lasting solution to the
political crisis already appear to have had an effect
on the ground, as some of the key provisions of the
Conakry Agreement have been implemented, mainly
as a result of the appeals made and the significant
pressure exerted by the Security Council, as well as by
regional and international actors such as the Economic
Community of West African States, the African Union,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and
the European Union.
The international community has the capacity to
promote the use of different tools such as dialogue,
good offices, the maintenance of special political
missions in the field and sanctions, among others. But
the best solution for ultimately achieving institutional
stability and peace in Guinea-Bissau lies in the hands of
its leaders. As the Council is aware, 2019 is an election
year in Guinea-Bissau, and ensuring the stability,
transparency and legitimacy of its institutions must be
the cornerstone of its democratic process, a key element
for consolidating peace in the country. We hope that
the second round of presidential elections, scheduled to
be held 28 December, as well as the peaceful transfer
of power in the coming weeks to the newly elected
President, will put a definitive end to the uncertain
political situation in the country and give way to clear
signs of substantive progress towards the achievement
of a solution in the near future.
I made my second field visit to Guinea-Bissau at
the end of October, and there I was able to meet with
the political class at the highest level, as well as various
military and civil-society stakeholders and members of
the diplomatic community. It should be noted that in
the seven years since the adoption of the sanctions, that
was the third time that a Chair of the Committee had
visited the country. The first visit of such visits was
made in 2017 by my predecessor from Uruguay. Some
of the remarks that I have made at previous meetings on
the issue are still valid in the current context; however,
I would like to highlight some of the observations from
my report that are still valid.

19-4138011/13

S/PV.8688

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

First, the lack of political will to reach a solution
can be attributed to personal interests and ambitions,
and not diverging religious, ideological, ethnic or
philosophical views.
Secondly, since 2012 the sanctioned military has
maintained a republic-oriented conduct that respects
the constitutional order and the laws of the country
and refrained from interfering in the political life of
Guinea-Bissau. I personally consider the meetings
I had with civil-society and religious community
representatives — both during my first visit, in June
2018, when we also visited Guinea-Conakry to meet
with its leader, His Excellency President Alpha Condé,
who is working to mediate the crisis in Guinea-Bissau,
and during my second visit this year — to have been the
most memorable and moving moments during my time
as Chair of the Committee. Civil society and religious
communities have indeed faithfully expressed the
legitimate aspirations of the people of Guinea-Bissau to
put an end to the political instability that has persisted
since the end of the 1990s, to encourage them to truly
come together and to promote economic development
so that young people and future generations can enjoy
better living standards and conditions.
On the other hand, all the components of society in
Guinea-Bissau have been calling for the lifting of the
sanctions against the military, given that that political
leaders, and not the military, are those responsible for
the political and institutional instability. During the
current electoral process, the military has committed
itself to remaining completely on the sidelines of the
elections. I also observed the neutrality of the military
during my recent visit to the country, when I witnessed
the appointment of a parallel Government by the
outgoing President Vaz, which led to heightened tensions
in all the social sectors of the country. Those facts are
undoubtedly very positive signs of the neutral and
constitutional conduct of the military. To summarize,
there is no doubt that the sanctions have played an
important role in maintaining the constitutional order
in Guinea-Bissau. The imposition of sanctions is not an
end in itself, but rather a means or tool at the disposal
of the Security Council to achieve a given objective.
Sanctions must be maintained or updated with a view
to achieving that objective.
As I have said on previous occasions, after seven
years of exemplary conduct on the part of the military
of Guinea-Bissau, I believe that it is now appropriate for
the Security Council to consider and take the decision
12/13

17/12/2019

to lift the sanctions on the military, or end the sanctions
regime itself, following the end of the electoral cycle
and the peaceful transfer of power to the newly elected
President of the Republic. I strongly recommend that
the Council consider my recommendation and sincerely
thank its members for the support they have provided
to my delegation over its two years as Chair of the
Sanctions Committee, especially in the form of the
Council’s visit to Guinea-Bissau in February and for the
strong encouragement it provided to all the country’s
political actors. It is with great emotion that I end my
term as Chair of the Committee.
Personally, I know the country of Guinea-Bissau
well, as I served there for four years as an official of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations. I know the lands and villages, as well as the
people and their leaders. As I conclude my term as Chair
of the Committee, I hope, above all other things, that
there will be a successful transfer of power in GuineaBissau and that the situation there can in the coming
years be phased out of the agenda of the Security
Council, as in the cases of Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia.
My delegation would have been delighted to witness
those achievements, but owing to events that will not
be possible. We therefore wish the incoming Chair of
the Committee, His Excellency Ambassador Moncef
Baati of Tunisia, every success. I assure him that I will
always be available to cooperate on this issue. I wish to
express the importance of the international community
continuing to support Guinea-Bissau through multiple
channels, as it has done to date. However, it will be
essential that such support be accompanied by positive
signals and tangible progress on the part of GuineaBissau’s political leaders, especially during this
electoral process and even more so during the postelectoral phase, in which the country plans to embark
on a number of institutional reforms.
To conclude, I wish to convey the sincere thanks
of my delegation to all the members of the highly
professional team of the Security Council Affairs
Division, which has supported us throughout this
delicate undertaking. Its ongoing cooperation has been
vital to the successful discharge of our mandate. Special
thanks must be extended to Manuel Bressan, Assiata
Abdouroihamane and Ma Da, as well as to all the
interpreters and all Committee experts, including those
from the delegation of Equatorial Guinea; without them
we would not have been able to successfully complete
our work.
19-41380

17/12/2019

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Finally, we convey our most sincere thanks to the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, whose staff and logistical support have
always been available to us. I thank also the diplomatic
Missions in Guinea-Bissau for their support and the
contributions they made during our visits.

S/PV. 8688

The President: On behalf of the Security Council,
I take this opportunity to express appreciation to the
outgoing Chairs for the manner in which they have
discharged their important responsibilities on behalf of
the Council.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

19-4138013/13
