General Assembly-Eleventh Se.aeion

18

2. E.xpresse.r its apprecwtion to the Government of
Austria for the part it has played in receiving and
assisting the refugees who have entered its territory;
3. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue his efforts to effect solutions
in accordance with the Statute of his Office and the
programme of the United Nations Refugee Fund, under due safeguards in accordance with his responsibility under the said Statute to provide international
protection to refugees within his mandate ;
4. Requests the High Commissioner, in consultation
with the Secretary-General and with the Governments
concerned, to develop a comprehensive assessment of
the needs, both material and financial, of the Hungarian refugees, tô be submitted to the United Nations
Refugee Fund Executive Committee for its approval
at the earliest possible date ;
5. Expresses grave concern at the shortfall in the
governmental contributions to the United Nations
Refugee Fund established at $16 million;.
6. Urges all States Members of the United Nations
or members of the specialized agencies to give early
and serious consideration to making contributions to
the United Nations Refugee Fund in order that the
target for 1956 and 1957 may be reached and the High
Commissioner enabled fully to implement the programme planned under that Fund;
7. Requests the High Commissioner to study with
the United Nations Refugee Fund Executive Committee the appropriate means to ensure the full implementation of the programme of the Fund.

643rd plenary meeting,
23 ]anuary 1957.

B
The Genera/, Assembly,
N oting Economie and Social Council resolution 628
(XXII) of 13 July 1956,
Recalling with gratitude the work accomplished by
Dr. G. J. van Heuven Goedhart as United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, and mindful of bis
devoted and untiring efforts,
Recording its deep regret at bis untimely death,
1. Decides that a plaque to the memory of Dr. G.
J. van Heuven Goedhart shall be placed in the Palais
des Nations in Geneva ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to make appropriate arrangements for this purpose ;
3. Urges Governments actively to support tl,e work
on behalf of refugees in the spirit of the United Nations
Charter.
643rd plenary meeting,
23 January 1957.
1040 (XI). Convention of the Nationality of
Married Women
The General Assembly,
Considering that it is appropriate to conclude, under
the auspices of the United Nations, an international
convention on the nationality of married women, designed to eliminate conflicts of law arising out of provisions concerning the loss or acquisition of nationality
by women as a result of marriage, of its dissolution, or

of the change of nationality by the husband during
marriage,
Decides to open the Convention annexed to the
present resolution for signature and ratification at the
end of the eleventh session of the General Assembly.

647th plenary meeting,
29 January 1957.
ANNEX
CONVENTION ON THE NATIONALITY OF MARR!ED WoMEN

The Contracting States,
Recognizing that, in article 15 of the Universal Declaration
ence to nationality arise as a result of provisions concerning
the Joss or acquisition of nationality by women as a result
of marriage, of its dissolution or of the change of nationality
by the husband during marriage,
Recognizing that, in article 15 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the General Assembly of the United
Nations has proclaimed that "everyone has the right to a
nationality" and that "no one shall be arbitrarily deprived of
his nationality nor denied the right to change his nationality",
Desiring to co-operiate with the United Nations in promoting
universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and
fundamental freedoms for ail without distinction as to sex,
Hereby agree as hereinafter provided:
Article 1
Each Contracting State agrees that neither the cclebration
nor the dissolution of a marriagc between one of its nationals
and an alien, nor the change of nationality by the husband
during marriage, shall automatically affect the nationality of
the wife.
Article 2
Each Contracting State agrees that neither the voluntary
acquisition of the nationality of another State nor the renunciation of its nationality by one of its nationals shall
prevent the retention of its nationality by the wife of such
national.
Article 3
1. Each -Contracting State agrees that the alien wife of one
of its nationals may, at her request, acquire the nationality
of her husband through specialty priviliged naturalization
procedures; the grant of such nationality may be subject to
such limitations as may be imposed in the interests of national
security or public policy.
2. Each Contracting State agrees that the present Convention shall not be construed as affecting any legislation or
judicial practice by which the alien wife of one of its
nationals may, at her request, acquire her husband's nationality as a matter of right.
Article 4
1. The present Convention shall be open for signature and
ratification on behalf of any State Member of the United
Nations and also on behalf of any other State which is or
hcreafter becomes a member of any speciatized agency of the
United Nations, or which is or hereafter becomes a Party
to the Statute of the International Court of Justice, or any
other State to which an invitation has been addressed by
the General Assembly of the United Nations.
2. The present Convention shall be ratified and the in struments of ratification shall be deposited with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
Article 5
1. The present Convention shall be open for accession to
ail States referred to in paragraph 1 of article 4.
2. Accession shalt be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Thinl Committee

Article 6
1. The present Convention shall corne into force on the
ninetieth day following the date of deposit of the sixth instrument of ratification or accession.
2. For each State ratifying or acceding to the Convention
after the deposit of the sixth instrument of ratification or
accession, the Convention shall enter into force on the
ninetieth day after deposit by such State of its instrument
of ratification or accession.
Article 7
1. The present Convention shall apply to ail non-selfgoverning, trust, colonial and other non-metropolitan territories for the international relations of which any Contracting
State is responsible; the Contracting State concerned shall,
subj ect to the provisions of paragraph 2 of the present article,
at the time of signature, ratification or accession declare
the non-metropolitan territory or territories to which the
Convention shall apply ipso facto as a result of such signature, ratification or accession.
2. In any case in which, for the purpose of nationality,
a non-metropolitan territory is not treated as one with the
metropolitan territory, or in any case in which the previous
consent of a non-metropolitan territory is required by the
constitutional laws or practices of the Contracting State or
of the non-metropolitan territory for the application of the
Convention to that territory, that Contracting State shall
endeavour to secure the needed consent of the non-metropolitan territory within the period of twelve months from the
date of signature of the Convention by that Contracting
State, and when such consent bas been obtained the Contracting State shall notify the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. The present Convention shall apply to the
territory or territories named in such notification from the
date of its receipt by the Secretary-General.
3. After the expiry of the twelve-month period mentioned
in paragraph 2 of the present article, the Contracting States
concerned shall inform the Secretary-General of the results
of the consultations with those non-metropolitan territories
for whose international relations they are responsible and
whose consent to the application of the present Convention
may have been withheld.
Article 8
1. At the time of signature, ratification or accession, any
State may make reservations to any article of the present
Convention other than articles 1 and 2.
2. If any State makes a reservation in accordance with
paragraph 1 of the present article, the Convention, with the
exception of those provisions to which the reservation ,-eJates,
shall have effect as between the reserving State and the
other Parties. The Secretary-General of the United Nations
shall communicate the text of the reservation to all States
which are or may become Parties to the Convention. Any
State Party to the Convention or which thereafter becomes a
Party may notify the Secretary-General that it does not agree
to consider itself bound by the Convention with respect to
the State making the reservation. This notification must be
made, in the case of a State already a Party, within ninety
days from the date of the communication by the SecretaryGeneral; and, in the case of a State subsequently becoming
a Party, within ninety days from the date when the instrument of ratification or accession is deposited. In the event
that such a notification is made, the Convention shal! not
be deemed to be in effect as between the State making the
notification and the State making the reservation.
3. Any State making a reservation in accordance with
paragraph 1 of the present article may at any time withdraw
the reservation, in whole or in part, after it bas been accepted,
by a notification to this effect addressed to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations. Such notification shal! take
effect on the date on which it is received.
Article 9
1. Any Contracting State may denounce the present Convention by written notification to the Secretary-General of

19

the United Nations. Denunciation shall take effect one year
after the date of receipt of the notification by the SecretaryGeneral.
2. The present Convention shall cease to be in force as
from the date when the denunciation which reduces the
number of Parties to less than six becomes effective.

Article 10
Any dispute which may arise between any two or more
Contracting States concerning the interpretation or application of the present Convention, which is not settled by
negotiation, shall, at the request of any one of the Parties
to the dispute, be referred to the International Court of
Justice for decision, unless the Parties agree to another mode
of settlement.
Article 11
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall notify
all States Members of the United Nations and the nonmember States contemplated in paragraph 1 of article 4 of
the present Convention of the following:
(a) Signatures and instruments of ratification received in
accordance with article 4;
( b) Instruments of accession received in accordance with
article 5;
( c) The date upon which the present Convention enters
into force in accordance with article 6;
(d) Communications and notifications received in accordance with article 8;
(e) Notifications of denunciation received in accordance
with paragraph 1 of article 9;
(f) Abrogation in accordance with paragraph 2 of article 9.
Article 12
1. The present Convention, of which the Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish texts shall be equally authentic,
shall be deposited in the archives of the United Nati-Jns.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
transmit a certified copy of the Convention to all States
Members of the United Nations and to the non-member States
contemplated in paragraph 1 of article 4.

1041 (XI). Interim measures, pending entry into force of the covenants of human rights,
to be taken with respect to violations of
human rights set forth in the Charter of the
United Nations and the Universel Declaration of Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the fact that human rights constitute
one of the corner-stones of the Charter of the United
Nations,
C onsidering that, notwithstanding the obligations
arising from the Charter and notwithstanding the Universai Declaration of Human Rights, violations of
human rights continue to occur in various parts of the
world,
Recalling its resolution 540 (VI) of 4 February
1952, by which it recommended that Member States
intensify their efforts for the observance of human
rights and freedoms in their own territories and in
the Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories,
Believing that, owing to the close interdependence
established by the Charter between the effective observance of human rights and the maintenance of peace,
provision should be made as soon as possible for the
adoption of measures with respect to the observance
of human rights, in particular with a view to ensuring
respect for the said rights at all times,
