S/2016/11

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 January 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus
I. Introduction
1.
The present report on the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP) covers developments from 21 June to 18 December 2015 and brings up
to date, since the issuance of my previous report, dated 2 July 2015 ( S/2015/517),
the record of activities carried out by UNFICYP pursuant to Security Council
resolution 186 (1964) and subsequent Council resolutions, most recently resolution
2234 (2015).
2.
As at 15 December 2015, the strength of the military component stood at 8 60
for all ranks, and the strength of the police component stood at 57 (see annex).

II. Significant political developments
3.
The talks between the Greek Cypriot leader, Nicos Anastasiades, and the
Turkish Cypriot leader, Mustafa Akıncı, as well as their respective negotiators, have
continued to take place at a steady and intensified pace. In addition, the sides
continue to work intensively in various working groups of experts and technical
committees. The leaders have consistently underscored that th ey seek to reach
mutually beneficial solutions on issues which are being negotiated interdependently
with the aim of moving the process forward. More details are to be found in my
report on the status of the negotiations in Cyprus ( S/2016/15).
4.
Displaying their commitment to a common future, the two leaders issued a
joint statement on 18 November condemning the incidents that occurred two days
earlier, in which two vehicles belonging to Turkish Cypriots were tar geted during
protests in south Nicosia by Greek Cypriot youths throwing stones, resulting in two
Turkish Cypriots being injured. The two leaders jointly affirmed that they stood
together against racism and hatred, whatever the source, and that such deplora ble
acts would be thoroughly investigated and would not go unpunished. Nine people,
four of them students, were subsequently arrested in connection with the incidents;
five of the nine have been charged. The two leaders indicated that they would not
allow such unacceptable incidents to jeopardize the ongoing negotiations in any
way, in particular at the very time that they were trying in earnest to find a solution
to the Cyprus problem.

15-23003 (E)

080116

*1523003*

S/2016/11

5.
In response to the above-mentioned incidents, on 25 November, the two
leaders announced the establishment of a technical committee on education tasked
with reviewing research and good practices and undertaking new research on how
education could contribute to conflict transformation, peace, reconciliation and the
countering of prejudice, discrimination, racism, xenophobia and extremism and with
devising a mutually acceptable mechanism for the implementation of confidence building measures in schools and promoting contact and cooperation between
students and educators from the two communities. In addition, the committee was
tasked with making recommendations regarding the coordination of the two
educational systems.
6.
My Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Hervé Ladsous,
visited Cyprus from 23 to 26 October to gain a better understanding of how
UNFICYP might best support the peace process in the coming period. In the light of
the positive momentum in the negotiations, he also discussed with the sides their
expectations regarding how the United Nations might support the implementation of
an agreement. During the visit, Mr. Ladsous informed Mr. Anastasiades and
Mr. Akıncı that the United Nations would start to engage in settlement -related
planning in order to be prepared for any post-settlement role assigned to it by the
two leaders and the Security Council.

III. Activities of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus
7.
UNFICYP is intended first and foremost to prevent a recurrenc e of fighting
and to contribute to the maintenance of law and order and a return to normal
conditions. Its mandate requires reconciling security considerations and the
maintenance of the military status quo with allowing Cypriots who live and work in
the buffer zone to pursue civilian activities and enjoy full and productive lives. Such
an approach, when successful, builds confidence between communities and
contributes to the overall effort by the United Nations in support of the peace
process.

A.

Prevention of a recurrence of fighting and maintenance of the
military status quo
8.
During the reporting period, UNFICYP continued to maintain the integrity and
stability of the buffer zone by means of regular patrols, detailed observation and
sustained liaison at all levels. Direct and effective lines of communication and
regular meetings with the respective commanders allowed the Force to avert
attempts by both sides to effect low-level changes to the military status quo and
allowed the Force to impartially address and manage disputes that might otherwise
have escalated to higher levels or led to heightened tensions. Building on the
positive climate of the current and previous reporting periods, UNFICYP
maintained strong relations with each of the opposing forces. Nonetheless, the
continued non-recognition by the opposing forces of the aide-memoire of 1989, the
lack of a common understanding of the exact delineation of ceasefire lines and the
contesting of UNFICYP authority in the buffer zone continue to pose challenges.
Instances of unannounced construction or refurbishment of military positions along

2/15

15-23003

S/2016/11

the ceasefire lines on both sides also continued to cause concern, particularly when
perceived as conferring a military advantage. Likewise, increased civilian access to
and activity in the buffer zone through normalization continued to present specific
challenges to the mission in terms of controlling the buffer zone and to strain
resources.
9.
Over the past six months, the Turkish forces have installed closed -circuit
television equipment at 28 locations along the length of its ceasefire line, in addition
to the existing 29 locations in sectors 2 and 4. Of the 57 closed -circuit televisionequipped locations, 42 posts have seen no reduction in military personnel . Without
such reductions, closed-circuit television cameras confer a military advantage and,
as such, constitute a breach of the status quo. In addition, military positions
established by both forces inside the buffer zone that violate the status quo,
including in Strovilia, remain in place and are classified as permanent violations.
The United Nations continues to hold the Government of Turkey responsible for the
status quo in Varosha.

B.

Demining activity
10. As I noted in my previous report, in May 2015, a mine clearance team from
Cambodia, operating under the auspices of inter-mission cooperation with the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), began to clear landmines
displaced from a minefield north of the ceasefire line, near Mammari , into the buffer
zone by heavy rains. A surface area of 16,691 m 2 was cleared, with a total of seven
items found and destroyed. Given that that was the second mine -wash incident in
that area in as many years, UNFICYP has received assurances from the Turki sh
Cypriot security forces that they will clear the minefield north of the ceasefire line.
In the interim, temporary mitigation measures have been put in place to prevent
such incidents in the future.
11. Following the transfer by Mr. Anastasiades to Mr. Akıncı of the coordinates of
28 minefields laid by the National Guard in the north in 1974, UNFICYP facilitated
a survey by the United Nations Mine Action Service. On 7 July, 25 of the
28 locations were deemed and declared to not pose a threat. The remaini ng three
locations, two of which are in a military-controlled area, were identified as
requiring further technical intervention to determine with certainty that they were
safe. Two further areas were identified from information received from the Turkish
Cypriot security forces that require further intervention, one of which included a
visible anti-tank mine alongside a disused road. Although work on these five areas
is needed, since they are either inaccessible or well-marked, the mission has
assessed that they pose no immediate risk to life.
12. The same Cambodian demining team carried out mine clearance in support of
the opening of crossings at Lefka-Aplici/Lefke-Aplıç and Deryneia/Derinya from
28 September to 26 November. A technical survey at Deryneia/De rinya resulted in
the western portion of the United Nations recorded minefield being assessed as
posing no threat, thus enabling the Technical Committee on Crossings to proceed
with plans to establish a crossing at that location. At Lefka -Aplici/Lefke-Aplıç, five
dangerous areas totalling 1,815 m 2 were cleared around the crossing site. Thirty-one
anti-tank mines and one trip flare were found and destroyed.

15-23003

3/15

S/2016/11

13. Despite repeated requests by UNFICYP, during the reporting period, no
progress was registered on the issue of access to the four known remaining
minefields in the buffer zone, of which three are under the control of the National
Guard and one is under the control of Turkish forces. While the Turkish Cypriot side
has indicated that it would accept the clearance of all four areas as a package, the
Greek Cypriot side maintains the position that its three minefields are required in
order to counter a perceived threat. Efforts continue at all levels to advance a more
comprehensive approach to demining, both inside and outside the buffer zone.
14. The United Nations Global Advocate for the Elimination of Mines and
Explosive Hazards visited Cyprus from 11 to 13 October to witness first -hand
UNFICYP support to demining efforts in Cyprus and to raise awareness of the
continued dangers posed by mines on the island.

C.

Restoration of normal conditions and humanitarian functions
15. Relations between UNFICYP police and the police services on both sides
remained cooperative and constructive during the reporting period, with daily
communications at all levels, enhancing cooperation in addressing operational
matters within the buffer zone. As part of its mandated task to contribute to the
maintenance of law and order, UNFICYP police continued to assist and facilitate
investigations into criminal matters occurring within the buffer zone.
16. In the case of the mixed village of Pyla inside the buffer zone, criminal
activities on the part of members of both communities continued to increase, in
particular relating to illegal casinos, which rose in number from four to seven
during the reporting period. UNFICYP has intensified efforts to secure a practical
solution to the casino issue in Pyla with cooperation from both sides.
17. During the hunting season, between September and December, UNFICYP
recorded 69 incursions into the buffer zone by Greek Cypriot hunters who were
often armed, compared with 54 such instances during the same period in the
previous year. To help address such activities, UNFICYP police intensified its
liaison with local authorities and intelligence-led patrolling, including joint patrols
with UNFICYP military and game wardens, resulting in charges being made against
five such hunters.
18. Parallel to such operational liaison, UNFICYP police facilitated four meetings
of the Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters. The Joint
Communications Room continued to act as a forum for information exchange on
criminal matters with intercommunal elements, including investigations of
humanitarian cases.
19. During the reporting period, UNFICYP continued to face challenges to its
authority in the buffer zone, including at times aggressive behaviour by individuals
engaged in unauthorized activities. In such cases, UNFICYP urges the competent
authorities to take prompt action, including through j udicial proceedings.
20. Regarding its mandate to contribute to a return to normal conditions,
UNFICYP continued to allow, to the extent possible, safe and orderly civilian
activities in the buffer zone, issuing more than 809 permits for farming, providing
access to employment and utilities and approving 21 of 22 applications for civilian
construction projects. The mission continued to urge the authorities, local

4/15

15-23003

S/2016/11

community leaders and civilians to cooperate with the mission by providing relevant
information on civilian projects in the buffer zone in accordance with established
procedures. The university in Pyla continues to operate without UNFICYP
authorization.
21. Incidents of non-compliance with established UNFICYP procedures,
particularly by farmers, continued to cause concern. In one such incident, on
28 September, a Greek Cypriot farmer struck an anti-tank mine after driving his
tractor across the northern ceasefire line into a marked Turkish forces minefield
near Mammari. Although the farmer was not injured, the incident raised tensions
between Greek Cypriot farmers and the Turkish forces in areas where farmers work
in proximity to the ceasefire line of the Turkish forces.
22. From July to December, 922,553 official crossings of the buffer zone were
recorded. UNFICYP continued to play an important role with regard to all
interactions that took place at, around or through crossing points. In particular,
UNFICYP police continued to provide escorts for convoys with civilians and
humanitarian supplies at the Limnitis/Yeşılırmak crossing point in accordance with
the agreement reached by the leaders in October 2010.
23. Beyond the buffer zone, UNFICYP continued to provide humanitarian support
for 342 Greek Cypriots and 106 Maronites residing in the north, inc luding through
weekly deliveries of humanitarian assistance and by facilitating the post -mortem
transfer of two Greek Cypriots for burial in villages in the north. Logistical support,
including the delivery of school textbooks, continued to be provided to the Greek
Cypriot primary and secondary schools on the Karpas Peninsula. Although none of
the textbooks were rejected, Turkish Cypriot authorities continued the practice of
vetting the Greek Cypriot textbooks. The appointment of 8 out of 11 teachers
nominated by the Greek Cypriots to serve in schools on the Karpas Peninsula was
approved by the Turkish Cypriot authorities.
24. Following agreement by Mr. Anastasiades and Mr. Akıncı, two Greek Cypriot
nurses were authorized to provide services at a local clinic on the Karpas Peninsula
during the reporting period. Requests for Greek-speaking doctors to attend to the
health needs of elderly Greek Cypriots and Maronites in the north had yet to be
addressed. The mission continued to engage with local authorities to ensure access
to health, welfare and educational services for Turkish Cypriots residing in the
south. Although there were no new developments regarding the establishment of a
Turkish language school in Limassol, Turkish Cypriot teachers continued to provi de
Turkish language education to students at a high school and primary school attended
by Turkish-speaking pupils.
25. UNFICYP assisted in addressing the legal and humanitarian issues faced by
two Turkish Cypriots detained in the south and by one Greek Cypriot detained in the
north during the reporting period.
26. UNFICYP continued to facilitate contacts between Nicosia municipal offices
to promote enhanced cooperation, including through four meetings of the Greek
Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot deputy mayors and their respective teams to develop
joint projects to address environmental, social and health issues of common
concern. Likewise, UNFICYP continued to provide support to representatives of the
Nicosia Master Plan — a bicommunal mechanism established in 1979 to address
urban issues in old town Nicosia — in particular their efforts and plans to preserve

15-23003

5/15

S/2016/11

cultural heritage sites in Nicosia, including along the Green Line. More broadly,
UNFICYP also continued to encourage the communities located inside the bu ffer
zone to address issues such as the need to clean and care for the environment and,
where possible, encouraged bicommunal efforts in those areas.
27. With a view to fostering bicommunal cooperation and reconciliation,
UNFICYP supported 37 sporting, cultural, educational and other civil society events
in cooperation with international and local partners, in which more than 5,200
individuals from both communities participated. This included a bicommunal
concert in the buffer zone on 18 September by Greek and Turkish artists in support
of peace and reunification, in which more than 3,800 people from both communities
participated. The second International Cyprus Car Rally, which was held on
26 September and included a crossing of the buffer zone outside the walls of old
town Nicosia, saw the participation of 66 racing cars, including cars from both
communities and from other countries, compared with 45 in 2014. In addition, the
Ledra Palace Hotel was host to some 58 bicommunal gatherings, including four
meetings of Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot political party representatives under
the auspices of the Embassy of Slovakia.
28. During the reporting period, as part of its contribution to confidence -building
measures and their implementation, UNFICYP significantly stepped up its support
to the bicommunal technical committees, taking on responsibility for five
committees (on cultural heritage, environment, health, crisis management and
humanitarian affairs) in addition to the three it already facilitates (on cr ossings,
crime and criminal matters and broadcasting).
29. More specifically, following the announcement by the leaders on 28 May,
UNFICYP supported the work of the Technical Committee on Crossings on t he
opening of the Lefka-Aplici/Lefke-Aplıç and Deryneia/Derinya crossings,
facilitating six meetings and two site visits during the reporting period. Agreement
was reached in the Committee on Routes, Technical Specifications and Modalities
on project implementation for both crossing points. The European Unio n, for its
part, amended its Green Line regulation to add Lefka-Aplici/Lefke-Aplıç and
Deryneia/Derinya to the list of official crossing points and, on 17 November, its
member States unanimously approved the allocation of 2 million euros through the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) for both crossings, to be drawn
from the aid package for the Turkish Cypriot community. With both crossing sites
declared mine-free, construction work is expected to begin in the first trimester of
2016. UNFICYP continues to facilitate discussions in the Technical Committee on
possible additional crossings to be opened in the future.
30. The Technical Committee on the Environment resumed its activities after a
two-year hiatus, meeting three times between July and December. The discussions,
which UNFICYP facilitated, resulted in four joint visits to locations in the north and
the south to address issues of mutual interest such as wastewater treatment and solid
waste management. The Technical Committee on Broadcasting, for its part, met
twice during the reporting period to discuss ways of overcoming interference on the
frequency spectrum, including for FM commercial radio and television channels,
future planning for digital television and the clearing of analogue televisio n
frequencies as dictated by the International Telecommunication Union. The
Committee saw some success in persuading commercial FM stations to adhere to
the correct modulation standards, thereby reducing interference within Nicosia.

6/15

15-23003

S/2016/11

UNFICYP facilitated three meetings of the Technical Committee on Health, which
resulted in an exchange of information on various aspects of the health sectors on
each side. Following up on the agreement by leaders to the interconnection of
electricity grids as a confidence-building measure, UNFICYP also escorted joint
technical teams into the buffer zone to undertake necessary repair work in
preparation for the reconnecting of the grids.
31. For its part, UNDP, with strong support from the European Union, continued
to work closely with the Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage. The restoration
of three cultural heritage sites was completed during the reporting period, including
the Othello Tower in Famagusta. Tenders for 3 cultural heritage sites in the walled
city of Famagusta and designs for an additional 12 sites are under way. Work is
progressing on the restoration of the Apostolos Andreas monastery on the Karpas
Peninsula. Separately, in support of a political settlement, UNDP continued to
facilitate the Cyprus dialogue forum, bringing together 94 organizations from both
communities, including political parties, businesses and industries, trade unions,
non-governmental organizations and civil society organizations to build consensus
on essential socioeconomic issues related to a settlement. The UNDP-managed
peacebuilding programme in Cyprus, the Action for Cooperation and Trust
Programme, is set to close by the end of 2015.
32. The Cyprus Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the Turkish Cypriot
Chamber of Commerce continued to provide a model for cooperation and to
advocate actively for a solution to the Cyprus question. The intercommunal
internship programme launched during the previous reporting period has been
particularly successful, with 12 Greek Cypriots and 9 Turkish C ypriots expected to
be placed with companies based in the other community by the beginning of 2016.
Preparations for the implementation of a bicommunal business incubation centre are
under way.
33. Considerable progress continues to be made in relation to freedom of religion
and belief in Cyprus, with the number of services held by Greek Cypriots and
Maronites in places of worship in the north increasing year by year, from
31 services approved out of 40 requests in 2013, to 52 approved out of 87 in 2014,
and 93 approved out of 133 in 2015. Progress also continued to be made in opening
for worship religious sites in the north that had been inaccessible since 1974, with
the Turkish Cypriot authorities opening nine new sites for worship during the
reporting period.
34. During the past six months, UNFICYP facilitated 49 religious services and
commemorative events, involving more than 12,000 individuals, which were either
conducted in the buffer zone or required crossing to the other side. Significantly, on
21 July and 30 September, UNFICYP facilitated the crossing of nearly 2,000
pilgrims, largely of Turkish origin, from the north to the Hala Sultan Tekke mosque
in Larnaca, as jointly requested by the Primate of the Church of Cyprus and the
Mufti of Cyprus. The 30 September pilgrimage to Hala Sultan Tekke took place in
the presence of a representative of the Church of Cyprus for the first time.
35. Meanwhile, the religious leaders of Cyprus intensified their dialogue and joint
efforts. In their first meeting with Mr. Anastasiades and Mr. Akıncı, held on
10 September at Ledra Palace Hotel in the buffer zone, the religious leaders
reiterated their full support to the negotiations for a settlement of the Cyprus
problem and promoted measures to further ease restrictio ns on freedom of religion,

15-23003

7/15

S/2016/11

including improved access to sites of worship across the island. On 24 November,
the religious leaders issued a joint statement expressing their united voice against all
forms of attacks, terrorism and violence in Cyprus and beyo nd, stressing that the
dialogue they had experienced had strengthened their conviction that there would be
no future without tolerance, mutual understanding, respect and peaceful
coexistence. The visit to Cyprus of the United Nations Special Rapporteur on
freedom of religion or belief from 5 to 8 October, for its part, served to highlight the
role that cooperation among the religious leaders had played in promoting progress
towards the realization of freedom of religion or belief across the island.

D.

Conduct and discipline and sexual exploitation and abuse
36. As part of my commitment to ensure compliance with the zero tolerance
policy for any act of sexual exploitation or abuse by UNFICYP personnel, during
the reporting period, UNFICYP continued to actively engage with the regional
conduct and discipline team to implement the initiatives outlined in my report on
special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse
(A/69/779). As part of the UNFICYP accountability framework, the UNFICYP
Conduct and Discipline and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse Working Group
continued to monitor on a quarterly basis compliance with the sexual exploitation
and abuse plan of action adopted by the mission, designed to implement specific
actions to prevent acts of sexual exploitation and abuse by mission personnel and to
strengthen reporting mechanisms and assistance provided to victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse. In line with the provisions of my report, UN FICYP
appointed a sexual exploitation and abuse focal point to coordinate and monitor
activities related to the prevention, enforcement and remediation of sexual
exploitation and abuse. In addition, the mission has appointed an immediate
response team to gather and preserve evidence upon receipt of an allegation of
sexual exploitation and abuse. UNFICYP is in the process of establishing a sexual
exploitation and abuse standing task force, to begin functioning on 15 December
2015, to serve as the expert body within the mission providing guidance on
operational and strategic sexual exploitation and abuse matters.
37. Between 1 January and 11 December 2015, a single category 1 allegation and
one category 2 allegation were reported and referred for investigation . The category
1 allegation is related to a report of sexual exploitation and abuse that was
unsubstantiated. It is notable that the total number of allegations for 2015 is less
than that for 2014, for which a total number of 14 allegations were reported, of
which 4 were category 1 (including 2 unsubstantiated reports of sexual exploitation
and abuse) and 10 were category 2.
38. Training is at the core of the activities carried out by UNFICYP to raise
awareness of the United Nations standards of conduct and to emphasize the
Secretary-General’s policy of zero tolerance for acts of sexual exploitation and
abuse. During the reporting period, a total of 17 training sessions relating to conduct
and discipline and sexual exploitation and abuse were conducted, in which
553 military personnel, 17 United Nations police personnel and 117 civilian
personnel participated. As part of the sexual exploitation and abuse awareness
campaign conducted by the mission, UNFICYP personnel have been provided with
a list of sexual exploitation and abuse prevention activities to be included,

8/15

15-23003

S/2016/11

developed and assessed by each section/office during the 2015 -2016 performance
period.

IV. Committee on Missing Persons
39. As at 18 December, out of a total of 2,001 persons on the official list of
missing persons, the bicommunal teams of archaeologists of the Committee on
Missing Persons had exhumed the remains of 1,059 missing persons on both sides
of the island. To date, the remains of 625 individuals have been identified and
returned to their respective families, including those of 30 individuals during the
reporting period. Between September and November, a Committee excavation team
exhumed two burial sites containing the remains of 36 persons in a military area in
the north of Nicosia. On 5 November, the Committee was notified by the leader of
the Turkish Cypriot community, Mr. Akıncı, that the Committee’s excavation teams
would have access to 30 suspected burial sites in military areas in the north of
Cyprus over a three-year period, beginning in January 2016, with 10 sites to be
excavated each year.

V. Financial and administrative aspects
40. As indicated in my previous report, the General Assembly, by its resolution
69/296, appropriated the amount of $52.5 million gross for the maintenance of
UNFICYP for the period from 1 July 2015 to 30 June 2016, inclusive of the
voluntary contribution of one third of the net cost of the Force, equivalent to
$17.6 million from the Government of Cyprus and the voluntary contribution of
$6.5 million from the Government of Greece.
41. As at 5 January 2016, unpaid assessed contributions to the special account for
UNFICYP amounted to $12.7 million. The total of outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $992.9 million.
42. As at 5 January 2016, amounts owed to contributors for troop costs totalled
$1.1 million. Reimbursement of troop and contingent-owned equipment costs has
been made for the periods up to 31 October 2015 and 30 September 2015,
respectively, in accordance with the quarterly schedule.

VI. Observations
43. I am heartened by the steady determination shown by the leaders during the
intensified phase of the negotiations. I encourage them to maintain the momentum
and to continue their efforts to bring the process to a successful conclusion and
reach a comprehensive settlement as soon as possible.
44. It is my firm belief that measures to build confidence are an important element
of the current efforts in that they reflect the common position of the leaders that the
status quo is unacceptable. Furthermore, such measures have a tangible effect on the
everyday lives of Cypriots and build a critical understanding that the status quo in
Cyprus is not tenable and that an alternative and better future lies ahead. In that
regard, I note that while the implementation of some confidence-building measures
agreed to by the leaders is fully under way, there has been little to no progress on

15-23003

9/15

S/2016/11

others, such as mobile phone interoperability. I urge the leaders to implement all
agreed measures in good faith and without delay.
45. I commend both sides for their decision to open additional crossing points at
Lefka-Aplici/Lefke-Aplıç and Deryneia/Derinya and for their sustained engagement
during the reporting period to overcome difficulties on the ground and turn that
decision into a reality. With high expectations raised, in particular within the local
communities, I encourage both leaders to expedite preparations and open the
crossings without delay.
46. The incidents of 16 November, during which two Turkish Cypriots were
assaulted by Greek Cypriot youths in south Nicosia, were regrettable. Such
incidents create tension and fuel mistrust between the communities at a time when
the leaders are striving to achieve a lasting solution and to build confidence in a
future of peaceful coexistence. The unity displayed by the two leaders in
condemning the attacks is to be commended, rightly signalling that such acts would
not be tolerated now or in a future united Cyprus.
47. The incidents raised concerns about the role of education in perpetrati ng
prejudice and misconceptions and, by contrast, the role education can play, if
utilized appropriately, in promoting a culture of peaceful coexistence. In that regard,
I praise the leaders for their political vision and courage in establishing a Technica l
Committee on Education and I urge them to appoint its members without delay. I
believe that such an initiative, if provided with the means necessary to formulate
implementable recommendations, can make a critical contribution to the
coordination of the two educational systems in a manner that promotes
intercommunal tolerance and reconciliation befitting a united Cyprus.
48. UNFICYP support to demining activity, undertaken with invaluable assistance
from UNIFIL and the United Nations Mine Action Service and excellent
cooperation from both sides, has been successful not only in clearing hazardous
materials, declaring minefields as no threat and paving the way for the opening of
crossing points, but also in building trust between the parties at an important
moment. I thank the Government of Cambodia, within the framework of inter mission cooperation, for agreeing to the temporary deployment, from May to
November 2015, of its mine clearance team to UNFICYP, as well as the Security
Council for its ongoing support. In the absence of a dedicated demining capacity
within UNFICYP, such support and cooperation may need to continue during the
next reporting period.
49. The visit to Cyprus of the United Nations Global Advocate for the Elimination
of Mines and Explosive Hazards, and the mine explosion incident involving a Greek
Cypriot farmer, highlighted the ongoing threat posed by mines in Cyprus, a threat
that often goes unnoticed given the presence of the opposing forces along the
ceasefire lines. While I welcome the commitment of the Turkish Cypriots to clear
the Turkish forces minefield adjacent to the ceasefire line near Mammari, I am
concerned by the delays and urge that the clearance be done as soon as possible to
avoid the occurrence of another mine wash incident in the area. Given the
acceleration of the talks, it is all the more important that the two sides engage and
take concrete steps without further delay towards island -wide demining.
50. The efforts of the two mayors and municipalities of Nicosia, together with
those of the representatives of the Nicosia Master Plan, are welcome and continue to

10/15

15-23003

S/2016/11

provide a model of successful cooperation by further developing and promoting a
shared vision for the future of the city, with support from UNFICYP. Likewise,
business leaders continued to make a valuable contribution to the peace process by
creating incentives and opportunities for entrepreneurs from both sides to engage
with one another and by highlighting the economic benefits to come from a
reunification of the island. I commend them once again for their vision, and I
encourage enhanced support by all concerned for their efforts to promote private
sector initiatives that can foster interaction between the communities and that have a
positive effect on levels of trade across the buffer zone, which remain low.
51. As I have done in previous reports, I continue to call upon the leaders of both
communities to exert efforts to create a climate conducive to achieving greater
economic and social parity between the two sides and to widen and deepen
economic, social, cultural, sporting or similar ties and contacts, including with a
view to encouraging trade. Such contacts promote trust between the communities
and help to address the Turkish Cypriots’ concerns of isolation. I note that steps in
that direction continue to be taken and urge both leaders to persist in addressing
these issues. Likewise, I encourage the sides to fully engage civil society in the
ongoing process, with a view to fostering grassroots support for a solu tion.
52. The ongoing dialogue among the leaders of the religious communities
contributes positively to the climate surrounding the talks. By easing access to
religious sites across the island, religious leaders have played an important role in
fostering understanding and reducing mistrust between the communities which, in
turn, has helped build grassroots support for reunification. In the critical months
ahead, I strongly encourage both sides to continue to support this cooperation,
including by enabling full access to the more than 500 churches and other places of
worship in the north and to approximately 100 mosques in the south.
53. The closure of the UNDP Action for Cooperation and Trust Programme at the
end of December has brought an end to 10 years of concerted support to civil
society action in the reconciliation process in Cyprus. As the peace process enters a
critical phase, platforms that provide a space for citizens from all sectors of society
to engage and have a voice in a future settlement are becoming all the more
important. In that regard, I am pleased that the Cyprus dialogue forum will continue
in 2016 and hope that its work will be further supported and its recommendations
taken into serious consideration.
54. The United Nations remains committed to supporting the critical humanitarian
work being done on behalf of the families of victims through the Committee on
Missing Persons. I welcome the confirmation by the leader of the Turkish Cypriot
community, Mustafa Akıncı, that the excavation teams of the Committee will have
access to 30 suspected burial sites in military areas in the north of Cyprus. This
represents important progress towards the objective of the Committee to locate,
identify and return the remains of the many individuals who ar e still missing to their
families. In the light of the advanced age of both relatives and witnesses, it is
critical that the Committee be given the means and the information required to
accelerate its work.
55. In the current positive climate, the role of UNFICYP in maintaining a
conducive environment for negotiations remains of paramount importance to the
overall success of the process. By pre-empting and responding in a timely and
efficient manner to civilian, law and order and military issues that arise on a daily

15-23003

11/15

S/2016/11

basis in and around the buffer zone, UNFICYP helps to prevent political or military
tension that could otherwise undermine the efforts of the two leaders. Despite minor
incidents and challenges, which remained a regular occurrence, the situatio n along
the ceasefire lines has remained calm and stable over the past six months.
56. Increased civilian use of the buffer zone continues to be a natural element of
the normalization process, which UNFICYP promotes and facilitates, provided that
it is undertaken in a safe and orderly manner, in accordance with established
UNFICYP procedures. In this light, I once again call upon both sides to act
decisively towards all who engage in activities not authorized by UNFICYP, thereby
showing respect for UNFICYP authority in the buffer zone, supporting the Force in
the implementation of its mandate and avoiding unnecessary tension. With the start
of the hunting season, I am grateful for the good cooperation between UNFICYP
and the Cyprus police in addressing instances of illegal hunting in the buffer zone.
57. It remains disappointing that the opportunity for direct communication
between the commanders of the opposing forces has not yet been seized, despite the
offer of facilitation and encouragement from UNFICYP. Opening such
communication channels would undoubtedly assist in resolving or avoiding disputes
and would also build critical trust, which would be key to a successful drawdown to
agreed levels of foreign forces in a united Cyprus. I repeat my call for bo th sides to
respond positively to the efforts of the Force Commander to strengthen relations and
to explore the possibility of an early implementation of military confidence -building
measures that could help improve the climate and build support for a sett lement. I
also once again call upon both sides to formally accept the aide -memoire of 1989,
thereby bringing an end to the contestation of the United Nations delineation of the
ceasefire lines. I reiterate that the ability of UNFICYP to play this role depe nds by
and large on the commitment of the two sides to refrain from challenging the
authority and legitimacy of UNFICYP in the buffer zone.
58. While acknowledging that closed-circuit television cameras can help monitor
illegal activity in the buffer zone, and thus contribute to improved security in the
area, such installations confer a military advantage and constitute a violation of the
status quo if unaccompanied by a reduction in military personnel. I therefore
strongly encourage a reduction in the military presence and posture along the
ceasefire line, particularly in those positions that have been enhanced with closed circuit television cameras, and particularly in the militarized area within the
Venetian walls in old town Nicosia.
59. I note that the continued expansion of criminal networks and activities in the
sensitive mixed village of Pyla, inside the buffer zone, continues to be a major
source of concern and tension for the two communities in the village, the political
leadership on both sides and the respective police services, creating a level of risk to
the communities of Pyla that is avoidable. It is regrettable that, despite a shared
acknowledgement of the problem and repeated facilitation attempts by UNFICYP,
the sides have yet to agree on how to tackle the criminality and thereby reduce the
risk to the communities of Pyla. Such coordination and cooperation between the
respective police services would instil a broader confidence in the ability of the
communities to live side by side in security, both at present and in a united Cyprus.
60. To respond to the new intercommunal dynamic outlined in the present report,
UNFICYP significantly increased its support to the settlement talks during the
reporting period, particularly in facilitating the work of the eight technical

12/15

15-23003

S/2016/11

committees, assisting with confidence-building measures and by providing security
and logistical support to the (at times) daily meetings of the sides. Coupled with
pressures on resources caused by increasing civilian access to t he buffer zone, this
new operational context has placed limitations on the ability of the mission to
support new requirements, including the opening of two new crossing points. A
capability gap has therefore emerged in the areas of UNIFCYP military police,
headquarters analytical and planning functions and patrols across the sectors to
sustain current operations. To enable UNFICYP to be ready at this critical juncture,
I request the Security Council to authorize a modest increase in force level, from
860 troops to 888.
61. In the light of positive developments on the ground and the support from the
leaders during the visit in October of my Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, UNFICYP has, in coordination with my mission of good offices,
intensified its planning in relation to a settlement, as requested by the Security
Council most recently in its resolution 2234 (2015). This planning will continue to
be guided by developments in the negotiations and the views of the sides on the
possible role of the United Nations in that regard.
62. At the same time, I will continue to keep the operations of UNFICYP under
close review, taking into account developments on the ground and the views of the
parties, and report to the Security Council with recomme ndations, as appropriate,
for further adjustments to the UNFICYP mandate, force levels and concept of
operations as soon as is warranted.
63. I recommend that the mandate of the mission be extended for a period of six
months, until 31 July 2016, together with a slight increase in the force level, from
860 to 888. I once again express my gratitude to the 34 countries that, since 1964,
have contributed either troops or police or both to the mission, and I pay tribute to
the 186 peacekeepers that lost their lives during that period in support of peace in
Cyprus. It is incumbent upon all parties to work in a determined manner towards a
comprehensive settlement, to which all Cypriots aspire and which would obviate the
continuing need for a peacekeeping presence.
64. At this critical juncture in the peace process, and with encouraging prospects
for an early solution, I count on the international partners of Cyprus to show
commitment and resolve in supporting, in any way possible, initiatives and projects
that build trust between the communities and foster support for a solution from the
ground up. In that regard, I am particularly grateful for the sustained partnership
between the United Nations and the European Union in support of confidence building measures and other projects and initiatives, in particular crossing points, to
the Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage and the Committee on Missing
Persons.
65. I would like to express my appreciation to my Special Representative and
Head of UNFICYP, Lisa Buttenheim, including for her commitment and dedication
in serving as my Deputy Special Adviser. I would like to thank also the UNFICYP
Force Commander, Major General Kristin Lund, for her service. UNFICYP
continues to lead the way in increasing the number of female personnel across the
military, police and civilian components. Finally, I extend my thanks to all of the
men and women serving in UNFICYP for the efficiency and commitment with
which they have discharged the responsibilities entrusted to them by the Security
Council. I also express my appreciation to my Special Adviser, Espen Barth Eide.

15-23003

13/15

S/2016/11

Annex
Countries providing military and police personnel to
the United Nations operation in Cyprus (as at
15 December 2015)
Country

Military personnel

Argentina a

295

Austria

4

Canada

1

Norway

2
b

84

Slovakia c

200

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

274

Hungary

Total

Country

860

Police personnel

Australia

12

Bosnia and Herzegovina

9

China

3

Ireland

12

Lithuania

1

Montenegro

4

Romania

3

Serbia

2

Slovakia

4

Ukraine

7

Total

57

a

The Argentine contingent includes soldiers from Brazil (1), Chile (14) and Paraguay (14).
The Hungarian contingent includes soldiers from Serbia (7).
c
The Slovakian contingent includes soldiers from Serbia (39) and Ukraine (2).

b

14/15

15-23003

S/2016/11

15-23003

15/15
