8

General Assembly-Twenticth Scssion

Convinced that General Assembly resolutions 1652
(XVI) of 24 November 1961 and 1911 (XVIII) of
27 November 1963 aim at preventing the proliferation
of nuclear weapons,
Believing that it is imperative to exert further efforts
to conclude a treaty to prevent the proliferation of
nuclear weapons,
l. Urges al! States to take ali steps necessary for
the early conclusion of a treaty to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons;
2. Calls upon the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament to give urgent consideration to the question of non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons ami, to that cnd, to reconvene as early as
possible with a view to negotiating an intemational
treaty to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons,
based on the following main principies :
(a) The treaty should be void of any loop-holes
which might permit nuclear or non-nuclear Powers to
proliferate, directly or indirectly, nuclear weapons in
any form;
( b) The treaty should embody an acceptable balance
of mutu;-il responsibilities and obligations of the nuclear
and non-nuclear Powers;
(e) The treaty should be a step towards the achievement of general and complete disarmament and, more
particularly, nuclear disarmament;
( d) There should be acceptable and workable provisions to ensure the effectiveness of the treaty;
(e) N othing in the treaty should adversely affect
the right of any group of States to conclude regional
treaties in order to ensure the total absence of nuclear
weapons in their respective territories ;
3. Transmits the records of the First Committee
relating to the discussion of the item entitled "Nonproliferation of nuclear weapons", together with all
other relevant documents, to the Eighteen-Nation Committee for its consideration;
4. Requests the Eighieen-Nation Committee to submit to the General Assembly at an early date a report
on the results of its work on a treaty to prevent the
proliferation of nuclear weapons.
1382nd plenary meeting,
19 November 1965.
2030 (XX). Question of convening a world disarmament conference

The General Assembly,
M indful of the continuing interest and responsibility
of the United Nations in connexion with the solution
of the disarmament problem,
Reaffirming the paramount importance of disarmament for the contemporary world and the urgent need
for the achievement of this goal,
Believi,ng that it is imperative to exert further efforts
towards reaching agreement on general and complete
disarmament with effective international control, with
a view to securing lasting peace in the world,
C onvinced that all countries should contribute towards
the accomplishment of disarmament and co-operate in
taking immediate steps with a view to achieving progress
in this field,
C onvinced also that a world disarmament conference
would promote the realization of general and complete
disarmament,

Reaffinning the resolution adopted by the Disarmament Commission on 11 June 1965,7
] . Endorses the proposal adopted at the Second Conference of Heads of Sta te or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at Cait'o in 1964, on the convening of a world disarrnament conference to which ali
countries would be invited ;
2. Urges that the necessary consultations be con<lucted with all countries for the purpose of establishing a widely reprcsentative preparatory committee
which will take appropriate steps for the convening
of a world disarmament conference not later than 1967;
3. Urges furthcr that ali countries be kept informed,
as appro¡iriate, of the results achieved by th'e preparatory conunittce in accordance with paragraph 2 above.
1384th plenary meeting,
29 November 1965.
2031 (XX). Queslion of general and complete
disarmament
The General Assembly,
H aving received the reports of the Conference of the
Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament, 8
Recalling its resolutions 1378 (XIV) of 20 November
1959, 1722 (XVI) of 20 December 1961, 1767 (XVII)
of 21 November 1962 and 1908 (XVIII) of 27
November 1963,
Conscious of its responsibility under the Charter of
the United Nations for disarmament and the consolidation of peace,
1. Requests the Conference of the Eighteen-N ation
Committee on Disarmament to continue ts efforts
towards making substantial progress in reaching agreement on the question of general and complete disarmament under effective international control, as well as on
collateral measures;
2. Decides to refer to the Eighteen-Nation Committee all documents and records of the First Committee
concerning ali matters related to the disarmament
question;
3. Requests the Eighteen-Nation Committee to resume its work as early as possible and to report to
the General Assembly, as appropriate, on the progress
achieved.
1388th plenary meeting,
3 December 1965.
2032 (XX). Urgent need for suspension of nuclear
and thermonuclear tests
The General Assembly,
1-laving considered the question of the cessation of
nuclear and thermonuclear weapon tests and the relevant sections of the reports of the Conference of the
Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament, 8
Recalling its resolutions 1762 (XVII) of 6 November
1962 and 1910 (XVIII) of 27 November 1963 on the
cessation of ali test explosions of nuclear weapons,
N oting wth regret that notwithstanding these resolutions nuclear weapon tests have taken place,
Recalling the undertaking given by the original signatories to the Treaty banning nuclear weapon tests in
7 !bid., document DC/224.
s Official Records of the General Assembly, Nineteenth Ses-

sion, Annexes, annex No. 9, document A/5731; Official Records
of the Disarmament Commission, Supplement far January fo
December 1965, document DC/?27.
