136

General Aaembly '11drty-fomtb Sesidon

(e) The establishment of multinational marketing
enterprises among developing countries;
as well as for the studies and necessary meetings pursuant
to resolution 1 (1) of 9 May 1977 of the Committee on
Economic Co-operation among Developing Countries; 16º
25. Welcomes Trade and Development Board decision 186 (XIX) of 17 October 19791 ~9 on trade relations among countries having different economic and
social systems and all trade flows resulting therefrom,
and urges all States members of the United ~a!ions
Conference on Trade and Development to part1c1pate
constructively in the consideration of this question at the
twenty-first session of the Board;
26. Endorses resolution 107 (V) of 1 June 1979 of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Developmentm and requests the Trade and Development Board,
at its twenty-first session, to recommend the place, date
and duration of the sixth session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, bearing in mind
the offer made in this regard by the Govemment of Cuba.
109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979
34/197.

Effects of the world inftationary phenomenon
on the development process

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October
1970, containing the lntemational Development Strategy for the Second United N ations Development
Decade, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974,
containing the Declaration and the Programme of
Action on the Establishment of a New Intemational
Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974,
containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on
development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling its resolutions 34/138 and 34/139 of 14
December 1979 on the global negotiations relating to
international economic co-operation for development to
deal with raw materials, energy, trade, development and
financial and monetary questions,
Recalling its resolution 32/175 of 19 December
1977, in which it requested the Secretary-General of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
to establish a group of high-level govemmental experts
to prepare a study of the inflationary phenomenon and
to transmit it, together with the comments of the Trade
and Development Board, to the General Assembly, so
that the Assembly might decide what action should be
taken, including the possibility of holding a world conference on inflation,
Recalling its resolution 33/155 of 20 December
1978, in which it, inter alía, took note of the report of
the Group of High-level Governmental Experts on the
Effects of the World Inflationary Phenomenon on the
Development Process, 101
Noting with regret that the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, at its fifth session,
did not take a firm decision on international policy
measures to combat the world inflationary phenomenon
or on the conclusions and recommendatlons contained
in the report of the Group of Experts,
190 See Official Records of the Trade and Develop_ment Board,
Seventeenth Session, Supplement No. 2 (TD/B/6S2), annex l.
161 lbid., Eighteenth Session, Annexes, document TD/B/704.

Recalling a/so Trade and Development Board decision 144 (XVI) of 23 October 1976, entitled "Arrangements to keep under review interrelated problems ~n the
field of intemational trade and related areas of mternational economic co-operation, in particular development finance and monetary issues", 162 in which, inter alia,
the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development was requested to keep
such problems under continuous review,
Bearing in mind that deteriorating internatio~al ~onomic conditions and the high rates of world mflat1on
are hindering the growth of the econo1;11ies of ali countries, particularly the developing countnes,
Bearing in mind also ~hat inflat~on . intem~t~ona_lly
transmitted to the developmg countnes ts acqumng mcreasingly alarming proportions,
Recognizing the fundamental interconnexion between
inflationary pressures, protectionism, growth, balanceof-payments disequilibrium and the uncontrolled creation of international monetary liquidity,
Taking note of the proposal made by the Govemment of Iraq concerning the establishment of 31n international fund to combat the adverse effects of 1mported
inflation on the economies of the developing countries, 168
1. Recognizes that the present world inflationary
process seriously affects the economies of the developing
countries because, inter alia:
(a) It has increased the cost of their essential imports, particularly capital goods and manufactures;
(b) It has led to instability in the export eamings
of their essential commodities;
(e) It has caused considerable fluctuations in the
exchange rates of the countries with greater trading
activity, with resultant adverse effects ~n world ~rade,
particularly on the exports of the developmg countnes;
(á) It has substantially increased the current account deficit and the debt burden of the developing
countries;
(e) It has reduced the real value of the flow of
official development assistance;
(f) It has adversely affected the net flow of real resources, thereby aggravating the trade and development
problems of the developing countries;
(g) It has reduced the real value of the monetary
reserves of the developing countries;
2. Affirms, therefore, the urgent need for the implementation of policies, particularly by industrialized
countries, to control inflation by, inter alía, such measures as elimination of protectionism, fiscal and monetary
policies, acceleration of the transfer of real resources to
developing countries, structural adjustments and sustained real economic growth;
3. Requests the Trade and Development Board,
when considering the item entitled "Interdependence of
trade problems, development finance and the intemational monetary system", which it maintains on its
agenda by virtue of its decision 144 (XVI), to discuss
measures to combat the world inflationary phenomenon
with a view to accelerating the real growtb of the developing countries and increasing their import capacity
in a context of just and stable financial markets;
m See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/31/lS and Corr.1), vol. II,
annex l.
1e3 lbid., Thirty-fourth Session, Second Committee, 41st meeting, para. 41.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of tbe Second Committee

4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, with
the assistance of experts, if necessary, as envisaged in
Trade and Development Board decision 144 (XVI), to
prepare a report on this subject for consideration by the
Trade and Development Board ami subsequently by the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.
109th plenary meeting
19 Deccmber J979

34/198.

Specific action related to the particular needs
and problems of land-locked developing
countries

The General Assembly,
Reiterating the specific actions in favour of the landlocked developing countries, particularly those envisaged in resolutions 63 (III) of 19 May 1972, 16 ' 98
(IV) of 31 May 1976 16 ·• and 123 ( V) of 3 June 1979'""
of the United Nations Conferencc nn 'frade and Dcvelopment,
Bearing in mind various other resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly, its related organs and the specialized agencies emphasizing special and urgent measures
in favour of land-locked developing countries,
Recognizing that the lack of access to the sea, aggravated by great distances to seaports, by remoteness
and isolation from world markets, and by the greater
difficulties and costs of their international transport
services, constitutes a majar and persistent hindrancc to
the social and economic development of the land-locked
developing countries,
Recalling the provisions of its resolutions 31/157 of
21 December 1976, 32/191 of 19 December 1977 and
33/ 150 of 20 December 1978, and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations with respect to the exercise
of the right of land-locked developing countries to free
access to and from the sea as well as their right to freedom of transit,
1. Reatfzrms the right of land-locked developing
countries to free access to and from the sea and their
right to freedom of transit;
2. Calls upon ali countries, intemational organizations and financia! institutions urgently to implement the
specific actions related to the particular needs and ptoblems of land-locked developing countries envisaged in
resolutions 63 (111), 98 (N) and 123 (V) of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and in
other relevant resolutions adopted by the United Nations;
3. Notes with regret that the assistance given thus
far falls far short of the needs of the land-locked developing countries;
4. Urges all donor countries as well as the international organizations concerned to provide land-locked
developing countries with appropriate financia! aid and
assistance in the form of grants or concessional loans
for the construction, improvement and maintenance of
their transport and transit infrastructures and facilities;
164 See Proceedings o/ the United Nations Co11fere11ce on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report a11d
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.II.D.4),
annex I.A.
165 lbid., Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10 and corrigendum),
part one, sect. A.
168 lbid., Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.II.D.14), part one, sect. A.

137

5. Commends the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and other related agencies within the United Nations system for the
work and assistance they have provided to the landlocked developing countries;
6. Invites the United Nations Development Programrne and the financia! institutions of the United Nations system to take appropriate and effective measures
in order to provide additional resources within their
spheres of competence to meet the particular needs of
the land-locked developing countries;
7. Invites the Preparatory Committee for the New
International Development Strategy to take fully into
account, in the formulation of the strategy for the third
United Nations development decade, the special problems relating to land-locked developing countries;
8. Further invites the international community to
give financia! support to interested transit and landlocked dcveloping countries in the construction of alternate routes to the sea;
9. Recommends intensified activities relating to the
conducting of necessary studies and the implementation
of special actions and action programmes, including
those under "economic co-operation among developing
countries", as well as those under the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, at the regional
and subregional levels, in co-operation with the regional
commissions.

109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979

34/ 199.

Multilateral trade negotiations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
Tnternational Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 197 4, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and intemational
economic co-operation,
Considering that the Tokyo Declaration of 1973 167
called for the Tokyo round of multilateral trade negotiations and set forth the framework, principies and objectives to govern the negotiations, especially the objectives
and commitments in favour of developing countries,
particularly those regarding the principie of nonreciprocity in trade relations between developed and
developing countries, the special and differential treatment for developing countries and the securing of additional benefits for the international trade of developing
countries and the maintaining and improving of the
generalized system of preferences,
Bearing in mind the modified part four of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade stipulating, inter alia,
that the developed countries should not expect reciprocity in their trade relations with developing countries,
Recalling also its resolution 33/199 of 29 January
1979, in which it, inter alia, reiterated the need for continued efforts aimed at the reform of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the international trade
167 See General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, Basic lnstruments and Selected Documents, Twentieth Supplemmt (Sales
No. GATI/1974-1), p. 19.
