A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/86
6 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 38
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/50/L.53/Rev.1)]
50/86.

The situation of democracy and human rights
in Haiti

The General Assembly,
Having considered further the item entitled "The situation of democracy
and human rights in Haiti",
Recalling all its relevant resolutions, as well as those adopted on the
question by the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and the
Commission on Human Rights,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions adopted on the question by the
Organization of American States,
Reaffirming that the goal of the international community remains the
full observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms and the promotion of
social and economic development in Haiti,
Welcoming the legislative and municipal elections being held in a
peaceful environment and observed by the Organization of American States in
close coordination with the United Nations,
Stressing the willingness of the Government of Haiti to hold the
forthcoming presidential elections in accordance with the Constitution, as a
crucial step in the complete consolidation of long-lasting democracy in Haiti,
Strongly supportive of the continuing leadership of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and the Secretary-General of the Organization of
American States in the efforts of the international community in furthering
political progress in Haiti,

96-76279

/...

A/RES/50/86
Page 2

Welcoming the success of the United Nations Mission in Haiti and the
contributions of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and his staff to that success,
Welcoming also the continued efforts by States to provide humanitarian
assistance and technical cooperation to the people of Haiti,
Supporting fully the contribution of the International Civilian Mission
to Haiti and the United Nations Mission in Haiti in the establishment of a
climate of freedom and tolerance propitious to the full observance of human
rights and the full restoration of the constitutional democracy of Haiti,
Paying tribute to the members and staff of the International Civilian
Mission to Haiti for their contribution in accompanying the Haitian people in
their efforts to return to constitutional order and democracy,
Welcoming the continuous improvement in the situation of human rights in
Haiti,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General of 12 October 1995 on
the situation of democracy and human rights in Haiti, 1/
1.
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General, outlining the
continuation until 7 February 1996 of the joint participation of the United
Nations with the Organization of American States in the International Civilian
Mission to Haiti, with the task of verifying full observance by Haiti of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, in order to further the establishment of a
climate of freedom and tolerance propitious to the consolidation of long-term
constitutional democracy in Haiti and to contribute to the strengthening of
democratic institutions;
2.
Stands ready, upon consideration of a recommendation by the
Secretary-General and at the request of the Haitian authorities, to extend the
United Nations component of the International Civilian Mission to Haiti beyond
7 February 1996 in an appropriate resolution;
3.
Expresses its full support for the International Civilian Mission
to Haiti and trusts that the Government of Haiti will continue to afford it
timely, complete and effective cooperation;
4.
Commends the Haitian authorities on the progress accomplished in
the advance of democracy, respect for human rights and the reconstruction of
Haiti;
5.
Pays tribute to the Haitian people in their ongoing quest for
strong and lasting democracy, justice and economic prosperity;
6.
Expresses its appreciation to those States participating in the
United Nations Mission in Haiti and those that have accompanied the Haitian
people in their efforts to return to constitutional order and democracy;
7.
Expresses its confidence that the forthcoming presidential
elections will further strengthen democracy in Haiti;

1/

A/50/548.
/...

A/RES/50/86
Page 3

8.
Reaffirms once again the commitment of the international community
to continue its technical, economic and financial cooperation with Haiti in
support of its economic and social development efforts and in order to
strengthen Haitian institutions responsible for dispensing justice and
guaranteeing democracy, respect for human rights, political stability and
economic development;
9.
Commends the cooperation between the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Secretary-General of the Organization of American
States in their efforts to promote respect for the rights of all Haitians and
to contribute to the strengthening of democratic institutions, including
through election monitoring;
10.
Requests the Secretary-General to support the Government of Haiti
as it works towards the national reconstruction and development of Haiti, in
order to consolidate a climate propitious to the establishment of a lasting
democracy and full respect for human rights;
11.
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to coordinate the
efforts of the United Nations system to help provide humanitarian aid and meet
the development requirements of Haiti;
12.
Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General
Assembly regular reports on the work of the International Civilian Mission to
Haiti;
13.
Decides to keep the item entitled "The situation of democracy and
human rights in Haiti" under review at its fiftieth session.
93rd plenary meeting
15 December 1995
