VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
-- - - - - - - - -- · - - - - - - - ~ - - -- ··-----

1. Commends the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization for the work it has
done in connexion with the return or restitution of cultural property to its countries of origin;
2. Requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to intensify its efforts to
help the countries concerned to find suitable solutions to
the problems relating to the return or restitution of cultural property and urges Member States to co-operate
with that organization in this area;
3. Invites Member States to draw up, in cooperation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, systematic inventories
of cultural property existing in their territories and of
cultural property abroad;
4. Appeals to all States to take adequate measures to
prohibit and prevent the illicit import, export and
transfer of ownership of cultural property;
5. Further appeals to Member States to co-operate
closely with the Intergovernmental Committee for
Promoting the Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin or its Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation, particularly through bilateral agreements, in
order to encourage the return or restitution of their cultural property;
6. Invites once again Governments to accede without delay to the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, of
14 November 1970;
7. Appeals to Member States to encourage the mass
information media and educational and cultural institutions to strive to arouse a greater and more general
awareness with regard to the return or restitution of cultural property to its countries of origin;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, to take the necessary measures
to alert and mobilize international public opinion in
favour of the return or restitution of cultural property to
its countries of origin, in particular by mobilizing the
United Nations information media for this purpose;
9. Expresses the desire that the second World Conference on Cultural Policies, to be held in 1982, will
devote considerable attention to the question of the return or restitution of cultural property with a view to
improving international cultural co-operation;
I0. Requests the Secretary-General to take the
above considerations into account when preparing, in
collaboration with the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the report which is to be submitted to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session in accordance with
resolution 34 /64.
92nd plenary meeting
I I December I 980
35/129.

Problems of the elderly and the aged

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 33/52 of 14 December 1978
by which it decided to convene a World Assembly on the
Elderly in 1982, as a forum to launch an international
action programme aimed at guaranteeing economic and
social security to older persons, as well as opportunities
to contribute to national c!'evelopment,

-

--- - - -

·----- -

185

Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1980 /26 of 2 May 1980 concerning the World Assembly
on the Elderly,
Recognizing that the question of aging is a complex
one which is concerned with the aging individual as well
as with the aging of populations,
Recalling, in particular, paragraph 3 of its resolution
33/52, in which it requested the Secretary-General to
elaborate, in consultation with Member States, the
specialized agencies and organizations concerned, a
draft programme for the World Assembly on the
Elderly,
Desiring that the World Assembly on the Elderly
should result in societies responding more fully to the
socio-economic implications of the aging of populations and to the specific needs of older persons,
Appreciating the leiJding role of the Centre for Social
Development and Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat in preparing for the World Assembly on the
Elderly,
Appreciating also the financial support of the United
Nations Fund for Population Activities in the preparatory work for the World Assembly on the Elderly,
Stressing that the World Assembly on the Elderly is a
significant event through which a long-term programme of action can be launched,
Having considered with satisfaction the report of the
Secretary-General on the draft programme for the World
Assembly on the Elderly, 52
I. Calls upon the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures to enable the Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs, in close co-operation
with the specialized agencies and organizations concerned, to undertake all the necessary preparatory and
follow-up activities of the World Assembly on the
Elderly;
2. Adopts the recommendations of the Economic
and Social Council contained in its resolution 1980 /26;
3. Decides to change the name of the World Assembly on the Elderly to the World Assembly on Aging in
view of the interrelatedness of the issues of aging individuals and the aging of populations as defined by the
Secretary-General's draft programme;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to establish a voluntary fund for the World Assembly on Aging and to inform Member States of the existence of the fund;
5. Appeals to Member States to make in due time
generous voluntary contributions to the Fund for the
World Assembly on Aging;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to launch a campaign, as soon as possible, to establish an appropriate
emblem for the World Assembly on Aging;
7. Invites the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities to continue to provide financial support to the
preparatory work for the World Assembly on Aging as
well as to the implementation of the international programme of action which would result from the Assembly;
8. Invites Member States to consider establishing
national committees for the World Assembly on Aging
and to conduct activities at the national level along the
lines of the Secretary-General's programme and in ways
that are in conformity with the culture, customs and
traditions of each country;
'' A/35/130.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

186

9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session an item entitled "World Assembly
on Aging" and requests the Secretary-General to prepare a progress report on the preparations for the World
Assembly on Aging, including the report of the Advisory Committee for the World Assembly on Aging,
whose establishment was recommended by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1980/26," to
be considered under this item.
92nd plenary meeting
I I December I 980

4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a report prepared on the basis of the information received from
Member States regarding the implementation of the
provisions of the Declaration:
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Human rights and
scientific and technological developments".

35/130.

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 33/53 of 14 December 1978, in
which it urged the undertaking by the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities of a study on the question of the protection
of those detained on grounds of mental ill-health, with a
view to formulating guidelines as a matter of priority,
and requested a progress report on this question at its
thirty-fifth session.
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights
resolution 10 A (XXXIII) of 11 March 1977," in which
the Commission requested the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities
to study the question of the protection of those detained
on grounds of mental ill-health, with a view to formulating guidelines.
Taking note of resolution 6 (XXXII) of 5 September
1979 of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,'' in which the
Sub-Commission requested a report from the SecretaryGeneral on medical measures that might properly be
employed in the treatment of persons detained on
grounds of mental ill-health and procedures for determining whether adequate grounds exist for detaining
such persons and applying such medical measures,
Taking note also of resolution 11 (XXXIII) of 10 September 1980 of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,'" in which
one of its members, Mrs. Erica-Irene A. Daes, was entrusted with the task of elaborating and submitting to
the Sub-Commission at its thirty-fourth session guidelines relating to procedures for determining whether
adequate grounds existed for detaining persons on the
ground of mental ill-health and principles for the protection of persons suffering from mental disorder, taking
into a_ccount the views of Governments and specialized
agencies,
Bearing in mind its resolution 34 / 168 of 17 December
1979 concerning the draft Code ot Medical Ethics submitted by the World Health Organization to the General
Assembly,
Concerned, in particular. at reports from several parts
of the world of persons being detained in mental institutions on account of their political views and on other
non-medical grounds,
Recalling that 1981 has been proclaimed by the
United Nations as the International Year of Disabled
Persons,
I. Welcomes the action taken by the Sub-Commission
on Prevention pf Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities to implement General Assembly resolution
33 '53:

92nd plenary meeting
I I December I 980
B

Human rights and scientific and technological
developments

A
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the great importance of the Declaration
on the Use of Scientific and Technological Progress in
the Interests of Peace and for the Benefit of Mankind.
adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 3384
(XXX) of 10 November I 975,
Considering that scientific and technological progress
is a necessary prerequisite for accelerating social and
economic development in all countries,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Declaration
on Social Progress and Development, contained in its
resolution 2542 (XXIV) of 11 December I 969,
Seriously concerned that the results of scientific and
technological progress could be used to the detriment of
human rights and fundamental freedoms, the dignity
of the human person, international peace and security
and social progress,
Recognizing that the establishment of the new international economic order calls in particular for an important contribution to be made by science and technology
to economic and social progress, and also to the promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
A ware that the implementation of the Declaration on
the Use of Scientific and Technological Progress in the
Interests of Peace and for the Benefit of Mankind will
contribute to the strengthening of international peace
and security and promote co-operation among States in
the field of human rights and economic and social
development of peoples,
1. Stresses the importance of implementing the provisions and principles contained in the Declaration on
the Use of Scientific and Technological Progress in the
Interests of Peace and for the Benefit of Mankind in order to promote human rights and fundamental freedoms
under conditions of scientific and technological progress:
2. Requests the specialized agencies and other bodies of
the United Nations to take fully into account in their programmes and activities the provisions of the Declaration:
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights, in
its consideration of the item entitled "Human rights and
scientific and technological developments", to give
special attention to the question of the implementation
of the provisions of the Declaration:
------

'-' In resolution 1980/26 the Economic and Social Council recommended that the Advisory Committee should be composed of nnt
more than twenty-three Member States appointed by the Chairman of
the Third Committee. The Chairman subsequently informed the
Secretary-General, by communications dated 30 June and 13 August
1981 (A/35/806 and Add.I), that he had appointed the following
twenty-two States as members of the Advisory Committee: Benin.
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Chile. Costa Rica, Dominican
Republic, France, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Japan. Lehanon. Malta.
Morocco, Nigeria, Philippines, Spain, Suriname, Sweden. Togo. Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics. United States or America and Vcnc1ucl:i

See 0/}icia/ Records of 1he Economic and Social Council. Sixly·"',·ond Session. Supp/emen, No. 6 (E/5927), chap. XXI, sect. A.
"Sec E,'CN .4 / \.<50. chap. XVI. sect A.
· Sec E C'\.4 I.JI 1 and Corr.I. char. XVII. sect. A.
