United Nations

A/RES/66/188

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 February 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 17 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2011
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/66/438/Add.2)]

66/188. Addressing excessive price volatility in food and related
financial and commodity markets
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 which provides that
everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for her or his health and wellbeing, including food, the Universal Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger and
Malnutrition 2 and the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 3 in particular
Millennium Development Goal 1 on eradicating extreme poverty and hunger by
2015,
Bearing in mind the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World
Food Summit Plan of Action 4 and the Declaration of the World Summit on Food
Security, 5
Recalling its resolution 56/210 B of 9 July 2002, in which it endorsed the
Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for
Development, 6 and recalling also the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit
on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 7

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
Report of the World Food Conference, Rome, 5–16 November 1974 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.75.II.A.3), chap. I.
3
See resolution 55/2.
4
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the World Food Summit,
13–17 November 1996 (WFS 96/REP), part one, appendix.
5
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document WSFS 2009/2.
6
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
7
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
2

11-47010

*1147010*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/188

Recalling also the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome
document of the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development
to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, 8
Recalling further the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis
and Its Impact on Development and its outcome document, 9
Taking note of the work undertaken by the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, including the Committee on World Food Security, and by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, particularly its recent work
on the financialization of commodity markets,
Taking note also of recent initiatives that aim to help Governments, firms and
farmers to mitigate and build capacity to manage the risks associated with excessive
food price volatility, in particular in the poorest countries,
Recognizing the need to support a comprehensive and coordinated response in
order to address the multiple and complex causes of excessive price volatility of
food and related commodities in financial markets,
Deeply concerned by excessive volatility of commodity prices and by the
impact that excessive price volatility has on food security and sustainable
development in developing countries, and, in particular, by the fact that many
commodity-dependent developing countries and economies in transition continue to
be highly vulnerable to excessive price fluctuations, and recognizing the need to
improve the adequate regulation, functioning and transparency of financial and
commodity markets in order to address excessive commodity price volatility,
Reiterating that the international financial system should support sustained,
inclusive and equitable economic growth, sustainable development, and hunger and
poverty eradication efforts in developing countries, while allowing for the coherent
mobilization of all sources of financing for development,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Agriculture
development and food security: progress on the implementation of the outcome of
the World Summit on Food Security”, which inter alia, highlights the significant
increase in the financialization of commodity markets since about 2004, as reflected
in rising volumes of financial investments in commodity derivatives markets, 10
Taking note also of the policy report entitled “Price Volatility in Food and
Agricultural Markets: Policy Responses”, 11 issued on 2 June 2011 by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for
Agricultural Development, the International Monetary Fund, the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development, the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, the World Food Programme, the World Bank, the World Trade
Organization, the International Food Policy Research Institute and the High-level
Task Force on the Global Food Security Crisis,

_______________
8

Resolution 63/239, annex.
Resolution 63/303, annex.
10
See A/66/277, para. 10.
11
Coordinated by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development as a joint report to the Group of Twenty (G-20).
9

2

A/RES/66/188

1.
Recognizes the initiative of Mr. Leonel Fernández Reyna, President of
the Dominican Republic, “Towards Reaching an International Consensus that Aims
to Reduce Excessive Price Volatility and Speculation in Commodity Markets”;
Stresses the need to take active measures to reduce excessive food price
2.
volatility, while acknowledging that there is an incomplete understanding of its
causes and that more research needs to be done, and in this regard underlines the
need to promote greater transparency and market information at all levels;
Underlines the importance of timely, accurate and transparent
3.
information in helping to address excessive food price volatility, and in this regard
takes note of the Agricultural Market Information System hosted by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and urges the participating
international organizations, private-sector actors and Governments to ensure the
public dissemination of timely and quality food market information products;
Requests the President of the General Assembly at the sixty-sixth session
4.
to convene a high-level thematic debate, to be held in plenary meeting, with the
participation of Member States, independent experts and other stakeholders, to
promote an exchange of views on addressing excessive price volatility in food and
related financial and commodity markets, while taking into account relevant work
done at the national, regional and international levels;
Invites all relevant United Nations agencies and other international
5.
organizations, in particular the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, as well as
other relevant United Nations agencies and international organizations, to
participate actively in the high-level thematic debate and to continue their research
and analysis on this matter;
Recognizes the importance of considering, in this dialogue, the needs of
6.
developing countries, and stresses that special attention should be given to the needs
of net-food-importing developing countries in addressing excessive price volatility
in food and related financial and commodity markets to achieve their food security;
Requests the Secretary-General to consider the outcomes of the high7.
level thematic debate in relevant reports to be submitted under the item entitled
“Macroeconomic policy questions” and other relevant agenda items.
91st plenary meeting
22 December 2011

3
