UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
T H I R T I E T H

Y E A R

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (SIAgendall825) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1825

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplemhnts
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supptement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of.the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of. the Security Cotmcil; .The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

.-

-

...

_’

1825th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 3 June 1975, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Abdul Karim AL-SHAIKHLY (Iraq).

At the invitation of the President. Mr. Banda
(President of the United Nations Council foi Namibia)
and the members of the delegation took places at the
Security Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of Tanzania
and United States of America.

3. The PRESIDENT: I should like to .inform the
members of the Council that I have received, in
addition, a letter from the representative of the United
Arab Emirates requesting to be invited to participate
in the discussion in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure. Pursuant to the usual practice I
propose, if I hear no objection, to invite the said.
representative-to. participate in the discussion without
the right to vote. Owing to the limited number of places
at the Council table, I regret that I must invite the
representative of the United Arab Emirates to take a
place at -the side of the. Council chamber. I shall
invite him to take a place at the Council table whenever
/he wishes to address the Council.

Provisional agenda (SlAgendaJl825)
1.

Adoption of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia
The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

At-the invitation if the President, Mr. Linmaidan
-(United Arab Emirates) took a place at the side of
the Council chamber.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions
taken by the Security Council at its 1823rd and 1824th
meetings, I now invite the representatives of Burundi,
Dahomey, Ghana, India, Liberia, Nigeria, Romania,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Yugoslavia and
Zambia to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber in order that they may
participate in the current discussion without the right
to vote; When any of them wishes to address the
Council, he will of course be invited to take a place
at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr; Mikanagu
(Burundi); Mr. Adjibade (Dahomey). Mr. Boaten
(Ghana). Mr. Jaipal (India), Mr. Dennis (Liberia),
Mr. Ogbu (Nigeria), Mr. Datcu (Romania), Mr. Djigo
(Senegal), Mr. Blyden (Sierra Leone), Mr. -Hussein
(Somalia), Mr. Petri6 (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Mwaanga
(Zambia) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with-a further
decision taken at the 1823rd meeting, I now invite the
President and the delegation of the United Nations
Council for Namibia to take places at the Council table.

4. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Dahomey. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
5. Mr. ADJIBADE (Dahomey) (interpretation from
French): It is a real pleasure for Dahomey to see
Iraq presiding over the Security Council in June 1975,
when the Council is once again considering the problem
of .Namibia. My -delegation- has -every reason to be
pleased and to congratulate you warmly, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. Your
talents as a diplomat and your .deep -belief in justice
arid fain&~‘ together with the progressive choices
that your country has made, are for Africa in particular and the Third World in general a guarantee
that the case now before the Security Council will be
dealt with in such a way as to protect our common
interests, which, in the present circumstances, lie
-first and foremost in fully satisfying the legitimate
aspirations of the Namibian people as a whole, that
is one and indivisible. We are convinced that you
will do -.-your utmost to ensure that the Security
Council’s work on this matter will conclude with the
appropnate, effective and vigorous decision required
by the situation.
1

6. The delegation of Dahomey wishes to thank you
warmly, Mr. President, and all the members of the
Security Council for allowing us to participate in the
Council’s work on the important question of Namibia
and to present the views of the revolutionary military
Government of Dahomey.

up for its past poor performance, South Africa
persists in maintaining its illegal presence in Namibia,
and has blindly proceeded to hurl another challenge
at the Organization, reflected in the letter of 27 May
to the Secretary-General and Vorster’s statement of
20 May [see.S/11701].

7. For almost 20 years now the United Nations has
been considering the question of Namibia and its
related issue, the illegal presence on Namibian
territory of the fascist, reactionary and despicable
apartheid regime set up by a handful of whites
installed in Pretoria. Since 1966, when the General
Assembly, in its resolution 2145 (XXI), decided to
terminate South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia and
to entrust the administration of that Territory to the
United Nations Council for Namibia, the General
Assembly and the Security Council have done
everything and tried everything to make that gang of
crazed individuals usurping power in Pretoria listen
to reason.

1 1 . It might perhaps be useful once again to stress
the fact that various possible solutions have failed
primarily because, on the strength of its alliances and
the unconditional support it enjoys from certain
influential Members of the United Nations, South
Africa is guaranteed impunity and views our decisions
with cavalier disdain.
12. Another reason we have failed in our attempts
to bring about a solution to the problem of Namibia
is that various United Nations bodies, in particular
the Security Council, have been victims of diversionary
tactics inasmuch as they have allowed themselves
to be placated, in particular by some of those who
occupy a privileged place in the Council.

8. With regard to this dispute-and it would never
have been a dispute without the obvious bad faith of
the wild men in Pretoria-the General Assembly, in
order to give a legal basis to the actions that the
Organization might have to take in the future vis Q
vis the forces of evil in South Africa, felt it
necessary to place the matter before the Intemational Court of Justice, whose Advisory Opinion
handed down on 21 June 197 1’ had only one meaning:
that South Africa had an obligation to free the Territory
of Namibia without delay and to transfer its responsibilities in the matter to the United Nations Council
established to manage, provisionally, the interests of
the people of Namibia.

13. Dahomey believes that the reply of Vorster’s
clique to resolution 366 (1974) is irresponsible and
unacceptable. It is a manifestation of the impunity
which has been guaranteed South Africa. The representative of the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), our brother Sam Nujoma, has
.described at considerable length the masquerade put on
by the South African authorities in Namibia which
has been made possible thanks to blind repression,
cruel intimidation and the stifling of the legitimate
aspirations of the nationalists in Namibia. There is no
need to revert to this; the record on the subject
is well known to the Council, partly because it has
been before the Council for so long and partly
because it is so voluminous. Dahomey will only say
that by its reply South Africa has once again confirmed
to the international community that it has absolutely
no intention whatsoever of changing its policies of
inhuman cruelty, which have been condemned as
reprehensible by the world at large. South Africa’s
reply to resolution 366 (1974) bares the real intentions
and the folly of Vorster’s clique. It is to be hoped
that those who protect those evil forces will draw from
that. reply the appropriate moral lesson: namely, that
one cannot defend Vorster and his clique without
participating in this vast conspiracy against mankind
and deliberately becoming part of the persistent
threat to international peace and security for which the
supporters ofapartheid in their irresponsibility must be
held accountable.

9. In the search for possible solutions to the conflict
arising from the persistent and continuing illegal
presence of South Africa in Namibia, we must recall
the task that the Security Council entrusted to the
Secretary-General to engage in a dialogue with the
authorities of the racist Pretoria regime, with a view
to ensuring that Namibia was returned to the United
Nations.
1 0 . A final effort was recently made by the Security
Council. It is reflected in its resolution 366 (1974),
according to which, and for those who refused to
believe in the imminence of action against the Pretoria
clique, was to serve as a last chance for South Africa
to agree to the solution of the problem of Namibia
desired by the United Nations. It is clear that if the
backward-looking authorities of South African racism
had really wished to show their good faith, more than
one opportunity was given to them to do so. Unfortunately, all these efforts to achieve a solution were
confronted and are still confronted by the categorical
refusal of South Africa to respect the relevant decisions of the United Nations, and these decisions are
without number. Instead of trying to understand the
concerns of the international community and to make

1 4 . Ever since the Advisory Opinion of the Intemational Court of Justice’ was handed down, for Africans
at least, the problem of the presence of South Africa
in Namibia should no longer really exist nor is it truly
negotiable. South Africa must immediately put an end
to its occupation and return that Territory to the United
Nations.
2

1 5 . The question, then, is not whether South Africa
very important economic Power. Neither have we
should leave Namibia. The problem ‘before the
lost sight of the fact that in the present monetary
crisis the Republic of South Africa supplies certain
Council is, rather, what ways and means can be used
members of the Council with that very much sought
to compel South Africa to give up an entity that
does not belong to it, an entity the international after precious metal, gold. Nor have we forgotten
community has decided to manage until the interests
that owing to a lack of petro-dollars, some do not
of that Territory are handed over to the Namibian
hesitate to defend the largest supplier of gold. That
is why we would appeal to those who, in order to
people themselves. The Council’s decision should be
as clear as possible. It should avoid any ambiguity.
safeguard their own interests, have a stake in protecting
Vorster’s clique must understand that the time of
the mentally deranged members of Vorster’s gang;
tacit complicity with its inhuman policies of racial
we would ask whether once again they will dare deal
discrimination, arbitrary laws, repression and exportaa death blow to the prestige and credibility of the
Organization, and in particular to the prestige of its
tion of apartheid is long past. The Council’s decision
must be a strong one; it must be intended to make
principal organ, the Security Council. If they intend to
do precisely that, then let them remember that world
South Africa understand once and for all that Namibia
is not, nor can it be, the Republic of South Africa.
public opinion has its eyes on New York and is
It is a single entity which cannot be divided in any
anxious to know the outcome of the Council’s deliberaway to satisfy the overt or covert selfish interests of a
tions; let them not forget also that the use of their
veto rights cannot be considered the expression of the
white minority. In a word, the Council’s decision
should be intended to give the United Nations Council
opinion of the international community, but rather an
for Namibia what it needs to establish itself in Namibia
expression of the policies for which they stand.
and effectively play the administering role that has
been entrusted to it until powers are transferred to
20. It would be a matter of considerable regret and
the indigenous population of Namibia.
very damaging to the Organization if the unbridled
defence by certain Powers of their selfish interests
1 6 . Since all possible recourses for reasonable settlewere to deny the Security Council a unique opportunity
ment have been exhausted, as we said last year and
to take certain concrete political action in respect of
will repeat today, since Vorster’s gang has eyes but
Namibia.
will not see, has ears but will not hear, the only choice
remaining for the Council is to throttle the supporters
21. There can be no doubt but that in order to justify
of apartheid and compel them to stop taunting the
their position, those who protect the gang in Pretoria
Organization through appropriate enforcement action.
will not fail to find certain positive notes in Vorster’s
In order to achieve that objective, the Council should
reply to resolution 366 (1974) and will claim that in
first and foremost impose a rigorous embargo on
fact that reply constitutes a favourable response to
South Africa both at the economic level and with
the appeals of the Council. In the presence of such
regard to arms. The Council must also apply rigorous
diversionary tactics, the question which comes quickly
sanctions to South Africa until it gives the various
to mind is whether it is fitting and proper for the
resolutions on Namibia the kind of consideration the
Security Council to agree to listen to Vorster crying
international community expects it to give them.
out to the world at large that he feels that the
17. The time for talk is long past. This is not the
United Nations has no rights over Namibia. Can such
time for wonderful declarations of intent. This is the
provocation and insolence remained unpunished?
time for action,concrete action, action that will bring
We are also entitled to ask whether or not the United
about progress on the question of Namibia in accordNations recognizes SWAP0 as the sole liberation
ance with the relevant resolutions of the Organization.
movement representing the true aspirations of the
The basic framework for such action already exists;
Namibian people. If certain members of the Council,
it is not necessary to create a new framework for
on the basis of certain political and legal quibbles,
contact with South Africa. To claim the opposite
endorse Vorster’s position on SWAPO, then one
would amount to a singular display of amnesia and
should ask them also whether they believe in all
a refusal to draw any benefit from past experience
conscience, that those who support the apartheid
and would indicate a desire to divert the Council
regime in Pretoria truly represent the aspirations of the
from what should properly be its preoccupations in
majority of the white minority in South Africa.
this problem of Namibia.
22. The time has come for the Security Council to
1 8 . The delegation of Dahomey will not be deluded.
assume its responsibility, just as Vorster has assumed
It is well aware of the fact that the various proposals
what he considers his by continuing to defy the
that have been put forward will remain dead letters
Organization, by flouting it and by spuming its resoluif they are not endorsed by certain members of the
tions to the extent of challenging United Nations
Security Council whose interests are likely to be
rights over Namibia. That situation must not be allowed
affected.
to last much longer. The Council must no longer be
1 9 . In making our proposals, we have not lost sight
satisfied with half measures which can have no effect
of the fact that the Republic of South Africa is a
on a fascist regime, whose Nazi background, as
3

for having permitted me to take part in this debate on
the situation in Namibia. ,This is a problem of great
importance for international legality and justice, for,
in the final analysis, peace and security in the African
continent- depend upon the solution of this problem.

exemplified in its philosophy of apartheid, admits of
no doubt whatsoever.
._.__._ -.---.
-23. The Council in&t act ‘&i&y. It must- impose
rigorous sanctions such as I described earlier. Failure
on the part of the Council would be fraught with
serious‘consequences, for if the Council were not to
perform its duty, then it would give Africa no other
choice but to take desperate violent action. Were
the Security Council to fail to act, then the African
people, in defence of the just cause of SWAPO,
could not fail to give that liberation movement the
moral, material and logistical support it needs to attack
the enemy everywhere at- any time and to liberate
the Territory of Namibia.

29. Mav I take this onnortunitv to convey to the
President of SWAPO, hii. Sam Nujoma, my cordial
and friendly congratulations. At the same time, I
should like to express the satisfaction of the Romanian
delegation at seeing him here at this debate. His
participation in the work of the Council is, in our view,
a valuable contribution to the cause of the freedom
and independence of his country, and further recognition of the fact that the destiny of a people cannot
be settled without the direct participation of its
legitimate representatives.

24. In other words, if the Council once again allows
itself to be. lulled by devious arguments and fails
to discharge its respo>sibility. -as it-- should, .then’ the.
Narriibian people will settle -its own problem sooner
or later, within or without the United Nations, in a
manner similar to the way the Cambodian problem
or the problem of Viet-Nam has been settled and ina manner similar to that of the -settlement which will
be reached in many other areas,- with undoubted
effect on international peace and security.
.
25. Mr. President, if Africa has to go -that far, then
the Council over which you are presiding will have
to face its responsibilities, because it will have allowed
itself to yield to the various manoeuvres and soporific drugs which the racist Government of apartheid
and its protectors do not tire in administrating
to it. But we hope that Africa -will not have to take
the action described because of the losses in innocent
human lives that would result from any solution
involving violence.

30. The current proceedings of the Council are
actually part of. the long sustained effort. of - the
United Nations, but we must recognize that the
problem of Namibia could already have-been solved
if so much tolerance had not been shown to the
Pretoria
regime.
3 1. An important event in the activities of the United
Nations in this regard was the adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 366 (1974), which is familiar
to us all, and which, inter alia, demanded that South
Africa make a solemn declaration that it will comply
with the resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations in regard to Namibia. South Africa was also
called upon to take the necessary steps to effect the
withdrawal of its illegal administration in Namibia and
to transfer power to the people of Namibia with the
assistance of the United Nations: In that same resolution the Council expressed its -gtave concern at South
Africa’s efforts to destroy the national unity and
territorial integrity of Namibia, and further demanded
that South Africa release all Namibian political and
other pri.soners.

26. My delegation is convinced that you will do your
utmost to see to it that your tountry’s name.will not
have to be added to this sorry page in the history
of the Organization, as it would have to be if the
Council decided to turn a deaf ear to the appeal made
to it by all of Africa. The Council must assume its
proper responsibilities and give Vorster’s clique the
kind of treatment it deserves. Africa would not remain
impassive in the circumstances. Africa in turn would
assume its responsibility, and perhaps then the
consciences of some would waken to ihe voice -of
reason and justice.

32. Today’s debate has been preceded by intense
political and diplomatic activity undertaken recently
by the- Organization, by the United Nations Council
for Namibia-the organ legally entrusted by the
United Nations with administering the Territory until
it. becomes independent-and by various States,
including members ‘of the Security Council. We
should also stress in this regard the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the resolutions it adopted at the Ninth Extraordinary Session
of the Council of Ministers, held from 7 to 10 April
1975 in Dar es Salaam.

27. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of Romania, whom I now invite to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
.~
28. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation from
French): First of all, ‘Mr. President, I should like
to say that the Romanian delegation -is extremely
happy to see you presiding over the Security Council
this month. May- we convey to -you our warmest
congratulations. I should like also to express my
thanks to you and the other members of the Council

‘33. As has been stressed here by African delegations,
the reply of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
-Pretoria regime addressed to the Secretary-General
[ibid.] did not live up to the hopes of the Members
of the United Nations.
34. Obviously, ‘there is only one choice in the face of
a persistently negative attitude on the part of the
4

Pretoria regime towards the sacred right of the
Namibian people to independence-in the face of
defiance of United Nations resolutions on Namibia
and the requests made by the internationalcommunity;
and that choice is the adoption of firm and concrete
measures with regard to South Africa so that it m.
it will immediately. and unconditionally withdraw its
illegal administration from that Territory.

vres of the Pretoria regime, which is attempting to
deceive world public opinion in order to mask its
real purpose of undermining the national unity of the
Namibian people and the territorial integrity of
N a m i b i a .
41. The Romanian Government, faithful to its position of principle with regard to the, struggle of the
peoples of the colonies and their national liberation
movements, supports the efforts of SWAP0 to build
a free, unitary and independent Namibia. We are
giving it constant political, diplomatic and material
support, in accordance with the. Joint Communique
-issued after the. talks which took place in Bucharest
in August 1973 between President Nicolae Ceaucescu
and the President of SWAPO, Sam Nujoma.

35. The position of Romania with regard to the illegal
occupation of Namibia by South Africa is well known.
It was set forth in this very chamber on 25 October
1974 [f8U3rd meeting]. As a member of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, my delegation considers
that the position of that body was eloquently
expounded at the beginning of our debate by the
representative of Zambia, Mr. Rupiah Banda, President of the Council for Namibia [1823rd meeting].
,_
.
.
36. According to information in the possession of
the Council for Namibia, and also according to the
statement made by the representative of SWAP0
[ibid.], it appears that, in clear contradiction of -the
wish for a peaceful transfer of power in Namibia,
South Africa is continuing to strengthen its illegal,
brutal presence in that country. There has been an
intensification of systematic repressive measures
against Namibian patriots, and the arrest of members
and leaders of SWAP0 has continued. There is a
continuation, too, of actions aimed at the division of
Namibia into Bantustans in order to undermine the
national unity and territorial integrity of the country,
thus defying United Nations decisions and the will .of
the Namibian people.
_

42. ‘The Romanian delegation considers that the
United Nations -must. contribute more energetically
and more effectively to the cause of the independence
of Namibia and measure up to its important responsibihties towards that Territory. In accordance with the
provisions of its Charter, the-united Nations should,
in our view, take the following actions:
--First, take firm measures to ensure the territorial
integrity of Namibia .and the independence of that
country as a single State and to enforce respect for
the sacred right of the.Namibian people to permanent
sovereignty over its natural resources;
-Secondly, adopt resolute and concrete measures to
prevail upon South Africa immediately to withdraw
its armed forces and police and its whole illegal
administration from Namibia;

37. In its reply to the Secretary-General, the Pretoria
Government in actual fact rejected the provisions of
paragraphs 3 and 4 of resolution 366 (1974) of the
Security Council, thus disregarding the political and
constitutional framework laid down by the United
Nations in the light of its responsibilities.

-Thirdly, enhance the role of the. Security Council
in the implement&ion of its own resolutions and
strengthen these decisions and also expand the
assistance. which the Security Council should give to
the United Nations Council for Namibia for the full
discharge of the mandate .entrusted to it by the
General Assembly.

38. South Africa has not even attempted to conceal
its intentions; it is endeavouring to perpetuate by
other means its domination in the Territory, particularly by the so-called “Constitutional Conference*’
within the framework of “law and order”-promu&ted, of course, by the South African authorities.
That is why the position of SWAPO, which rejects.
the organization of elections in Namibia under the
supervision of the occupation forces of the Pretoria
regime, is entirely justified.

43. As a member of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, the Romanian delegation supports the
proposais’.made in the course of this debate by the
President of the Council and those put forward by
the, President of SWAPO. We are also in favour of
ail other measures that are likely to contribute to
the complete impiemcntation of the United Nations
resolutions on Namibia, thus permitting the Namibian
people to exercise their sacred right to self-determination and independence in accordance with their
interests and national aspirations.

39. We also find entirely justified the request of
SWAP0 that any election in Namibia take place
under the auspices of the United Nations, the sole’
authority legally empowered to administer the
Territory until it becomes independent.
40. Romania fully supports the Namibian people in
its decision to use all means available to it to win its
inalienable rights. We resolutely condemn the manaeu5

44. In this way the United Nations -can make a
contribution to the accomplishment bf one of its most
important and urgent tasks in the world today, that is
to say, the elimination once and for all of the last
remaining vestiges of colonial regimes, the elimination
of all forms of domination and oppression on the part
of colonialism and neo-colonialism.

45. In conclusion, I should like to say that our
keenest desire is to be able to welcome as soon as
possible the State of Namibia as a full-fledged Member
of the Organization. We should like to express the
hope that the Namibian people will be able fully to
enjoy the fruits of its own work and also the fruits of
international co-operation and that it will be able to
make its own contribution to the solution of the
problems facing the international community.

of Namibia and seriously’impairing the prestige of the.
United Nations as a whole and of the Security Council
in particular, as well as their effectiveness as important
instruments of struggle against colonialism and racism.
51. In its last attempt, in. resolution 366 (1974),
the Security Council once again urged South Africa
to undertake an obligation to comply with the resolutions and decisions of the United Nations and the
International Court of Justice, to recognize the territorial integrity and unity of Namibia and to take the
necessary steps to effect the withdrawal of its illegal
administration maintained in Namibia and to transfer
power to the people of Namibia with the assistance
and under the supervision of the United Nations.
However, in giving to South Africa yet another
opportunity, in setting yet another deadline for taking
the necessary steps towards the implementation of the
decisions of the United Nations and the Security
Council-et a time when the historic victories of the
peoples of former Portuguese colonies and the growing
armed struggle of the peoples of Zimbabwe and
Namibia had radically changed the situation in the
whole of southern Africa and when it had become
clear to all that the resistance of colonialism, racism
and apartheid had no prospects whatsoever-the
Security Council did not simply repeat its earlier
appeals.

46. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the representative of Yugoslavia to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
47. Mr. PETRIC (Yugoslavia): Mr. President, I
should like to congratulate you, in your capacity as
representative of the friendly and non-aligned country
of Iraq, upon your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council during the month of June, a
month when the Councii is dealing with one of the
most important of international problems. I would
also stress how apt it was that the consideration of
the item on the Council’s agenda started under the
presidency of the friendly and non-aligned country of
Guyana.
48. My delegation is taking part in the consideration
of this very urgent problem as the delegation of a
country which is a staunch friend and constant
ally of the peoples of Africa in their liberation struggle
for the eradication of every manifestation and of the
last remnants of colonialism and racism from their
continent. We also wish to express our firm belief
that, under your abie guidance, Mr. President, the
Security Council will examine with full responsibility
the situation with which we are confronted and will
take appropriate measures.

52. .We all know that agreement, that unanimity with
regard to resolution 366 (1974)-in a situation when
a strong demand for the application of Chapter VII
of the Charter through the imposing of a mandatory
arms embargo and mandatory sanctions against South
Africa had already been made-was possible on. the
understanding that if South Africa rejected even this
opportunity, the next resolution could not be a mere
repetition of resolution 366 (1974).

49. It is regrettable that we have had to meet again
in order to deal with the reactionary and aggressive
policy of South Africa in Namibia. The General
Assembly and the Security Council have already met
so many times, since 1966, and have adopted so many
decisions that it is almost embarrassing to enumerate
them, while the people of Namibia, the peoples of
Africa, are demanding that we take resolute and
effective action.

53. In its declaration and resolution 23 (IX) on
Namibia, the Council of Ministers of the OAU, meeting
at Dar es Salaam in April 1975, showed itself ready
to offer one more chance to South Africa to put an
end to its illegal occupation of Namibia and to enable
the population of the Territory to realize its right to
self-determination, territorial integrity, freedom and
independence. But it was also stressed that, failing
this, struggle by all means would continue.

SO. South Africa has turned a deaf ear to all this
and has failed to show any readiness to solve the
problem, continuing its illegal occupation of Namibia
and preventing the people of the Territory from
realizing their right to self-determination, freedom,
independence and territorial integrity. In spite of this,
the international community and the Security Council
have given proof of a maximum of patience and good
will, endeavouring, unsuccessfully, to induce South
Africa to permit a peaceful solution of the problem.
It has become crystal clear to everyone that, faced
with South Africa’s defiance, we cannot continue to
meet and repeat the same appeals all over again
without hindering thereby the struggle of the people

54. Now what reply have we received, in return,
from South Africa? Prime Minister Vorster, in his
statement of 20 May, and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Muller, in his letter addressed to the
Secretary-General on 27 May [see S/11701], continue
to refuse to recognize the right of the United Nations
to administer Namibia; they do not recognize SWAP0
as the liberation movement and legitimate representative of the people of the Territory; they consider
the territorial integrity of Namibia to be only one of
the possible options and refuse to put an end to their
illegal occupation and withdraw from the Territory.
At the same time, to take part in contacts and
6

negotiations with the Secretary-General and the
Special Committee of the OAU, they offer, as representatives of the Territory, stooges and quislings
chosen by them and serving the occupation administration. Every so-called new .hint is immediately and
wholly invalidated by the repetition and even aggravation of the worst and totally unacceptable stands of
South Africa, presented, this time also, with the
customary and deliberate arrogance.

resolution 366 (1974). When saying and demanding this,
we have particularly in mind the responsibility and
obligations of the permanent members of the Security
Council who, together with the other members of the
Council, voted unanimously in favour of resolution 366
(1974).
59. We doubt that there is a single member of the
Security Council who would be prepared to qualify
South Africa’s answer as satisfactory. We also
sincerely hope that-in the spirit of unanimity
manifested at the time of the adoption of resolution 366 (1974)-the members of the Council will
remain consistent and will adopt concrete measures
against South Africa, which has flagi-antly violated
the Charter and all the decisions of the Assembly
and the Council concerning the question of Namibia.
We appeal, in particular, to those who had earlier
given their support, for totally unacceptable reasons,
to the South African regime, thus enabling it to continue
its illegal occupation of Namibia, to abandon such a
policy once and for all. Colonialism, racism and
apartheid constitute the greatest anachronism and
shame of the epoch in which we live and it is high
time to deal a decisive blow to their last remaining
bastions. We hope that everyone realizes by now that
the existing situation is untenable and that South
Africa’s aggressive and reactionary policy will soon
be bankrupt, as every aggression is doomed, sooner
or later, to utter failure, as amply proved by recent
history.

55. What attitude can the Security Council adopt
towards a Government that does not recognize the
legitimate and repeatedly confirmed competence of the
United Nations in Namibia? How can the SecretaryGeneral have contacts with a Government that does
not recognize the decisions of the United Nations?
How can the OAU contact a Government that does ;
not recognize SWAPO? And, generally speaking, what
can be the subject of talks with a regime that
considers the territorial integrity of Namibia to be
one of the options and claims that its aggressive
and illegal presence in the Territory represents the
wish of its inhabitants?
56. The situation is clear. South Africa has not
changed its well-known reactionary and unacceptable
policy and, in fact, wants to conduct talks under the
old conditions, for purposes of bantustanization,
that is, for the further legalization and perpetuation
of its presence in Namibia. And the terrible massacre
perpetrated the other day in Salisbury by the racist
regime of Southern Rhodesia, where South Africa
still keeps military units, shows best what we are
faced with.

60. The Yugoslav people and Government; in
keeping with their well-known policy, will continue
to lend, as heretofore, full political, moral and
material assistance to the people of Namibia and its
legitimate representative SWAPO, in their struggle for
the realization of its inalienable right to self-determination, freedom and independence. This assistance is
given in the spirit of our traditional policy of support
to every struggle against imperialism, colonialism and
all other forms of foreign domination.

57. We deem that South Africa’s so-called reply to
the Security Council is unacceptable. We state this
with a full sense of responsibility, because the
Yugoslav delegation has been following this problem
actively for a number of years as a member of the
Special Committee of 24,* of the Council for Namibia
and of the Security Council in 1972 and 1973-the
bodies with have been, so far unsuccessfully, exerting
efforts for its solution.

61. With regard to the matter now before us, we
feel that on the basis of Chapter VII of the Charter,
the Security Council should adopt appropriate
measures and, as a minimum, the mandatory complete
prohibition of the sale of weapons to South Africa.
Any measure of military co-operation, either direct
or indirect, or of assistance to South Africa in the
military field strengthens its racist regime in its policies
of apartheid and occupation of Namibia. Consequently, it goes without saying that all forms of military
co-operation and ties with South Africa must be
discontinued-whether in the area of supply of arms,
the facilitation of its own arms production, installation
or the like.

58. As a European, socialist and non-aligned country,
Yugoslavia is deeply convinced that peace and
international security are indivisible. There can be no
detente and peace between some countries only or
peace in some regions alone, while simultaneously
there is disregard of the situation in southern Africa,
or anywhere else. By its reactionary, racist policy
South Africa has created a dangerous hotbed of
conflict and an area of crisis liable to endanger
peace and security in the whole world. For this
reason, the Security .Council, which has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, should, as a matter of urgency,
take measures for the eradication of this hotbed of
conflict and for compelling South Africa to cease
its illegal occupation of Namibia. Actually, the Security
Council undertook this obligation in paragraph 5 of

62. May I be allowed to mention here that the
Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries in its
Declaration of 21 March 1975 concluded, inter alia,
that:
7

“the Bureau demands that the oppressive white
minority regime in. South Africa implement the
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
concerning Namibia. It reaffirms its categorical
rejection of the transplanting of ignoble ‘Bantustani
policies in the Territory. It demands the strictest
respect for, the unity and territorial integrity of
Namibia, while pledging its continued support to the
legitimate struggle of the Namibian people under the
leadership of. their liberation movement SWAPO.
The Coordinating Bureau calls upon the Security
Council of the United Nations to live up to its
responsibility and adopt all necessary measures,
including~those under Chapter VII of the Charter,
in order to enforce the United Nations decision on
Namibia.”

attempt to split the national liberation movements
in those countries, break the militant unity of the
African countries and undermine the armed struggle
of the peoples in southern Africa so as to save themselves from their doomed destruction.
66. One hard evide,nce of the political deception
employed -by Vorster under the smokescreen of
“reconciliation” and “dialogue” is a statement made
by Vorster on 20 May on the question ef Namibia.
What kind of stuff is this statement? Does it signify
the slightest change in the colonialist policy pursued
by South Africa over Namibia?
67. In his statement [ibid.] Vorster said that the
United Nations has no right to exercise any supervision over South African administration of Namibia.
As is known to all, South Africa’s occupation of
Namibia is entirely illegal and the General Assembly
and the Security Council have in their relevant resolutions repeatedly condemned South Africa for its illegal
occupation of Namibia, recognized the United Nations
as the administering authority of Namibia and
demanded the immediate withdrawal of the South
African authorities from Namibia. Now Vorster
has even dared to declare that the United Nations ‘.
has no right to look into South Africa’s illegal
occupation of Namibia. Is this not contempt for the
relevant resolutions of the General Assemblyand the
Security Council, as well as an open challenge against
the overwhelming majority of States Members of the
United Nations?

63. In conclusion, we should like to ‘stress once
again that South Africa has rejected every constructive
initiatives. taken with regard to it, and -that it has
violated all the ,decisiont and resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security ‘Council and all relevant
principles. Consequently, we put forward with full
responsibility .the demand’ that the Security Council
take the strongest action in this case.
64. Mr. CHUANG Yen (China) (translurion from
Chinese): In recent years, under the great call of the
OAU to “eliminate all forms of colonialism on the
African continent”, the African countries and peoples,
holding aloft the banner of unity and struggle, have
won one great victory after another in their struggles
against imperialism, colonialism and neocolonialism,
racism, Zionism and great-power hegemonism. At
present, the situation in Africa is getting better
and better. Through protracted armed struggles the
peoples of Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique and Angola
have won their right to national independence, and
the Portuguese colonial domination that has lasted for
five centuries in Africa has been collapsing. The
national liberation struggles of the peoples of
Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania which are still under
the domination of the white racist regimes are
developing increasingly in depth. The excellent situation .m Africa has struck panic into’ the hearts of the
South African and Southern Rhodesian colonial racist
regimes that are still putting up a stubborn resistance
and have thus landed themselves in unprecedented
isolation.

68: Vorster has the cheek to say: “We do not occupy
the Territory”-referring. to Namibia. “We are there
because-the people of the Territory want us there”.
Here;Vorster is again harping on the Iong-discredited
gangster’s logic of the colonialists. As a matter of
fact, from the day the South African racist .regime
started its illegal occupation of Namibia, the Namibian
people have never ceased their heroic struggles for
national independence and the liberation of the
country. According to the wishes of the Namibian
people, the South African authorities should have
got out of Namibia long ago. The so-called “leaders
of. the peoples” referred to by. the South African
authorities are precisely a handful of puppets that
have been fostered for maintaining their colonialist
domination over Namibia. Vorster is attempting to
confer on this handful of puppets the title of the
“leaders of the peoples” for imposition on the
Namibian people. Such a despicable practice is of
course totally unacceptable to the entire Namibian
people ancl the other African peoples. To put it
bluntly, those who really desire the continued illegal
South African racist occupation of Namibia
are none other than the South African authorities
themselves .and the.’ imperialist forces that have
tremendous economic interests in South Africa and
other parts of southern Africa and that have ceaselessly given enormous political and military support
to these racists. Incidentally, it was the: Minister for

65. However, like all other reactionaries in the
world, the South African and Southern Rhodesian
racists will never step down from the stage of history
of their own accord ‘and they. are still engaged in. a
desperate struggle. What calls for special alertness
now is that, with,‘the support and abetment of the
-imperialists and the super-Powers, they are racking
their brains to play and push their counter-revolutionary dual tactics in order to maintain, their reactionary rule. While stepping up armed suppression,
they are engaged in political deception and are
vigorously -trumpeting so-called reconciliation in an
8

..-

Foreign Affairs of South Africa who corfessed straight
away that “South Africa will remain in and continue
to administer the Territory”. This has revealed point
blank the true intention of the South African authorities
stubbornly to hang on in Namibia.

strengthen their unity, persevere in ‘Struggle, and
particularly armed struggle, so as to frustrate all the
enemy’s schemes and. win. the independence and
liberation of the whole of Africa. As is pointed out
in the statement of SWAP0 on 21 May: “The SWAP0
of Namibia, in face of these provocations of the
South African regime, indicates that there is no
alternative but to step up armed struggle in order to
liberate our country from the arrogant foreign
aggressors”. The OAU issued a statement on
22 May calling on the Namibian people to continue
to struggle until they attain total independence. This
is the. powerful reply of the Namibian people and
the other African peoples to Vorster’s arrogant
statement. The Chinese delegation firmly supports it:
.a.
72. The Chinese Government and peoplehave always
supported the people of Namibia and other parts
of southern Africa in their just struggles for national
independence and liberation. The Chinese people
.and the African people are comrades-in-arms fighting
on the same front. In the future we shall continue to
strengthen our unity and carry through to the end the
joint fight for the independence and liberation of the
whole continent of Africa.

69. Vorster also said that the local inhabitants should
be given the opportunity to express their views freely
on their political and constitutional future, that it
was for the “population groups” there and the
“peoples”, in the plural, to choose the future of
Namibia, and that all options were open to them, and
so on and so forth. Those with a discerning eye
know full well the true meaning of these words.
They mean that the South African authorities still
want to divide the Namibian people into the socalled “‘population groups” and resort to the trick
of so-called “constitutional discussions’* to step up
their reactionary “Bantustan” policy of divide and
r u l e .
70. However, while spreading a smokescreen of the
so-called “reconciliation”, the Vorster and Smith
racist regimes have not ‘relaxed, but have stepped up
their tactics of bloody armed repression. Last April,
it was none other.than the South African racist regime
that sent out armed force and police to suppress the
SWAP0 supporters, killing and wounding several
of them and arresting several hundred patriots, thus
creating an appalling incident of bloodshed. Likewise,
it is none other than the South African racist
regime that has stepped up arms expansion and war
preparations, strengthened its apparatus for military
repression and added another 50 per cent to its 1974
huge military budget, which reached the amount of
some 1.4 billion United States dollars. It is none
other than the South African racist regime that has
wildly clamoured that South Africa possesses the
highest-standard army on the African continent, that
no force on earth could seize political power from
the hands of the whites and that the whites would
continue their rule in South Africa. Not only have
the South African armed force and police refused to
.quit Zimbabwe, but with their support, the Smith
authorities of Southern Rhodesia went so far as to
create another bloody incident by massacring
Zimbabwe African nationalists in Salisbury on 1 June.

73. Mr. SCALI. (United States of America):
Mr. President, may 1. add my good wishes to those
of my colleagues upon your accession to the presidency
of the Security Council. I assure you of the full
co-operation of the United States delegation. I also
would like to congratulate our colleagues from Guyand.
upon the very able manner in which they presided
over the Council during the .month of May.
74. Last December [1811rh meeting] the United
States supported Council resolution 366 (1974). We
voted “yes” in the belief that the text, though
imperfect in some ways, adequately reflected our view
that South Africa should act quickly and decisively
to end its illegal occupation of Namibia. -We believe;
moreover, that the Security Council rightly placed
its views and recommendations before the South
African Government and urged it to move prompti):
along the path indicated.
75. During the last six months there has been some
forward movement in the Namibian situation, but not
enough. It is clear, however, that regardless df
how disappointed we are at the pace of steps towards
genuine self-determination at this stage, we must move
carefully lest we worsen rather than improve the
:,
outlook for justice and freedom.
-.

71. Are these facts not sufficient to show that
behind the evil wind of the so-called “reconciliation”
and “dialogue” stirred up by Vorster, Smith and
company there is a conspiracy to intensify further
the armed repression against the peoples in southern
Africa? However, the great- African people are after
all a people with political consciousness.’ From the
pratice of their protracted struggles, they have come
to realize that the nature of colonialists and racists
will never change. The African countries and peoples
that have a glorious tradition of fighting imperialism
will certainly see through the various tricks played
by the enemy, use revolutionary dual tactics to deal
with the enemy’s counter-revolutionary dual tactics,

76. In this connexion we hear calls for an armi
.embargo. The record of the United States Govemment in this respect is one of which..the .-American
people can’ be proud. For 12 years the United States
Government has voluntarily refused t&lidw shipments
of American arms and military equipment to South
Africa. Our Government has done this as a matter of
principle. We do so out of conviction, and not because
‘.
9
I

.-

we are required to do so by an international forum.
If others wish, they can join us in such a voluntary
policy, and we earnestly invite them to do so.

83. Mr. Muller’s most recent statements may offer
hope that South Africa will allow a truly fair exercise
of selfdetermination in Namibia. South Africa must
now move from general statements of purpose to
specific implementing action. Can South Africa be
in any doubt that the international community wants
these steps to define Namibia’s separate status and
the time-table for carrying them out-and wants these
to be stated in unambiguous terms?

77. As the Security Council is considering what
constructive steps it can take for the future of Namibia,
there are four fundamental questions, as we see it:
whether there is a commitment on the part of South
Africa to a course of selfdetermination for all the
people of Namibia and to respect for their rights;
the timing of steps towards self-determination once
that principle is accepted by South Africa; the question
of whether all Namibians, of whatever colour, political
affiliation or social origin, would have their voices
heard in determining the future of the Territory; and,
finally, the role of the United Nations in the process
of self-determination for all the people of Namibia.

84. At its meeting in Dar es Salaam in April, the
Council of Ministers of the OAU reviewed the situation in Namibia and adopted a comprehensive declaration on the Territory aimed at overcoming South
Africa’s recalcitrance. Members of the Security
Council, including the United States, have also been
active in seeking to eixouragk South Africa to move
forward decisively in Namibia to allow the Namibian
people to express their views freely on the political
future and the constitutional structure of the Territory.

78. The South African Government made public its
position on Namibia in a letter [see S/Z17011 of 27 May
from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Muller,
to the Secretary-General. In that letter the South
African Minister for Foreign Affairs restated many
positions already put forward by his Government.

85. The United Nations, and the Security Council
especially, have a unique and grave responsibility
for Namibia and its future. South Africa has now given
us some reason to expect that it acknowledges the
interest of the international community in Namibia,
even though it still has not accepted United Nations
participation in the process of self-determination for
Namibia. Once again we declare to South Africa that
it is our considered view that without a role for
the United Nations in the selfdetermination process
the international community cannot judge progress
objectively and therefore cannot be satisfied that the
people of Namibia will be able to exercise a democratic
choice as to their future.

79. My delegation believes we should explore South
Africa’s offer to resume a dialogue with a representative of the Secretary-General and to enter into
discussions with African leaders, with the Chairman
of the United Nations Council for Namibia and with
the Special Committee of the OAU. We fully recognize
the past difficulties in such dialogues, and we note
the restrictive terms of South Africa’s present offer.
Nonetheless, in our view, it is important that new
efforts be made to determine whether, in fact, a
genuine discussion can now be initiated through
these channels.

86. The United States, for its part, remains committed
to the view that within a short time all the people
of Namibia should be given the opportunity to express
their views freely and under United Nations supervision on the political future and constitutional
structure of the Territory; that all Namibian political
groups should be allowed to campaign for their
views and to participate without hindrance in peaceful
political activities in the course of the process of
self-determination; that the Territory should not be
split up in accordance with the policy of apartheid;
and that the future of Namibia should be determined
by the freely expressed choice of its inhabitants.

80. We also note that the letter of 27 May, in discussing the future of the Territory, states that all
options are open, including “independence as one
State”. We have also noted that that letter reiterates
South Africa’s recognition of the international status
of the Territory and states that it is the South African
Government’s wish that a constitutional conference
take place in as short a time as possible.
81. Mr. Muller’s words go somewhat beyond the
assurances he gave the Secretary-General in April
1973. They may reflect a more realistic appraisal of
the situation in southern Africa. Ambiguities remain,
and South Africa should provide clarification of its
intent. We wish to know more precisely when and
in what manner the planned constitutional convention
will be conducted and who exactly will participate.

87. As we continue to press towards these goals,
the United States will sustain its present policies
with regard to the Territory. We will continue to
discourage United States investment in Namibia and
to deny export-import bank guarantees and other
facilities for trade with Namibia. We will continue
to withhold United States Government protection
of United States investments, made on the basis of
rights acquired through the South African Government
after 1966, against the claims of a future lawful
Government of Namibia. This policy reflects our
strongly held belief that South Africa should act in

82. During the Council’s debate on 17 December
1974 [1812rh meeting], I called unequivocally for
precision and detail in South African planning for
Namibia’s future. Such clarity, coupled with positive
action, is called for to ensure a peaceful and realistic
settlement of the Territory’s future.
10

the immediate future to end its illegal occupation of
Namibia.

at this time. Thus, in our view, it would not be
appropriate to invoke mandatory sanctions which are
specifically reserved for threats to peace. We believe
the Council, in collaboration with the African States,
should insist that South Africa give concrete effect
to its words, give firm assurances about the issues
on which it has not yet declared its position and move
forward with dispatch towards a new environment of
freedom in southern Africa.

88. The obligation of the Council is to foster a
peaceful and just settlement. Our agreed goal is the
exercise by. the people of Namibia of their right to
selfdetermination. As a responsible deliberative body,
it is our duty to encourage all the parties concerned
and to explore every possible opportunity for launching
the process of timely self-determination.

The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.
89. In view of the facts of the Namibian situation,
it is difficult to find that a threat to international
peace and security exists within the meaning of the
Charter. The party seen by some as causing the threat
has agreed on some of the objectives desired by the
international community and has offered to exchange
views on the means of achieving them. This clearly
does not add up to a crisis, peace-and-war situation

,

Notes
I Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of
South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstandina
Security-Council resolution‘276 (1970). A&so& Opinion, 1.C.i
Reports 1971. p. 16.
z Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Gxanting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.

11

,..

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATlONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PU3X.ICATlONS

DES NATIONS UMES

Les publications des Nations U&s sont en ventc dam les librairis et la agenas d+sitaires du
monde enticr. Informez-vous aupr6s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous i : Nations Unies, Section
des votes. New York ou C&&z.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras en
t&as panes del mundo. Consulte a su libnxo o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, &c&n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebta.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

82-61202-October 1983-2,200
