Supplementary rule J
At the second part of the first session, the General Assembly shall elect simultaneously, in accordance with rule 75, the nine members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, two of whom at Jeast shall be financia)
experts of recognized standing. It shall then, by a
second vote, choose three of the elected members
one of whom shall be a financia) expert, for th~
three-year term. By a third vote it shall choose
three of the remaining elected members, one of
whom shall be a financia) expert, for the twoyear term.

under the terms of reference laid down in rule 42
of the provisional rules of procedure:
Mr. Paul H. APPLEBY
Mr. M. BAUMONT
Mr. J. P. BRIDGEN
Dr. Cm Chao-ting
Mr. Seymour JACKLIN
Sir Cecil K1scH
Mr. Pavle LuKIN
Dr. MARTINEZ CABAÑAS
Mr. Nedim EL-PACHACHI
Mr. Nicolai V. ÜRLOV

Supplementary rule K
At the first part of the first session, the General
Assembly shall elect simultaneously, in accordance
with rule 75, the ten members of the Committee
on Contributions. It shall then, by a second vote,
choose four of the elected members for the threeyear term. By a third vote it shall choose three of
the remaining elected members for the two-year
term.
Thirty-first plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.

Mr. J. P. BRIDOEN
Mr. Seymour JACKLIN
Dr. MARTINEZ CABAÑAS
Mr. Nicolai V. ÜRLov
to be elected for a three-year term, and
Mr. M. BAUMONT
Sir Cecil K1scH
Mr. Nedim EL-PACHACHI
to be elected for a two-year term;
3. Draws the attentiim <>f the Committee to
paragraphs 12, 13, and 14 of the report on budgetary and financia! arrangements contained in section 2 of chapter IX of the Report of the Preparatory Commission;
4. Requests the Committee to submit a detailed
~ale f?r the apportionment of expenses for cons1deration at the second part of the first session of
the General Assembly.
Thirty-first plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.

2. Declares:

16 (1). APPOINTMENT OF A COMMITTEE ON
CONTRIBUTIONS

The General Assembly:
l. Declares the following persons to be elected
as members of the Committee on Contributions

23
