United Nations

S/PV.6378

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6378th meeting
Tuesday, 7 September 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Apakan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Vukašinović
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Nishida
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mr. Adamu
Mr. Kravchenko
Mr. Mugoya
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-50633 (E)

*1050633*

S/PV.6378

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Atul Khare,
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Khare to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Margot Wallström, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Ms. Wallström to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

2

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Atul Khare and Ms. Margot
Wallström.
I now give the floor to Mr. Khare.
Mr. Khare: Thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Council on the chain of events
surrounding the recent incidents of mass rapes in North
Kivu and the cases of rapes in South Kivu. The map on
the screen shows the area in question.
As the Council is aware, I visited the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, on the instructions of the
Secretary-General, from 28 August to 2 September.
Apart from Kinshasa, I travelled to North Kivu,
notably to Goma and Walikale and to Lubonga and
Luvingi where the systematic rapes had occurred, and
to Kirumba, where three Indian peacekeepers were
killed on 18 August. In South Kivu, I travelled to
Bukavu and to Uvira, where cases of rapes have also
been reported.
During the visit, I met with Government officials,
including the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Alexis
Thambwe; the National Security Adviser, Mr. Pierre
Lumbi; and the Governor of South Kivu, Mr. Marcellin
Cishambo. I also met with several senior operational
officers of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC): General Dieudonne
Amuli, commanding general of Operation Amani Leo;
General Pacifique Masunzu, commanding general of
the South Kivu military region; Colonel Delphin
Kahimbi, commander of Operation Amani Leo in
South Kivu; and Lieutenant Colonel Bernard
Byamungu, commander of the Uvira military region in
South Kivu.
I had the opportunity to interact with civil society
groups in Kinshasa and Kirumba, as well as in the
villages where rapes were perpetrated, both in North
Kivu and South Kivu. In all these meetings, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Roger Meece
accompanied me as we sought out together, both
internally and with our partners, the details
surrounding the outrageous and utterly condemnable
systematic and mass rapes in the Kibua area, and
thereby sought to identify our shortcomings.
After outlining the details surrounding the mass
rapes in North Kivu and the cases in South Kivu, I will
present certain actions that the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic

10-50633

S/PV.6378

Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) has already
initiated and some that the Mission envisages
initiating, as well as certain proposals for consideration
by the Council. I will provide information on
additional cases of rape in Uvira, Movinga and
Shabunda, in South Kivu, as well as in Mubi and Pinga
in North Kivu, which have been recently reported to
us.

had been looted in the Lubonga area and that there was
no movement of civilians on the road between
Walikale-Mpofi-Kibua-Goma, perhaps because of the
fear of the presence of armed groups. Increased
movement of FDLR cadres was observed between
Mpofi and Ruwenge, 22 kilometres north-west of
Kibua, and between Mpofi and Lubonga, 13 kilometres
west of Kibua.

The Forces Démocratiques de Libération du
Rwanda (FDLR) still retains a strong and active
presence in the Kibua area. On 25 July, the FARDC —
that is, national army — units deployed in the area of
Kibua were redeployed to Walikale. Five days later, on
30 July, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) office in the area
received unconfirmed information about possible
attacks by FDLR in Mpofi. However, the MONUSCO
company operational base in Walikale could not
confirm this information. Information, again,
unconfirmed, indicated that Mai-Mai Cheka allegedly
intended to block off the Walikale-Goma and WalikaleBukavu roads, which members see on the map, to halt
the movement of minerals. An unconfirmed case of
rape in Mpofi was also reported on 30 July. The same
day, the security officer of the United Nations
Department of Safety and Security (UNDSS) in
Walikale sent an advisory by SMS to OCHA in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, security officers of
the World Food Programme and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), focal points of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and United Nations
Office for Project Services and MONUSCO security
officers in Goma, stating that the area of Mpofi, on the
Masisi-Walikale axis, had passed under the control of
FDLR and that UNDSS recommended the suspension
of movements in that zone. The same message was
transmitted
to
humanitarian
workers
and
non-governmental organizations by the OCHA office in
Goma.

The next day, 2 August, was a market day in
Kibua, where, as an innovative practice for civilian
protection, the company operating base in Kibua
provides market patrols, which includes escorting
villagers who assemble at Ishunga to Kibua.
Nevertheless, a forenoon patrol to Lubonga and
Luvingi on 2 August did not result in reporting of any
rapes to our peacekeepers. The patrol also interacted
with Lieutenant Colonel Mukale of the 2112 battalion
of the FARDC at Mpofi, as well as with the villagers of
Bunyampuri. The patrol was accompanied by an
interpreter. However, none of the villagers told the
patrol that there had been cases of rape. The patrol on
2 August also arrested a Mai-Mai cadre between
Lubonga and Luvingi.

On 31 July, we learned that, in an encounter near
Mpofi, the FARDC had killed eight FDLR combatants
and seriously wounded another. The chef de
groupement of Kibua contacted the FARDC and the
MONUSCO company operating base in Kibua on that
day to inform them about attacks and looting but did
not mention any rapes at that stage. A subsequent
patrol conducted by the Kibua company operating base
established that two shops, including a medicine shop,

10-50633

The first report of 15 rape victims who sought
medical attention at the International Medical Corps
(IMC) supported health centre was received on
5 August. The perpetrators had disappeared into the
surrounding forests long before that time. Obviously,
until that time the perpetrators had been in either the
villages or the surrounding areas, and the victims had
not been able to report their suffering or even to seek
medical attention. This was confirmed by the villagers
in Luvingi, which recorded the largest number of
rapes: over 103, as reported to me when I visited them.
The initial figure of 15 rose to 47 on 9 August,
and to 68 on 13 August. As this horror unfolded,
MONUSCO deployed a joint protection team on the
Mpofi-Kibua axis to assess the security situation of the
villages along the axis, verify the allegations of recent
attacks, mass rapes and lootings and evaluate the
protection needs of the local population.
A human rights investigation team was also
deployed from 25 August to 2 September, and
interviewed victims and witnesses in each of the
13 villages in the area. The investigation’s report is
being finalized and will be made public in the coming
days.

3

S/PV.6378

Assistance to victims, particularly medical and
psychosocial assistance, is being provided by IMC and
Heal Africa, with some transport assistance by
MONUSCO.
It is now clear that at least 242 persons, including
28 minors, were systematically raped in 13 villages in
that area between 30 July and 2 August. The
inhabitants of Luvingi, which recorded the largest
number of rapes — over 103 — told me that the
perpetrators of the attack, mass rapes and looting
arrived in their village on 30 July. A Mai-Mai Cheka
leader, the so-called Colonel Mayele, and the so-called
Colonel Sarafim of the FDLR claimed that they had
come to protect Luvingi, had decided to participate in
the reintegration process and only wanted to rest in the
village. The Mai-Mai Checka hail from the Walikale
territory and had visited the village often before. Many
villagers ran away on seeing the FDLR, but returned
when they learned that the FDLR had decided to
integrate with the FARDC. That this was a trap became
evident only later, as the horror and suffering unfolded.
The inhabitants of Luvingi also confirmed to me that
the rape victims sought medical attention only after
they were certain that the perpetrators had left the area,
because severe punishments were inflicted on people
who tried to escape.
While the primary responsibility for protection of
civilians lies with the State, its national army and
police force, clearly we too have failed. Our actions
were not adequate, resulting in unacceptable
brutalization of the population of the villages in the
area. We must do better.
Let me briefly reflect on the main conditions of
the area before outlining the actions that would, I hope,
improve our response. In North Kivu, the Walikale-toPinga road is an important transshipment route for
minerals and other natural resources. However, this
area, like others in the region, is not electrified and the
untarred road is quite broken and difficult to traverse.
In the absence of long-term income-generation
projects, many male villagers in the area stay away
from their families for periods of two to four weeks,
undertaking artisanal mining.
The journey from Kibua to Luvingi takes around
one and a half hours each way, as I discovered during
my visit. It would normally take the villagers some
four to five hours to walk the distance in either
direction. There is no mobile phone coverage, and even

4

the high-frequency radio coverage is extremely patchy
due to the mountainous and forested terrain. The armed
groups often wear clothes that are identical to FARDC
uniforms, and it is quite difficult for our peacekeepers —
and even for the villagers — to distinguish the enemy
from the friendly force.
The Kibua company operating base has one
interpreter and one mobile satellite phone, thus
operationally restricting it to one patrol at any given
time, given the distances and conditions of the roads to
be traversed. Finally, of course the number of
peacekeepers in North Kivu remains quite small —
4,000 peacekeepers for an area of around 59,483
square kilometres.
Continuous efforts at improving relations with the
community that we serve and better and
institutionalized mechanisms of information-gathering
are essential. It has been decided that more evening
and night patrols should be undertaken. The Force
Commander has further directed the company
operating bases to undertake more random and spotcheck patrols. It has also been decided that, within the
next few weeks, a separate tactical doctrine that builds
on the rules of engagement will be developed for the
company operating bases and the temporary operating
bases to provide our peacekeepers with the necessary
guidance to explore deeper when reports of armed
group movements are received from particularly highthreat areas — for example, an area that has been
recently cleared of armed groups by the FARDC and
where reprisal attacks on the civilian population might
take place.
A standardized list of questions to be asked
during patrols will also be instituted in our effort to
ensure that the patrols can and will probe even deeper
when interacting with the communities. This doctrine
would also cover the response expected from the
company operating bases in specific protection
situations, building on the guidelines produced within
the civilian substantive sections.
The Foreign Minister of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Mr. Alexis Thambwe Mwamba,
remarked to me that victims of rapes are victimized
twice — first by the perpetrators and secondly by their
communities. It is therefore no surprise that immediate
reports of rapes are unlikely to come forward.
Therefore, reports of looting and the presence of armed
groups in vulnerable areas that had been recently

10-50633

S/PV.6378

cleared of their presence would constitute indicators
that sexual violence may have occurred even though no
reports of rapes are received.

observation helicopters, as well as operational bases
already deployed in the area of operations. The
operational headquarters is based in Kibua.

Due to the terrain, the region does not have
mobile phone coverage. Active consideration is being
given by MONUSCO as to how radio communications
can be improved in areas where civilian protection is a
particular concern, despite the huge logistical
challenges related to this exercise. To this end, efforts
are under way to immediately and rapidly install a
high-frequency repeater in Luvingi, to be financed
within existing resources. However, I wish to take this
opportunity to inform the Council that mobile phone
coverage does not exist in the area of operations of
27 company operating bases or temporary operating
bases out of the total of 77 such forward deployments
of MONUSCO forces. The Mission would swiftly
evaluate the technical and financial aspects of
installing similar high-frequency repeaters in the
remaining 27 company operating bases or temporary
operating bases without mobile coverage and would
report to the Council and to the financial bodies. I
would strongly recommend that the Council encourage
such high-frequency installations as a matter of priority
for better and timely contact between the communities
and the forward bases.

The initial reports of the operation are positive,
with 27 FDLR cadres with 12 automatic rifles and
ammunition surrendering at Pinga on the first day, and
three FDLR cadres, with firearms, being apprehended
on the second day in Luvingi. The operations, which
were launched for a period of a week, until
6 September, have been extended in the area until
10 September, and may be further extended after due
evaluation.

Mobile phone coverage available for the other 50
company or temporary operating bases would also be
utilized more effectively. MONUSCO is actively
engaged with the main private telecommunication
providers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with a view to replicating in these company operating
bases, the surveillance centre concept successfully
tested in Kiwanja, North Kivu. Closed user groups will
be obtained from commercial mobile service providers
to allow unlimited calls within a limited number of
users to report imminent threats or attacks. I will
provide further details to Security Council members
and troop-contributing countries in closed meetings so
that the information will not be available to the FDLR
and other groups.
On 1 September, during my stay, MONUSCO
launched Operation Shop Window, a force projection
operation for area domination aimed at protecting
civilians in the region of Pinga, Kibua and Walikale in
North Kivu. The operation is also aimed at providing
security cover to the efforts of the relevant authorities
to apprehend the perpetrators. Shop Window is carried
out by some 750 peacekeepers, supported by attack and

10-50633

It is essential that the perpetrators of this heinous
crime be swiftly apprehended and brought to justice.
Rapid and exemplary punishment would deter others
who might repeat similar criminal acts. MONUSCO
will make all efforts, including a more aggressive
posture of peacekeepers, force multipliers such as
Radio Okapi, and information-gathering on these
people and the like to assist the efforts of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in this direction.
I would like to report that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has already
constituted a commission to bring the perpetrators to
justice. The commission is composed of an operational
military prosecutor, a military magistrate, two judicial
inspectors and special police for the protection of
women and children. However, reports indicate that,
until yesterday, no decision had been taken on the
commission’s date of departure for Walikale, despite
the willingness of various partners to support the
project, including MONUSCO, UNDP and the
American Bar Association, among others. I would
strongly urge the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to take advantage of the
assistance that the United Nations can offer the
commission. In addition, I would like to recommend,
for consideration by the Council, the imposition of
targeted sanctions on the leaders of this group —
including those within and outside the country — if a
chain of command is proven.
More sustained and rigorous efforts need to be
made by the Government and the international
community to implement the five priorities of the
23 March 2009 Peace Agreements. A number of those
demobilized have returned to their former armed
groups, thereby discouraging others from seeking the

5

S/PV.6378

path of demobilization. Furthermore, in the absence of
long-term community reintegration projects, those who
return disillusioned are likely to prove more
recalcitrant and perhaps more virulent in their actions.
The international security and stabilization
strategy remains the main framework for supporting
the Government’s stabilization and reconstruction plan
for war-affected areas. A key objective of that plan is to
develop the State’s capacity to provide security and
enforce the law. Thirty projects are currently being
implemented by United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, for a total value of around $190 million.
But only one of the plan’s programmes is being run in
Walikale, as the region is still not considered safe
enough to commence the stabilization programme.
Nevertheless, efforts need to be made to channel
more projects aimed ultimately at supporting the
stabilization of Walikale and other such remote areas,
focusing on road access, the reintegration of
ex-combatants and the extension of State authority. The
lack of State presence on the ground is directly related
to the lack of State capacity. Financial constraints,
coupled with the lack of a corresponding execution
capability of the State, remain a major challenge. In the
meantime, the United Nations country team has
developed additional programmes, including the
expansion
of
reintegration
programmes
for
ex-combatants, the expansion of road networks and
reinforcement of State capacity in the rule of law and
local governance. I would appeal to the Government of
the Democratic Republic of Congo and to international
stakeholders to make the implementation of these
projects a priority.
Before I provide a brief update on rapes that
occurred in other parts of the country, permit me to
express my regret for the delay in providing
information to the Council in a timely manner. We have
institutionalized mechanisms to speed up the process of
information flow between field offices and mission
headquarters, as well as between mission headquarters
and the Secretariat. The Secretariat remains at the
Council’s disposal to provide a daily briefing on
important developments in this Mission or others,
either to the President of the Council or to the Council
as a whole, as it may decide.
Let me now refer briefly to the rapes in Uvira and
other regions of North and South Kivu. Ten women
were raped by elements of the FARDC on 17 August in

6

Katalukulu, in Fizi territory, in South Kivu. I visited
the area, as requested during discussions in the
Council, on 26 August. While the military prosecutor
has opened an investigation, I hope that justice will be
quick and exemplary. We have indicated clearly to the
FARDC at all levels, from its generals to its lieutenantcolonels — whom I met — that as a national army it
will be essential for the FARDC to maintain a much
higher standard of discipline, good behaviour and
conduct, and observance of human rights.
In North Kivu, on 17 August, there was an attack
by a coalition of FDLR and Mai-Mai Cheka in Mubi,
36 kilometres north-west of Walikale on the WalikaleKisangani axis, slightly on the other side of the road.
Initial reports indicate that several houses were looted
and 50 civilians were kidnapped to transport looted
goods. Two FARDC soldiers died valiantly in that
attack and seven civilians were injured. On 25 August,
eight days later, the civilians were released; only after
that did the reports of rapes start to surface. A
MONUSCO joint protection team was deployed to the
area on 30 August. The team learned that at least 40
rapes had been committed in that village. Furthermore,
in the Pinga area, towards the north-east, in Chuho
market, on the same day, 17 August, Mai-Mai Coalition
des patriotes résistants congolais, along with the
FDLR, carried out 13 rapes.
It appears that many rapes were also carried out
in Shabunda and Mwenga, both in South Kivu, during
July and August. We received reports on 26 August that
in the village of Miki, 74 cases of sexual violence have
been recorded in the past two months, including
against 21 minors, girls aged between 7 and 15 years,
as well as six men. In the nearby villages of
Lubumba, Lusosa, Maheta and Masondjo around 395
houses were burned during the same period. An
evaluation team is being dispatched by MONUSCO to
Miki.
A few days before I was due to leave the
Democratic Republic of Congo, on 31 August, we
received information that in the territory of Shabunda,
between 1 and 20 August, at least 130 cases of rape
had been recorded across nearly 10 villages, including
40 cases in Bubila, 42 cases in Tchateka, 14 cases in
Tshombi and 12 cases in Lumba. There are some
reports, as yet unconfirmed, indicating that in the
village of Kiluma all the women might have been
systematically raped. Shabunda is not connected by
road, and five of the most serious cases were evacuated

10-50633

S/PV.6378

by MONUSCO helicopters to the nearest hospital,
Panzi in Bukavu, on 1 September, as soon as we
learned of this new challenge. The deployment of
protection cluster teams led by UNHCR, using
MONUSCO air assets, was also undertaken from 3 to
8 September, and a second visit is planned for 10 to
17 September.
I hope that the additional measures that I
described earlier in this presentation, particularly the
efforts to apprehend and punish the perpetrators, will
assist in controlling this spike in violence, especially
sexual violence, that we have observed in North and
South Kivu during the past two months.
In order to ensure a comprehensive approach, the
corrective measures I have just outlined will need to be
complemented by other essential efforts, including
maintaining the military pressure on the illegal armed
groups; the implementation of non-military measures
to address the FDLR issue; combating the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, which is clearly
driving the violence in the region; and establishing
effective State authority in the conflict-affected areas. I
must also stress that, considering the temporary nature
of the presence and efforts of the Blue Helmets, the
long-term solution to eradicating the increasing
entrenchment of a culture of sexual violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo lies in building the
capacity of the country’s security and rule of law
institutions and, in particular, transforming the armed
and police forces into protectors of the civilian
population. And, indeed, that is also the key to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s long-term
stability.
Allow me to conclude by making a brief but
important reference to the ongoing United NationsGovernment of Democratic Republic of the Congo
joint assessment that will form the basis of the Security
Council’s decision regarding the next steps on
MONUSCO’s drawdown. The process has so far been
completed in the eastern regions and is still pending for
Katanga, Equateur and the West. The joint assessment
has contributed to the building of a common
understanding
between
the
Government
and
MONUSCO of the remaining threats and security
challenges, including the complex challenge of
protecting the civilian population. A detailed update on
progress in this important process will be provided in
the next report of the Secretary-General, which is due
in October. Nevertheless, the key point I would like to

10-50633

highlight is that the recent spike in violence has
demonstrated the need for a cautious approach
regarding the next steps in the reconfiguration of the
Mission.
To conclude, I feel personally guilty over the
people who have suffered this brutalization and I trust
that we, all of us, will indeed do better next time.
The President: I thank Mr. Khare for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Wallström.
Ms. Wallström: I thank you, Sir, and members of
the Security Council for this opportunity to brief the
Council on this matter of grave concern to the
international community and also to say something
about the role of my Office. A senior member of my
staff, Mr. Tonderai Chikuhwa, accompanied Mr. Khare
on his mission to the affected villages in Walikale
territory.
But I wish to begin, in complementing
Mr. Khare’s account, with the survivors. In Luvingi
village, one of the women spoke of how they had been
forced to live through something like never before. She
recounted how armed men went from house to house
breaking down the doors, and how people were
prevented from escaping because the village had been
surrounded. She described how armed men inserted
their hands into women’s genitals searching for gold.
Many women were gang-raped by up to five or six men
at a time.
The women of the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo deserve better. They are the backbone of
the country and the mainstay of its largely agricultural
economy. Yet in 2010, the sad reality for many women
in the eastern DRC is that they are tired. They are tired
of wondering when their time will come to be robbed,
tortured and raped. For them, there is no safe place.
They are raped when harvesting crops, when going to
market, when fetching water and firewood, when
carrying their babies, and when in their homes at night
among their loved ones. Rape does not end when the
violence is over. Many survivors are permanently
traumatized, unable to return to the fields to earn an
income, resulting in increased poverty, isolation and
despair. Women live in fear of men carrying guns,
often clad in uniform. They cannot distinguish
protector from tormentor.

7

S/PV.6378

If this is not an illustration of why sexual
violence is an impediment to peace, stability and
security, what is? Right now, as we meet here in this
Chamber, thousands of women, children and families
are trying to cope with the trauma of rape. A ripple of
devastation emanates from each crime, bringing with it
disease, depression and despair. There are Congolese
women whose tragic experiences have led them to
conclude that being gang-raped by many men is normal
for a woman.
When I was in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in April, I stressed that the reputation of the
country is being held hostage to the perception that it is
the rape capital of the world. The only way to combat
such a perception is through determined and visible
actions by the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to address impunity and strengthen the
rule of law.
With regard to what must happen now,
humanitarian actors are now struggling to provide
essential health services to survivors. A recent interagency mission to Walikale confirmed that, of the 242
survivors who reached Lubongo Health Centre, most
had received some medical treatment and psychosocial
support. However, none had received post-exposure
prophylaxis to protect her from HIV, primarily because
they were unable to access care within 72 hours of the
incident. Many of the rape victims have still not come
forward to receive urgent medical treatment for fear
that they are still unsafe or due to the risk of being
ostracized by their communities because of the taint of
rape, as we have already heard Mr. Khare recall.
Indeed, rape is the only violation for which
communities tend to stigmatize the victim rather than
prosecute the perpetrator, and where victims feel
shame.
What is particularly disturbing is that the attacks
on Kibua were not an isolated incident but part of a
broader pattern of widespread and systematic rape and
pillage. I am deeply distressed by information that is
now beginning to surface about the large numbers of
rapes in other parts of North Kivu, as well as in South
Kivu, as outlined in stark detail by Mr. Khare.
It is evident that rape is increasingly selected as
the weapon of choice in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with numbers reaching
endemic proportions. The sad reality is that incidents

8

of rape have become so commonplace that they do not
trigger our most urgent interventions.
We know that information on the rapes that
occurred along the Kibua-Mpofi axis was slow to
surface. Therefore, one of the critical lessons we must
take from this tragedy is that the actual reporting of
rape cases should not be viewed as a prerequisite for
robust protection responses. We must be more keenly
attuned to other indicators, including the movements of
armed groups, their proximity to civilian centres,
patterns of looting and pillage, their actions to block
off access to certain areas, and the concerns of local
women about the security situation. These should all
now be considered to be signals that the population is
at risk from exactions, attacks and, increasingly, sexual
violence.
In Walikale, our information suggests that the
rapes were part of a planned and organized attack.
Women were rounded up and prevented from fleeing,
indicating that sexual violence was explicitly used as a
tactic of war and terror. I have previously stressed and
continue to maintain that, where sexual violence is
planned, it must also be viewed as preventable.
Systematic responses to sexual violence have been
elusive because, until recently, it was dismissed as an
unavoidable consequence of war.
At this moment, we are all compelled to look in
the mirror and face our collective responsibility for our
inability to prevent the mass rapes in Kibua. The
United Nations, for its part, cannot afford to shy away
from confronting its shortcomings because such an
examination, carried out in a spirit of transparency and
accountability, must form the basis for improving our
response in the future. Therefore, I welcome and
support the concrete recommendations made by
Mr. Khare in areas where we can and must improve.
That includes our communication with local
communities — particularly women — and our
capacity to collect and analyse early warning
information to trigger timely action.
Through resolution 1888 (2009), the Council has
emphasized better monitoring and reporting on sexual
violence as a basis for a more effective protection
response. Drawing on lessons from the mechanism
established to track grave violations against children
affected by armed conflict, I will prioritize the
establishment of systems for obtaining real-time and
actionable information. It is, of course priority number

10-50633

S/PV.6378

one to make sure that all the information, reporting and
monitoring work well.
However, as we focus on improving the flow of
information and data, we must confront squarely the
fact that we were too slow to respond to existing
information. We should examine the United Nations
response, including that of our peacekeepers on the
ground, not in a spirit of self-recrimination but with a
determination and resolve to do better to protect
civilians in what is undoubtedly one of the most
complex, vast and volatile conflict zones in the world.
We must also bear in mind that if we expect our
peacekeepers to perform more effectively, we have to
ensure that they receive the training, knowledge and
tools to do so. In that regard, I intend to work closely
with the United Nations Development Fund for
Women, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and troop-contributing countries to roll out a new tool
that my Office helped to launch in June this year,
entitled “Addressing conflict-related sexual violence —
An analytical inventory of peacekeeping practice”. It
contains a range of promising practices employed by
peacekeepers to protect women and girls from conflictrelated sexual violence. These ad hoc efforts need to be
systematized and included in predeployment training as
model scenarios that can help peacekeepers recognize
and react to sexual violence by armed groups. This
document provides, for the first time, a knowledge
base to help peacekeepers translate their obligations to
preventing sexual violence into actions. It gives
examples of early warning systems, patrols tailored to
women’s mobility patterns, community liaison
techniques and other tactics that illustrate a gradual
shift from best intentions to best practice.
Turning to another point, the mass rapes in Kibua
indicate a connection, as we have already heard,
between the illicit exploitation of natural mineral
resources, the continuing operations of illegal armed
groups and the high levels of violence against civilians
in general, and women in particular, in lucrative and
strategic areas. We must examine this nexus more
closely as one of the root causes of recent atrocities,
and more broadly of the protracted conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I will continue my
calls for Governments to enact due diligence measures
to track the flow of conflict minerals.
I should also like to stress that the role of the
United Nations in the Democratic Republic of the

10-50633

Congo is to support and not to supplant the
Government as the primary protection and service
provider. It is clear that deploying a well-trained,
vetted and permanent Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo and National Police presence
that prioritizes the protection of civilians is critical in
high-risk zones. I also urge the Government to
reinforce its efforts to address impunity and strengthen
the rule of law, particularly in the context of sexual
violence. For our part, I reiterate the offer to deploy a
team of experts on the rule of law, as called for by
resolution 1888 (2009), to support the Government in
that regard. My Office is in the process of constituting
that team and I hope that we may soon agree on the
timing and modalities for its deployment.
I have also been concerned that the intense focus
on the response of the United Nations has deflected
attention from the most critical element of all —
pursuing and bringing to justice the perpetrators. As
the spotlight falls on the United Nations and what we
could have done differently, the perpetrators — those
who committed or commissioned rape and pillage —
seem to have escaped from the scene of the crime and
slipped into the shadows. This challenges our
collective credibility and undermines efforts to deter
such atrocities in future.
As the Council has heard, we already have some
names, such as Colonel Mayele, the Mai Mai Cheka
Chief of Staff, and Colonel Serafim of the Forces
démocratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), who
was present on the scene. Cheka himself, as well as the
political and military leadership of the FDLR, may
ultimately bear command responsibility for crimes by
their subordinates that they failed to prevent or punish.
These names are a starting point and constitute leads
and leverage by which we may also identify some of
the other participants in and architects of the mass
rapes in Kibua. I believe that we have a narrow
window of opportunity before the trail goes cold and
the attention of the international community and media
turns to other crises, dissipating the pressure on these
groups. My role is to ensure sustained international
attention through public advocacy and direct political
dialogue.
The Council has encouraged systematic United
Nations engagement with armed groups that commit
grave violations against children affected by conflict.
This approach has yielded tangible results. In line with
resolution 1820 (2008), I intend to pursue such

9

S/PV.6378

engagement with State and non-State actors alike to
ensure that perpetrators of conflict-related sexual
violence are held accountable and prevention measures
put in place. In that regard, the Security Council has
unique means at its disposal. This includes the blacklisting of individuals and entities and the imposition of
sanctions and other targeted measures, which add
leverage in our dialogue. I therefore urge the Council
to take such action, beginning with the commanders of
the armed groups responsible for the atrocities
committed in Kibua.
Furthermore, I believe that the Security Council
is primed to take such action through its sanctions
Committee for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Resolutions 1857 (2008) and 1896 (2009), which
specify the mandate of the sanctions Committee,
establish a legal basis for the imposition of sanctions
on individuals operating in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo who commit sexual violence. I urge the
Council to follow up on this provision by mandating
the Democratic Republic of the Congo Sanctions
Committee to gather all necessary information from the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the Committee’s Group of Experts, as well as from
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and other
humanitarian actors who may have relevant
information. My Office stands ready to facilitate such a
process. The FDLR has time and again been
responsible for grave human rights violations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I therefore urge
Member States that have FDLR leaders residing in
their countries to take legal action against them in line
with resolution 1925 (2010).
On the ground in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the United Nations, together with the
Government, last year launched a comprehensive
strategy on combating sexual violence in the country.
The strategy has five pillars: combating impunity,
prevention and protection, security sector reform,
multisectoral assistance for survivors, and data
collection and mapping. It is being supported and
financed by donors through the Government’s
Stabilization and Reconstruction Plan for the eastern
part of the country, and has created a platform for a
coordinated, comprehensive response by all actors. We
need to support and strengthen this coordination
platform, reaching out particularly to NGOs that
provide frontline services. Their critical role has once

10

again been exemplified by the work of such
organizations as the International Medical Corps and
Heal Africa in response to the mass rapes in Kibua.
MONUSCO’s sexual violence unit is charged
with coordinating the implementation of the Strategy.
We must ensure that it has adequate capacity to
effectively perform this function. My role is to help
mobilize resources for the full implementation of the
Strategy, as well as to ensure strategic support from the
United Nations Action Network that I chair.
Finally, we cannot turn back time for the victims
of Kibua or for the countless other survivors of brutal
acts of organized sexual violence. As we strive to help
these survivors, we must do our utmost to ensure there
are no more victims. These unconscionable acts must
spur every one of us as protection duty-bearers to
immediate and concerted action. This is our collective
responsibility to the survivors and our collective signal
to the perpetrators, who are watching and waiting to
see how the world will react. Our policies of zero
tolerance cannot be backed by a reality of zero
consequences.
I intend to return to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo by the end of September to engage with all
stakeholders and, above all, to listen to the survivors.
The President: I thank Ms. Wallström for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): I will be brief. Allow me at the
outset to express to you, Sir, my joy at seeing you
preside over the Security Council this month. Indeed,
you represent a country, Turkey, with which my
country, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, enjoys
very close relations marked by mutual respect and
esteem.
I also thank you for having kindly agreed to
convene this important meeting of the Security Council
on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in particular following the tragedy in Luvungi.
You have thereby given me yet another opportunity to
express my deep disgust over the mass rapes that took
place there a month ago over the course of four days
and nights, in full impunity. Those heinous acts,
wielded as a weapon of war, are yet another chapter in

10-50633

S/PV.6378

the unspeakable suffering of the men and women of the
Congo over the course of more than a decade.
The Council has just heard an exhaustive briefing
from Assistant Secretary-General Atul Khare. I should
like to acknowledge its importance and to offer him my
full appreciation. Similarly, I wish most sincerely to
thank Ms. Margot Wallström, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
for her important statement on the issue at hand. The
briefings of the Assistant Secretary-General and the
Special Representative, which the Council will shortly
consider during its private consultations, should be
followed up with solutions, proposals and specific
action. Some delegations will be tempted to seek the
easy way out by imposing a litany of sanctions that
will have no impact in the reality of the deep equatorial
forests and will be entirely ineffective and incapable of
offering relief from the daily and now commonplace
horror that our men and women have, as I have noted,
experienced for more than a decade.
In the quest for appropriate solutions to these
mass rapes, which we all regret and condemn, I shall
begin by being politically incorrect. The criminals —
at least, those of Congolese nationality — who
committed these reprehensible acts are mostly young
and themselves the products, and thus the victims, of a
war that has gone on far too long and which we have
endured for more then 15 years. This should give us
food for thought with respect to the impact of the war
on the young people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
Nevertheless, a crime is a crime, and in this case
we need to take robust action against the criminals. I
recall that my Government takes the issue of sexual
violence most seriously. Sexual and gender-based
violence are unspeakable and should be condemned
wholeheartedly. They are a scourge that must be
eradicated. A small number of the Mai-Mai bandits
have been identified by the Congolese authorities and
are currently incarcerated and awaiting trial. Similarly,
I must inform the Council that the zero-tolerance
policy followed by the Government will be tirelessly
applied to the uncontrolled elements of the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo who
are found guilty of rape.
But that is not enough. In our humble view, the
Security Council and the Secretary-General would
benefit by instructing the Special Representative for

10-50633

the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to
fully implement the relevant provisions of resolution
1925 (2010), and particularly its paragraphs 6 and
sub-paragraphs (a), (c) to (f) and (h) of paragraph 12
under Chapter VII of the Charter in support of the
Government’s pursuit, arrest and trial of the
perpetrators so that they can be held accountable for
their acts.
It will be recalled that, since 2008, we have
advocated more robust United Nations action, jointly
with us, to put an end to the activities of these agents
of death in our country. At that time, following the
pressure brought to bear by a number of
non-governmental
organizations
(NGOs)
—
particularly international NGOs — that was not
possible. Today, those same NGOs are calling for an
urgent public inquiry into the rapes. I say yes to such
an inquiry. In any case, who could or would dare
oppose such an inquiry? At the same time, however, I
call for an end to a certain hypocrisy. Would such an
inquiry put an end to these atrocities. I doubt that, and
will speak out against this way of making the suffering
and misery of my compatriots into bargaining chips.
I remain convinced that, had the Council deigned
to give the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo sufficient personnel
and equipment in 2008, two years ago, we would be
much further along in the peace process today and in
re-establishing the authority of the Government
throughout the national territory. How many more
rapes and other violations of human rights must we
again condemn before we understand that we must
pursue these terrorists and assassins resolutely if we
are to promote a return to normalcy?
Other delegations will say that it is above all the
responsibility of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to ensure security throughout its
territory and to protect its civilians. That is true, but let
us stop turning a blind eye. If we could do so by
ourselves, we would not have needed MONUSCO or
the whole international presence in our country.
Similarly, if this Council believes that MONUSCO
cannot help us in that respect, then its presence is
totally useless and members will have to draw the clear
conclusion that it must be withdrawn so that we can
address our own demons, be they domestic or
imported.

11

S/PV.6378

Lastly, some delegations will seek to attach
blame for the dysfunctional prevention and response to
the news of the mass rapes. As well noted by the
Assistant Secretary-General, the area of North Kivu
province is larger than that of many European
countries. The province lacks those countries’
infrastructure and services. The rugged terrain and lack
of communications are an explanation, but not an
excuse. The province also has the densest
concentration of armed men in the country, but their
total number is sorely inadequate to covering the areas
of operations in comparison to the abilities of the
armed forces of the European countries. Finally, the
resources of the national police are truly pathetic. How
can the police act in such conditions against assassins
armed with war matériel. It is tantamount to mission
impossible.
What can and should we do? While I appreciate
the recommendations and ideas put forward by the
Assistant
Secretary-General
and
the
Special
Representative, I should also like to advance a limited
number of options.
In the near term, we should provide medical
assistance to the victims. Any assistance, wherever it
may come from and whatever its nature, is welcome. In
that regard, we wish sincerely to thank the United
Nations agencies that have already provided substantial
assistance.
Again in the near term, psychiatric and
psychological treatment for victims is essential. Rapes
having devastated several small villages around
Luvungi and Walikale, it will also be vital to create
space for dialogue that includes local chiefs, churches
and community networks, with a view to preserving the
fabric of the families of those villages as far as
possible. Moreover, perpetrators must be pursued,
apprehended and tried. The Government is already
working to that end. For its part, MONUSCO also
needs to do the same and to assist the Government, as I
have said, under Chapter VII.

12

We need to train and equip national and local
police in order to better ensure the protection of local
people while the army seeks to restore public order.
The Government has already made a request in that
regard. To date, the response has been one of deafening
silence.
Lastly, we need to support the national justice
system. It should be in a position to fully play its role
both in putting an end to impunity and in awarding the
victims restorative justice. It is urgent and important to
provide my country with sound national structures for
the protection of human rights and an appropriate
institutional framework under which criminals must
answer for their acts.
In conclusion, I would like to recall that, in
absolute terms, the Congolese people have by far paid
the heaviest price for the breakdown in international
peace and security, which has continued in the Great
Lakes region for nearly two decades now. Millions of
my sisters and brothers have been massacred. It is they,
not the nationals of another country, who are the
victims of sexual violence.
The horror goes on. Atrocities continue with little
hope for justice. We ask the Council to have the
courage and the political will to decide justly so that
the Congolese people can at last believe in improved
prospects, enabling them to envisage with much greater
calm the future of a country and a region where greater
peace, security, justice and prosperity will reign. For,
ultimately, restoring genuine peace will put an end to
those crimes that we all condemn.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for his statement.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. In accordance with the understanding reached in
the course of the Council’s prior consultations, I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

10-50633
