United Nations

A/RES/58/160

General Assembly

Distr.: General
2 March 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 115

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2003
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/58/506)]

58/160. Global efforts for the total elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and
the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 56/266 of 27 March 2002, in which it endorsed the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference
against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held at
Durban, South Africa, from 31 August to 8 September 2001, 1 as constituting a solid
foundation for further action and initiatives towards the total elimination of the
scourge of racism,
Recalling also its resolution 57/195 of 18 December 2002, in which it outlined
the important roles and responsibilities of the various organs of the United Nations
and other stakeholders at the international, regional and national levels, including, in
particular, the Commission on Human Rights,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolutions 2002/68 of 25 April
2002 2 and 2003/30 of 23 April 2003, 3
Stressing that the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by the
World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 4 attaches importance to the
elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and other forms of intolerance,
Recognizing that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance occur on the grounds of race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin
and that victims can suffer multiple or aggravated forms of discrimination based on
other related grounds such as sex, language, religion, political and other opinion,
social origin, property, birth and other status,

_______________
1

See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2002, Supplement No. 3 (E/2002/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
3
Ibid., 2003, Supplement No. 3 (E/2003/23), chap. II, sect. A.
4
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
2

03 50418

A/RES/58/160

Reiterating that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights
and have the potential to contribute constructively to the development and well-being of
their societies, and that any doctrine of racial superiority is scientifically false, morally
condemnable, socially unjust and dangerous and must be rejected, together with
theories that attempt to determine the existence of separate human races,
Reaffirming its commitment to a global drive for the total elimination of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
Reaffirming that universal adherence to and full implementation of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 5
are of paramount importance for the promotion of equality and non-discrimination
in the world,
Convinced that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance reveal themselves in a differentiated manner for women and girls and
may be among the factors leading to a deterioration in their living conditions,
poverty, violence, multiple forms of discrimination and the limitation or denial of
their human rights, and recognizing the need to integrate a gender perspective into
relevant policies, strategies and programmes of action against racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance in order to address multiple
forms of discrimination,
Reaffirming its firm determination and its commitment to eradicate totally and
unconditionally racism and racial discrimination, and its conviction that racism and
racial discrimination constitute a negation of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 6
Recognizing that the successful implementation of the Durban Programme of
Action requires political will, international cooperation and adequate funding at the
national, regional and international levels,
Deeply concerned that, despite continuing efforts, racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and acts of violence persist and even grow in
magnitude, incessantly adopting new forms, including tendencies to establish policies
based on racial, religious, ethnic, cultural and national superiority or exclusivity,
Alarmed, in particular, at the increase in racist violence and xenophobic ideas
in many parts of the world, in political circles, in the sphere of public opinion and in
society at large, inter alia, as a result of the resurgent activities of associations
established on the basis of racist and xenophobic platforms and charters, and the
persistent use of those platforms and charters to promote or incite racist ideologies,
Underlining the importance of urgently eliminating continuing and violent
trends involving racism and racial discrimination, and conscious that any form of
impunity for crimes motivated by racist and xenophobic attitudes plays a role in
weakening the rule of law and democracy, tends to encourage the recurrence of such
crimes and requires resolute action and cooperation for its eradication,
Recognizing that States should implement and enforce appropriate and
effective legislative, judicial, regulatory and administrative measures to prevent and
protect against acts of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, thereby contributing to the prevention of human rights violations,
_______________
5
6

2

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
Resolution 217 A (III).

A/RES/58/160

Emphasizing that poverty, underdevelopment, marginalization, social
exclusion and economic disparities are closely associated with racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and contribute to the persistence
of racist attitudes and practices, which in turn generate more poverty,
Deeply concerned about the misuse, by those advocating racism and racial
discrimination, of new communication technologies, including the Internet, to
disseminate their repugnant views,
Noting that the use of such technologies can also contribute to combating
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
Noting also developments that have occurred within the framework of the
Commission on Human Rights through its intersessional working groups and other
mechanisms created for the effective implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action, in particular the work of the group of independent eminent
experts, the Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent and the
Intergovernmental Working Group on the Effective Implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action,
Welcoming all the regional initiatives being undertaken to implement the
Durban commitments, and in this context expressing its appreciation to the
Governments of Mexico, Kenya and the Czech Republic for hosting the regional
expert seminars with a view to the implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action within their respective regions, and encouraging other regions
to take the necessary action in this regard,
I
Basic general principles
1.
Acknowledges that no derogation from the prohibition of racial
discrimination, genocide, the crime of apartheid or slavery is permitted, as defined
in the obligations under the relevant human rights instruments;
Expresses its profound concern about and its unequivocal condemnation
2.
of all forms of racism and racial discrimination, including related acts of racially
motivated violence, xenophobia and intolerance, as well as propaganda activities
and organizations that attempt to justify or promote racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance in any form;
Affirms that racism and racial discrimination, and xenophobia and related
3.
intolerance, where they amount to racism and racial discrimination, constitute
serious violations of and obstacles to the full enjoyment of all human rights;
Stresses that States and international organizations have a responsibility
4.
to ensure that measures taken in the struggle against terrorism do not discriminate in
purpose or effect on grounds of race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin,
and urges all States to rescind or refrain from all forms of racial profiling;
Recognizes that States should implement and enforce appropriate and
5.
effective legislative, judicial, regulatory and administrative measures to prevent and
protect against acts of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, thereby contributing to the prevention of human rights violations;
Emphasizes that it is the responsibility of States to adopt effective
6.
measures to combat criminal acts motivated by racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, including measures to ensure that such
3

A/RES/58/160

motivations are considered an aggravating factor for the purposes of sentencing, to
prevent those crimes from going unpunished and to ensure the rule of law;
7.
Urges all States to review and, where necessary, revise their immigration
laws, policies and practices so that they are free of racial discrimination and
compatible with their obligations under international human rights instruments;
Condemns the misuse of print, audio-visual and electronic media and
8.
new communication technologies, including the Internet, to incite violence
motivated by racial hatred, and calls upon States to take all necessary measures to
combat this form of racism in accordance with the commitments that they have
undertaken under the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,1 in particular
paragraph 147 of the Programme of Action, in accordance with existing
international and regional standards of freedom of expression and taking all
necessary measures to guarantee the right to freedom of opinion and expression;
Condemns also political platforms and organizations based on racism,
9.
xenophobia or doctrines of racial superiority and related discrimination, as well as
legislation and practices based on racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance as incompatible with democracy and transparent and accountable
governance;
10. Encourages all States to include in their educational curricula and social
programmes at all levels, as appropriate, knowledge of and tolerance and respect for
foreign cultures, peoples and countries;
11. Stresses the responsibility of States to mainstream a gender perspective
in the design and development of prevention, education and protection measures
aimed at the eradication of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance at all levels, to ensure that they effectively target the distinct situations
of women and men;
12. Expresses its concern at the increasing incidents of racism in various
sporting events;
13. Notes with appreciation the efforts being made by some sporting governing
bodies to combat racism, and encourages other such bodies to take similar actions;
II
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination
14. Urges States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding
to the international human rights instruments that combat racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, in particular to accede to the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination5
as a matter of urgency, with a view to achieving universal ratification by 2005, and
to consider making the declaration envisaged under article 14 thereof, to comply
with their reporting obligations, to publish and act upon the concluding observations
of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, to withdraw
reservations contrary to the object and purpose of the Convention and to consider
withdrawing other reservations;
15. Invites States parties to the Convention to ratify the amendment to
article 8 of the Convention, on the financing of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination, and calls for adequate additional resources from the United
Nations regular budget to enable the Committee to discharge its mandate fully;
4

A/RES/58/160

16. Urges all States parties to the Convention to intensify their efforts to
implement the obligations that they have accepted under article 4 of the Convention,
with due regard to the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights6 and
article 5 of the Convention;
17. Notes that the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
holds that the prohibition of the dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or
racial hatred is compatible with the right to freedom of opinion and expression as
outlined in article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in article 5
of the Convention;
18. Welcomes the emphasis placed by the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination on the importance of follow-up to the World Conference
against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance and the
measures recommended to strengthen the implementation of the Convention as well
as the functioning of the Committee; 7
III
Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
19. Emphasizes that the basic responsibility for effectively combating
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance lies with States,
and to this end stresses that States have the primary responsibility to ensure full and
effective implementation of all commitments and recommendations contained in the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;1
20. Also emphasizes, in that context, the fundamental and complementary
role of national human rights institutions, regional bodies and centres and civil
society, working jointly with States towards the achievement of the objectives of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;
21. Calls upon States to elaborate action plans, in consultation with national
human rights institutions, other institutions created by law to combat racism, and
civil society, and to provide the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights with such action plans and other relevant materials on measures taken to
implement the provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;
22. Calls upon all States to formulate and implement without delay, at the
national, regional and international levels, policies and plans of action to combat
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, including their
gender-based manifestations;
23. Urges States to support the activities of existing regional bodies and
centres that combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance in their respective regions, and recommends the establishment of such
bodies or centres in all regions where they do not exist;
24. Recognizes the fundamental role of civil society in the fight against
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, in particular in
assisting States to develop regulations and strategies, in taking measures and action
against such forms of discrimination and through follow-up implementation;
_______________
7
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/57/18),
chap. XI.

5

A/RES/58/160

25. Emphasizes that, in accordance with the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action, States have a shared responsibility, at the international level and within the
framework of the United Nations system, to determine modalities for the overall
review of the implementation of the Declaration and Programme of Action;
26. Stresses and reaffirms its role as the highest intergovernmental
mechanism for the formulation and appraisal of policy on matters related to the
economic, social and related fields, in accordance with Chapter IX of the Charter of
the United Nations, including in the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up
to the goals and targets set at all the major United Nations conferences, summits and
special sessions;
27. Acknowledges that the outcome of the World Conference against Racism,
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance is on an equal footing
with the outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences, summits and special
sessions in the human rights and social fields;
28. Invites all relevant organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system to become involved in the follow-up to the World Conference against Racism,
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, and invites specialized
agencies and related organizations of the United Nations system to strengthen and
adjust, within their respective mandates, their activities, programmes and
medium-term strategies to take into account the follow-up to the Conference;
29. Invites all human rights treaty-monitoring bodies and all mechanisms and
subsidiary bodies of the Commission on Human Rights to consider the relevant
provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action in the discharge of
their respective mandates;
30. Reaffirms that the Economic and Social Council shall oversee the
system-wide coordination of the implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action;
31. Takes note of the recommendations adopted by consensus by the
Intergovernmental Working Group on the Effective Implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action at its first session, on 21 March 2003; 8
32. Notes that the Working Group will continue its future sessions on the
basis of the thematic approach adopted during its first session, and notes with
appreciation that to this end the next session of the Working Group, which the
representative of Chile has expressed interest in chairing, will analyse the themes
relating to poverty eradication and education;
33. Also notes the convening of the sessions of the Working Group of
Experts on People of African Descent, the renewal of its mandate and the
adjustments effected thereto;
34. Welcomes the inaugural session of the group of independent eminent
experts, held at Geneva from 16 to 18 September 2003, with the participation of
representatives of Member States, the United Nations system and civil society, takes
note of its substantive outcome, and in this context requests the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to examine the possibility of the development of a
racial equality index, as proposed by the group of independent eminent experts, and
to report thereon to the Commission on Human Rights;
_______________
8

6

See E/CN.4/2003/20, sect. III, para. 33.

A/RES/58/160

35. Acknowledges with appreciation the entry into force of the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families 9 on 1 July 2003, and invites all States that have not yet done so to
consider acceding to that important instrument;
36. Notes with satisfaction the progress made during the first and second
sessions of the Ad Hoc Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral International
Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons
with Disabilities, held in New York from 29 July to 9 August 2002 and from 16 to
27 June 2003;
37. Notes with appreciation the first and second sessions of the Permanent
Forum on Indigenous Issues, held in New York from 13 to 24 May 2002 and from
12 to 23 May 2003;
38. Stresses the need to ensure adequate financial and human resources,
including through the regular budget of the United Nations, for the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to carry out its responsibilities
efficiently in the implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;
39. Encourages improvements in the current efforts of the
Anti-Discrimination Unit of the Office of the High Commissioner in providing
strong leadership and greater support to the mechanisms created by the Commission
on Human Rights to follow up the implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action;
IV
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination and coordination of activities
40. Notes with great concern that, despite the many efforts of the
international community, the objectives of the Programme of Action for the Third
Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination have largely not been
achieved, welcomes, therefore, the adoption of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action,1 and calls for its full implementation at the national, regional
and international levels;
41. Decides, after considering the report of the Secretary-General on the
extent of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Third Decade, 10 to
close the Third Decade;
42. Decides also, as part of the activities to combat racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, to place emphasis on the
concrete implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action as a
solid foundation for a broad-based consensus for further actions and initiatives
towards the total elimination of the scourge of racism;

_______________
9

Resolution 45/158, annex.
See A/58/80-E/2003/71.

10

7

A/RES/58/160

V
Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on contemporary forms
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
and follow-up to his visits
43. Expresses its full support and appreciation for the work of the Special
Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, and encourages its
continuation;
44. Reiterates its call to all Member States, intergovernmental organizations,
relevant organizations of the United Nations and non-governmental organizations to
cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur;
45. Requests the Special Rapporteur to continue his exchange of views with
Member States and relevant mechanisms and treaty bodies within the United Nations
system in order to enhance further their effectiveness and mutual cooperation;
46. Recognizes with deep concern the increase in anti-Semitism,
Christianophobia and Islamophobia in various parts of the world, as well as the
emergence of racial and violent movements based on racism and discriminatory
ideas directed against Arab, Christian, Jewish and Muslim communities,
communities of people of African descent, communities of people of Asian descent
and other communities;
47. Requests the Special Rapporteur to collect information from all
concerned, to respond effectively to reliable information that becomes available to
him, to follow up on communications and country visits and to seek the views and
comments of Governments and reflect them, as appropriate, in his reports;
48. Calls upon States to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur and to give
serious consideration to his requests to visit their countries so as to enable him to
fulfil his mandate fully and effectively;
49. Encourages closer collaboration between the Special Rapporteur and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in particular
the Anti-Discrimination Unit;
50. Urges the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
provide States, at their request, with advisory services and technical assistance to
enable them to implement fully the recommendations of the Special Rapporteur;
51. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Rapporteur with
all the necessary human and financial assistance to carry out his mandate efficiently,
effectively and expeditiously and to enable him to submit an interim report to the
General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session;
52. Takes note with appreciation of the recommendations contained in the
interim report of the Special Rapporteur, 11 and encourages the continuation of his
work;
53. Urges Member States to consider implementing the recommendations
contained in the reports of the Special Rapporteur, and invites other relevant
stakeholders to implement those recommendations;

_______________
11

8

See A/58/313.

A/RES/58/160

54. Calls upon the Special Rapporteur, in carrying out his mandate, to pay
special attention to the increasing frequency of incidents of racism at various
sporting events;
VI
General
55. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation
of the present resolution to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session;
56. Decides to remain seized of this important matter at its fifty-ninth session
under the item entitled “Elimination of racism and racial discrimination”.
77th plenary meeting
22 December 2003

9
