126

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

Bearing in mind the widespread and growing concern about the growth of protectionism in developed
countries against the exports of the developing countries,
1. Calls upon the developed countries to adhere
strictly to the commitment concerning the standstill on
new tariff and non-tariff barriers or intensification of
existing ones against the exports of developing countries;
2. Urges the developed countries to eliminate
speedily all forms of protectionist measures and practices against the exports of developing countries, bearing in mind, inter alia, section 1.3, paragraph (a) (x),
of General Assembly resolution 3202 (S-VI) and section I, paragraph 8, of Assembly resolution 3362
(S-VII);
3. Calls upon the developed countries to carry out
structural changes with respect to less competitive
sectors of their economies with a view to expansion
of existing, and creation of new, production capacities
in developing countries.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979
33/197.

Transport and Communications Decade
in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970 containing the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade, 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order and 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Noting with satisfaction the initiative taken by the
Organization of African Unity and the Economic Commission for Africa to establish an integrated African
road network and to rationalize Africa's railway systems and other transport systems in order to facilitate
the promotion of multinational economic co-operation
in Africa, intra-African trade and the political, social
and economic integration of Africa, as well as the
work carried out since June 1977,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2097 (LXIII) of 29 July 1977 on the Transport
and Communications Decade in Africa,
Recalling further General Assembly resolution
32/160 of 19 December 1977, in which,,the Assembly,
inter alia, proclaimed a Transport and Communications Decade in Africa during the years 1978-1988 and
requested the Secretary-General to mobilize all necessary resources to make the Decade a success,
Taking note of resolution ECO(XVIII)/Res.2
adopted by the Executive Committee of the Economic
Commission for Africa at its eighteenth meeting, held
at Khartoum from 2 to 4 May 1978,189 in which measures were proposed for the implementation of the
global strategy and comprehensive programme of work
for the Decade,
189 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Coimcil, 1978, Supplement No. JO, Addendum (E/1978/50/Add.l),
chap. II.

Noting with appreciation the work carried out so
far by the Economic Commission for Africa and the
Organization of African Unity in preparation for the
Decade,
1. Endorses resolution ECO(XVIII)/Res.2 of the
Executive Committee of the Economic Commission for
Afri:::a in which the Committee decided to convene
early in 1979 a meeting of African Ministers concerned
with matters relating to transport, communications,
works and planning, in order to adopt Africa's global
strategy and a comprehensive plan of action for the
implementation of the Transport and Communications
Decade in Africa;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Economic Commission for Africa, as the lead agency
for the Decade, with the necessary financial and staff
resources that will enable it to make all preparatory
arrangements for the Decade, including the preparations for and the convening of the meeting of Ministers
referred to in paragraph 1 above;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to make
all necessary arrangements, as appropriate, for the
convening of a pledging conference of donor countries
and institutions in the first half of 1979 on the basis
of the global strategy and the comprehensive plan of
action and of specific projects contained therein;
4. Urges the international community, in particular
the developed countries, to give full support and to
contribute substantially to the implementation of the
programmes and projects for the attainment of the
objectives of the Decade.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979
33/198.

Preparations for the special session of
the General Assembly in 1980

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/174 of 19 December 1977, in which it decided, inter alia, to convene
a special session of the General Assembly in 1980,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and
3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281
(XXIX) of 12 December 1974 containing the Charter
of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362
(S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and
international economic co-operation,
Considering that the General Assembly is requested
to assess at the special session the progress made in
the various forums of the United Nations system in
the establishment of the new international economic
order and, on the basis of that assessment, to take
appropriate action for the promotion of the development of developing countries and international economic co-operation,
Bearing in mind the ongoing process of the preparation of the new international development strategy,
Recognizing the importance of various United Nations conferences held in recent years on major topics
relating to economic and social development,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the
Director-General for Development and International

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Economic Co-operation with the task of co-ordinating
all preparations for the ~pecial session_ and of preparing, after consultation with the e~ecutive heads o! ~11
the organs, organizations and bodies co~cerned withm
the United Nations system, an analytical repo~t on
developments in the field of international econom~c cooperation towards the establishment of the _new m_ternational economic order since the sixth special session;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
the preliminary version of the report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session through the E~onomic and Social Council at its second regular sess10n
of 1979;
3. Invites the governing bodies of_ the or~ans and
organizations concerned within the {!mted Nat10ns system to assess within their respective areas of competence, the progress made towards the establishment
of the new international economic order, as well as
to indicate the obstacles that impede its establishment,
and to present interim reports to the ~eneral Asse~?lY
at its thirty-fourth session, with a view to ~ubmitti~g
comprehensive reports to the Assembly at its special
session in 1980.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979

33/199.

Multilateral trade negotiations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Recalling the Tokyo Declaration of 1973, 190 calling
for the Tokyo round of multilateral trade negotiations
and setting forth the framework and principles to
govern the negotiations, including, inter alia, the principles of non-reciprocity in trade relations between
developed and developing countries, special and differential treatment for developing countries, and securing additional benefits for the international trade of
developing countries,
Recalling the modified Part IV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade on co-operation and development, stipulating that developed countries should
not expect reciprocity in their trade relations with
developing countries,
Recalling also resolutions 82 (III) of 20 May 1972 191
and 91 (IV) of 30 May 1976 192 of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, in which the
Conference recognized the importance of the multilateral trade negotiations for the developing countries,
190 See General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, Basic
Instruments and Selected Documents, Twentieth Supplement
(Sales No. GATT/1974-1), p. 19.
191 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.11.D.4 ),
annex I.A.
192 Jbid., Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.I0 and corrigendum),
part one, sect. A.

127

Recalling further that the multilateral trade nego~iations were aimed at the achievement of the expansion
and liberalization of world trade in favour of developing countries,
Noting with concern the developments in the !nultilateral trade negotiations and the virtual exclusion of
the interests of developing countries from the process
of negotiation,
Concerned that developed countrie~ are insisti;1g ~n
reciprocal concessions from developmg. countries _m
the field of trade and that the developmg countries
may emerge with a negative_ balance-sheet _from the
negotiations, both in substantive and normative areas,
Emphasizing that the vital interests of developing
countries must be provided for in the outcome of the
multilateral trade negotiations,
1. Calls upon the developed countries to abide by
agreements arrived at in Tokyo, e~pecially wit~ regard
to the principle of non-reciprocity _and speci~l and
differential treatment for the developmg countries;
2. Declares once again that the results of the negotiations must reflect the following elements:
(a) Substantial reduction and ultimate abolition
of tariff and non-tariff restrictions against the trade of
developing countries, in particula~ on products of
special interest to developing countries;
( b) Removal of discriminatory and escalatory barriers against developing countries;
( c) Non-application of safeguard measures,. on a
selective basis, to the trade of developing countries;
(d) Improvement in the operation of the generalized system of preferences to provide wider covera~e
and deeper cuts in tariffs, bearing in mind the provision of section I.3, paragraph (a) (x), of General Assembly resolution 3202 (S-VI) and section I, paragraph 8, of Assembly resolution 3362 (S-VII) on this
subject, as well as the improvement of the system of
information on the generalized system of preferences
in order to enable all developing countries to make
better use of the latter;
3. Reiterates the need for continued efforts aimed
at the reform of the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade and the international trade regime in accordance with the principle of special and differential
treatment for developing countries;
4. Emphasizes that any new codes or rules in the
normative areas of negotiations affecting the trade of
developing countries should not be adopted without
the full participation of and acceptance by the developing countries;
5. Urges all participants in the multilateral trade
negotiations, before the closure of the negotiations, to
assess jointly the implementation, or otherwise, of the
objectives of the Tokyo Declaration concerning additional benefits to the developing countries and to take
corrective measures as necessary in the light of such
a review;
6. Urges the developed countries to extend full cooperation to ensure the successful conclusion of the
current multilateral trade negotiations, having full regard to the special needs and circumstances of developing countries and bearing in mind their just demands for an equitable international trading system
in line with the Tokyo Declaration;
