United Nations

A/RES/58/50

General Assembly

Distr.: General
8 January 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 73 (c)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 8 December 2003
[on the report of the First Committee (A/58/462)]

58/50.

Reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/33 D of 20 November 2000 and 57/58 and 57/59 of
22 November 2002,
Stressing the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States, in the
Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to accomplish the total elimination of their
nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament, to which all States parties to the
Treaty are committed under its article VI, 1
Recognizing that disarmament and non-proliferation are essential for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
Reaffirming the necessity of strict compliance at all times and in all
circumstances by all parties with their obligations under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 2 and the necessity of upholding their
commitments in the decisions and final documents agreed at the 1995 and 2000
Review Conferences,
Noting the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, issued at The Hague on 8 July
1996, 3
Reiterating the responsibility of the nuclear-weapon States for transparent,
verifiable and irreversible reductions in nuclear weapons leading to nuclear
disarmament,

_______________
1
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final
Document, vol. I (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled “Article VI and eighth to
twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15:6.
2
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
3
A/51/218, annex; see also Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, Advisory Opinion, I.C.J.
Reports 1996, p. 226.

03 45591

A/RES/58/50

Stressing the commitment made in the Final Document of the 2000 Review
Conference to the further reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons, 4
Convinced that the further reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons
constitutes an integral part of the nuclear-arms reduction and disarmament process,
Concerned about the threat posed by non-strategic nuclear weapons due to
their portability and proximity to areas of conflict, and thus about the risk of
proliferation and of use,
Concerned also about emerging approaches to the broader role of nuclear
weapons as part of security strategies, including the possible development of new
types of low-yield non-strategic nuclear weapons,
Taking into consideration the lack of transparency and of formal agreements
with regard to non-strategic nuclear weapons,
Emphasizing that further reductions of non-strategic nuclear weapons should
be accorded a higher priority, as an important step towards the elimination of
nuclear weapons, and be carried out in a comprehensive manner,
Agrees that further reductions in and elimination of non-strategic nuclear
1.
weapons should be based on unilateral initiatives and included as an integral part of
the nuclear-arms reduction and disarmament process;
Also agrees that reductions of non-strategic nuclear weapons should be
2.
carried out in a transparent, verifiable and irreversible manner;
3.
Further agrees on the importance of preserving, reaffirming and
implementing the 1991 and 1992 presidential nuclear initiatives of the United States
of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics/Russian Federation on
non-strategic nuclear weapons;
Calls upon the Russian Federation and the United States of America to
4.
formalize their presidential nuclear initiatives into legal instruments and to initiate
negotiations on further reductions of such weapons;
Stresses the importance of the enhancement of special security and
5.
physical protection measures for the transport and storage of non-strategic nuclear
weapons, their components and related materials through, inter alia, the placing of
such weapons in physically secure central storage sites, with a view to their removal
and subsequent elimination by the nuclear-weapon States as a part of the nuclear
disarmament process to which they are committed under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,2 and calls upon all nuclear-weapon States in
possession of such weapons to take the necessary steps in this regard;
6.
Calls for further confidence-building and transparency measures to
reduce the threats posed by non-strategic nuclear weapons;
7.
Also calls for concrete agreed measures to reduce further the operational
status of non-strategic nuclear weapons systems so as to reduce the risk of use of
non-strategic nuclear weapons;

_______________
4
See 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Final Document, vol. I (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled “Article VI and eighth
to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15:9.

2

A/RES/58/50

8.
Stresses the need for an undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States that
possess such weapons not to increase the number or types of weapons deployed and
not to develop new types of these weapons or rationalizations for their use;
Calls for the prohibition of those types of non-strategic nuclear weapons
9.
that have already been removed from the arsenals of some nuclear-weapon States
and the development of transparency mechanisms for the verification of the
elimination of these weapons;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons”.
71st plenary meeting
8 December 2003

3
