UNITED

NATIONS

TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 27 APRIL 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 416) . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . .

Pay

Adoption of the agenda . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8560) . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

s/PV.1416

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND SIXTEENTH MEETING
Held in New York on Saturday, 27 April 1968, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Y. A. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

5. The first speakeron the list is the representativeof
Jordan,on whomI now call.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
HuAgary, ‘India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

6. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): It hasbeen lessthan four
weekssincethe Council met to consideran Israeliviolation
of the cease-fireresolution. Before that the Security
Council had met repeatedlyto considervariousaspectsof
the Israeli full-scalesurpriseattack of 5 June 1967 on Arab
countries. Today the Council has been summonedto a
meeting in responseto an urgent request from my
Government to forestall a situation fraught with danger,
which may have repercussions
far beyond the immediate
area. We have requesteda meetingof the Council in the
face of wide-scalepreparationsfor an Israeli military
parade,unprecedentedin scale,to be held in defianceof
the United Nations. Military paradeshave been held in
Jerusalemyear after year andwehaverepeatedlycalledthe
attention of the United Nations to the fact that they
constituted a clear violation of the General Armistice
Agreement.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 416)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8560).
v*Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

7. The Mixed Armistice Commission
upheld our view and
its decisionwasendorsedby this Council.Thisyear another
parade is contemplated,a parade which is different in
character. It is part of a vicious plan to establishnonexistent rights in the Holy City and presentthe United
Nationsandthe world with anaccomplished
fact.

The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8560)

8. Thisyear my country, whichhassufferedsomuch from
faits accomplis,hasreasonto be speciallyconcernedabout
the Israeliplan to annex Jerusalem,of which the paradeis
only one visible aspect.We have reasonto be concerned
becauseprevious Israeli incursionswere not effectively
checked,and we feel that the Security Councilshouldnot,
in a matter of the utmost gravity asthis, allow the Israelis
to underminethe authority of this Organization.

1. The PRESIDENT (transhted from Russian): The representatives of Jordan and Israel have asked to be allowed to
participate, without vote, in the debate on the agenda item
now before the Security Council.
2. In accordance with rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure and with the usual practice of the Council, I
propose, if there are no objections, to invite the representatives of Jordan and Israel to take places at the Council table
to participate, without vote, in the discussion of this item.

9. On 4 July 1967, the GeneralAssembly at its fifth
emergencyspecialsession
adoptedresolution2253 (ES-V),
on Jerusalem,by a vote of 99 in favour, none against,and
only Israel and the United Statesabstaining.That resolution expresseddeep concernat the situation prevailingin
Jerusalemas a result of the measurestaken by Israel to
change the status of the City. The General Assembly
consideredthosemeasures
invalid and calledupon Israelto
desistforthwith from taking any action which would alter
the status of Jerusalem.The Secretary-Generalwas requestedto report to the Assemblyandthe Security Council
on the implementationof that resolutionnot later than one
week after its adoption. The Israelisdefied that resolution,
and their action prompted the General Assembly to
deplore, in a subsequentresolution /2254 (ES-V)] the

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The Council will now consider the item brought before the Council
by the representative of Jordan in his letter of 25 April

1968 [S/8.560].
4. Before I call on the first speaker,I shouldlike to draw
the attention of the Council membersto the note by the
Secretary-General on this item [S/8561/.
1

1
j

‘I
I

Israeli non-compliance with its first resolution. The General
Assembly reiterated its call to Israel to rescind all measures
already taken and to desist forthwith from taking any
action which would alter the status of Jerusalem.

14. In a memorandum to Mr. Thalmann, dated 26 August
1967, the elected Mayor of Jerusalem, Mr. Pauhi El-Khatib,
his deputy and the members of the Municipal Council
stated clearly that

10. Following the adoption of that resolutipn, the Secretary-General sent a personal representative, Mr. Thalmann,
to Jerusalem to obtain information on the situation.’
Mr. Thalmann visited the Holy City and reported on 12
September 1967 that the Israelis, including the Prime
Minister and the Minister for Foreign Affairs, had made
clear that “Israel was taking every step to place under its
sovereignty those parts of the city which were not
controlled by Israel before June 1967” /S/8146, para. 33/.
Furthermore, Mr, Thalmann said: “The Israeli authorities
stated unequivocally that the process of integration was
irreversible and not negotiable” [ibid., para. 3.51. Mr. Thaimann added, referring to Israeli legislation:

“The Jews are beginning to unveil their projects for the
construction of great buildings in the town and its
surroundings to increase the number of the Jewish
inhabitants to 500,000. The Arabs are afraid that these
projects may be carried out at the expense of their
properties and possessions by confiscation or under
pressure, Likewise they fear that Jews may become the
majority of inhabitants of Jerusalem, thus appropriating
the city, of which the Arabs would retain only
memories.” (See S/8146, annex I, sect. B.]
15. Municipalities, chambers of commerce, lawyers,
unions, leaders and people from all walks of life, from
different cities and villages, submitted memoranda to the
Military Governor of Jerusalem rejecting the measures
taken to annex Jerusalem and reminding the authorities
that the detachment of Jerusalem from the west bank, the
displacement of its inhabitants, the confiscations and the
looting of shops and property constituted serious violations
of international principles and human values.

“Under
the Law and Administration
Ordinance
(Amendment No. 11) Law of 27 June 1967, it was
provided that the law, jurisdiction and administration of
the State should apply in any area of the State of Israel
designated by the Government by order. Under this
provision the Government issued an order dated 28 June
1967 which declared that a territory defined in an annex
was an area in which the law, jurisdiction and administration of the State of Israel were in force. The area
described in detail in the annex included the Old City,
Sur Bahir, Sheikh Jarrah, the Kalandia airport, Mount
Scopus and vicinity and Shufat.” [Ibid., para. 39.1

16. What results did these petitions and complaints by the
representatives of the people accomplish? The Israeli
reaction was very swift; the Israeli authorities intensified
their acts of oppression. Imprisonment and banishment
continued to be the daily practice of the Israelis. However,
the Israelis have not succeeded, and will certainly not
succeed, in breaking the will of the Arab people of
Jerusalem and their determination to be free and not live in
separation or isolation in their homeland.

11. As we have learned to anticipate from the Israeli
authorities, they were busy consolidating their gains by all
means available to them. This fact was generally established
in Mr. Thalmann’s report. Mr. Thalmann was able to ascertain, for instance, that the Israelis had taken drastic
measures to stop the free flow of information to the Arab
inhabitants, thus forcing them to rely solely on the Israeli
media of information. The two daily Arab newspapers
which were published in Jerusal,em have been completely
silenced attd have disappeared.

17. The Arabs of Jerusalem, Christians and Moslems, will
not leave their city, and there is no force on earth that can
eradicate from their hearts the great love they have for their
city and their country. Certainly this great faith they have
in their country and their Holy City has not been shaken in
the least by the successive Israeli acts of persecution and
oppression. It was not shaken by closing the only two Arab
newspapers; it was not shaken by imprisoning or banishing
political leaders; it was not shaken by deporting all those
who said “We cannot accept that Israel should place us
un?ler its sovereignty with a mere stroke of the pen”; it was
not shaken by terrorizing the peopEc in different criminal
whys. The Israelis can inflict more physical suffering; but
our people will remain true to thr+ City, to their country
and to their King.

12. Freedom of information was not the only victim of
the repressive Israeli measures, since those acts were
followed by cruel acts against the human person and
property. Mr. ThaImann’s report made reference to memoranda, statements, resolutions and other communications
submitted to the personal representative of the Secretary
General by Arab personalities, including many officials and
recognized religious leaders. Those communications ranged
from complaints regarding the desecration of Holy Places,
oppressive economic measures, imposed Israeli cultural and
educational systems, and application of repressive Israeli
civil laws to the destruction of homes and Moslem and
Christian Holy Places, the expulsion of thousands of people
and the confiscation of private property.

18. The whole world now knows what happened to the
Maghrabi Quarter in the Old City. It was completely
bulldozed, and its 630 orphans and paupers were displaced.
Three thousand more persons living near that Quarter were
also forced to leave their homes, The Arabs have already
been replaced by Jewish families and Jewish institutions.
TO limit the Arab population in Jerusalem to the minimum,
the Israeli authorities refused to comply vith Security
Council resolution 237 (1967) which called upon is : ’
facilitate the return of those inhabitants who have !‘icd 1.1~
areas.”

13. In spite of all these Israeli atrocities and violations of
international law, Mr. Thalmann stated that he was informed
that the Arab population placed their trust in the United
Nations and relied on the resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly in July 1967.

2

26August
El-Khatib,
11 Council

cts for the
n and its
ke Jewish
that these
of their
or under
rcome the

ropriating
:ain only
lawyers,
ife, from
da to the
measures
uthorities
bank,the
i andthe
violations
Its by the
Le Israeli
ltensified
nishmenl
hvever,
linly not
eople of
ot live in
xns, will
that cat)
for their
ley have
hakenin
tion and
wo Arab
anidiing
all those
placeits
“; it was
criminal
‘kg; but
country
1 to the
npletely
splaced.
ter were
aIready
tutions.
nimum,
iecnrity
; ILL
bed i.te

j
[

19. What is more, according to 17zeJerusalemPost of 12
March, the Israeli Minister of Justice will soon submit a
draft concerning the granting of Israeli citizenship to the
Arabs of Jerusalem.Accordingly, those who refuseIsraeli
citizenship will find themselvesforeigners in their own
homes and will be expelled, and their property will be
confiscated as the property of absentees.With that background, is it advisablefor the Council to wait and not take
any action?
20. Other measureswere resorted to by the Israelisto
make life tnore diffioult for those who decided not to
abandontheir city under any form of pressureor force. The
Israeli authorities resorted to direct confiscation and
expropriation of Arab land.
2 1. On 11 January 1968, 848 acresof Arab land in the
area adjacent to the Old City were expropriated to
construct dwellingunits for Jewsonly. The map I presented
earlier to the Council showsthe location of the land. The
Israeli authoritieshave pursuedtheir systematicattemptsto
change the status of Jerusalem. In the Old City itself,
Jewish religious,social and settlement buildings arebeing
constructed within the Western area of the Wailing Wall
Outside the Old City, a road 30 metres wide has been
constructed to connect the northern part of Jerusalemat
St. Hadria with Mount Scopus, passingthrough newlyplanned Israeli settlement projects to be built on Arab
property.
22. The construction of 1,000 settlementunits in the area
stretching from St. Hadria through the no-man’sland and
on to the northern part of Sheikh Jarrah fields has been
scheduledfor this month. Bidding for the construction of
another 1,000 units in the Police Collegearea at Sheikh
Jarrah beganat the end of March 1968.
23. The St. John Eye Hospital, the oldest and most
reputed Arab eye institute, is to becomea luxurious hotel
following a recommendation taken by the Jerusalem
Economic Conference and announced by Israeli tourist
officials in TheJerusalemPost of 8 April 1968.

and the Jewsin connexion with the WailingWall and the
adjacent areain Jerusalem.The Commissionconsistedof
three jurists from Sweden,Switzerland and the Netherlands,namely, Eliel LGfgren,formerly SwedishMinister for
Foreign Affairs and memberof the Upper Chamberof the
Swedish Riksdag-he acted as Chairman; CharlesBarde,
who was Vice-Presidentof the Court of Justice at Geneva
and Presidentof the Austro-RumanianMixed Arbitration
TribunaI; and C. J. van Kempen,formerly Governor of the
East Coastof Sumatraandmemberof the States-General
of
the Netherlands,
26. The Commission,which wasapprovedby the League
of ‘Nations, held twenty-three meetings during which it
heard argumentsand engagedin collecting evidence. It
heard fifty-two witnesses,twenty-two presentedby the
Jewishsideand thirty by the Moslemside,and oneBritish
officer. It examinedall reports,dispatches,memorandaand
minutes relative to matters connectedwith the Wailing
Wall. It heard argumentsand counter-argumentsof the
lawyers for both sides.Aauni Bey Abdul Hadi of Palestine,
the leading lawyer, together with eleven other lawyers,
Moslemsand Christians,appearedto presentthe Moslem
case.They camenot only from Palestine,but from India,
Morocco, Algeria, Tripoli, Egypt, Syria, Trans-Jordan-asit
was called at that time-Iraq, Iran, the Dutch East Indies
and areasin Africa.
27. What were the findingsof that Commissionof jurists
appointed by the United Kingdomwith the approvalof the
Leagueof Nations?
28. First, the Commission
found that the ownershipof the
Wailing Wall aswell as the possession
of it and of those
parts of its surroundings
accrueto the Moslemsand that the
Wall itself, asan integralpart of the HaramEsh-Sharifarea,
is Moslemproperty.
29. Secondly, the Commissionfound that at no stageof
the investigation did the Jewish sidemake any claim of
ownership either to the WailingWall or to the Maghrabi
Quarter or to any part of the areasnow subjectedto the
Israeli changesand aggression.
The Commissionstatedthat
the Jewish side, when making its claim, expresslystated
that they “do not claimany proprietary right to the Wall”
/ibid./.

24. Much has been said by the Israelis about “our
Jerusalem”, “our city”, “our progress”in Jerusalem.They
speak of the city as if it were theirs dnd theirs alone and
they resort to every conceivable meansto give respecta- 30. Thirdly, the Commission
found that no matter how
bility and credibility to this false and unfounded contenone looks at the Jewishclaim,it doesnot exceed a claim
tion. The Israelis have no valid claim to Jerusalem.As
for a privilege to visit the Wall and that this privilege has
regardssomeof the religious shrines,I have had occasion evenresultedfrom MoslemandArab tolerance.
recently to call the attention of the United Nations
Security Council to an impartial report entitled “Report of
31. Fourthly, the Commissionfound that even the pavethe Commissionappointed by His Majesty’sGovernmentin
ment and the areacoincidentwith it wereMoslemproperty
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
and constituted MoslemWaqf, or Moslemreligiousendowwith the approval of the Council of the Leagueof Nations,
ment, by Afdal, the sonof Saladin,in 1193A.D.
to determinethe rights and claimsof MosleinsandJewsin
connexion with the Western or Wailing Wall at Jerusalem”, 32. FifthlY, the Commissionfound that the buildingsof
which, at the request of my delegation[see letter of 23
the Maghrabi Quarter, which were recently bulldoied by
February 1968, S/8427 and Add.11, was distributed asan
the Israeli authorities-wereput up in 1320A.D. “to serve
official document,
as lodgings to Moroccan pilgrims” and were alsomade a
MoslemWaqf-religiousendowment-by Abu Madian.
25. That report embodiesthe findings anddecisionsof the
Commissionthat was appointed by the United Kingdomto
33. Sixthly, the Commissionfound that the Moslem
determine the rights and the claimsof both the Moslems pilgrims and Arab inhabitants of Jerusalemwere alWaYS
3

religious buildings and religious sitesin the Arab city of
Jerusalem.

alert to the Jewish attempt to exploit Arab tolerance in
order to claim, at a later stage, the right to ownership; that
in 1911, the guardian of the Abu Madian Waqf (Maghrabi
Quarter) complained that the “Jews, contrary to usage, had
placed chairs on the pavement, and he requested that ‘in
order to avoid a future claim of ownership’ the present
state of affairs should be stopped” [ibid.]. That was a
complaint to the British Administration. The Arab side
argued that after stools would come benches, then the
benches would become fixtures and before long the Jews
would have established a legal claim to the site. That was in
1911. The Arabs were aware of this vicious, sinister
cupidity in 1911; they warned against it. Recognizing the
merits of the Arab contention, the British Administrative
Council decided that it was not permissible to place any
article on the Waqf property that could “be considered as
indications of ownership” [ibid.]. That was the British
finding, which coincided with the findings of the Commission of jurists nineteen years Later.

38. A new project for the Wailing Wall and the adjacent
area is now in progress.It embodiesthe enlargingof the
Westernareaof the Wall by four metresandthe plantingof
treesat a width of 1.50metres.
39. On 27 July 1967, only thirteen days after the
adoption of the secondGeneralAssemblyresolution,two
membersof the British Parliament,Ian Cilmore and Denis
Walters,who with a party of their colleagues
hadvisitedthe
area in Jerusalemto investigate the situation, reportedto
The Timesof London of the samedate that “In Jerusalem
we saw the rubble of Arab houses which have been
demolishedto make a large plaza anda car park in front of
the Wailing Wall.” The Israeli plans embody additional
construction nearthe WailingWall.
40. As hasbeen establishedin the report of the Commission of jurists to which I have referred, the WailingWalland
the entire adjacent area are an integral part of the Haram
Esh-Sharif, which hasbeen clearly determinedas Moslem
property. The demolition of the Maghrabi Quarter is a
thinlyveiled attempt to impair the sacredcharacterof the
area and to cast a shadowof doubt on the questionof
ownership and possession.
It also offends the feelingsof
hundreds of millions of Moslemsaround the world and
presentsthem with an open challengeandbrazendefiance,

34. Seventhly, the Commission found that the British
Government had stated to Parliament in the White Paper of
November 1928 that the Western or Wailing Wall “is legally
the absolute property of the Moslem community and the
strip of pavement facing it is Waqf property, as is shown by
documents preserved by the Guardian of the Waqf” (ibid./.
It is interesting to hear that the United Kingdom said this in
1928.
35. Things have not changed; the legal validity has not
changed. All these facts about the legal situation in
Jerusalem make it unmistakably clear that all the recent
Israeli measures are, in fact, naked aggression, and make
nonsense of the cynical Israeli allegations that these are
simply’administrative measures.

41. The recent illegal expropriation of 838 acres(3,345.
&mums) of the areaadjacentto the Old City of Jerusalem
is but another sinister attempt aimed at the eventual
eradication of Arab presencefrom the area The leadersof
Jerusalemhave alwaysbeen alert to twisted methodsused
by the Zionists to gradually changethe statusquo of the
Wailing Wall and the adjacentarea.This continueddefiance
of international law and of the General Assemblyresolutions on Jerusalem,together with the arbitrary actsof the
Israelis within the Arab City of Jerusalem,call for
immediate action. Unlessthe continuing Israeliviolations
stop, they; will constitute a permanent danger and a
constant menaceto peace.

36. The Israeli bulldozing of Arab property in the
Maghrabi Quarter defies Arab rights which had been
adjudicated and affirmed by a competent body constituted
with the approval of the League of Nations. It also makes a
mockery of the two General Assembly resolutions [2253
(ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V)/ on Jerusalem which called upon
Israel “to rescind all measures already taken and to desist
forthwith from taking any action which would alter the
status of Jerusalem”. It is also an encroachment on the
second holiest place in Islam, the Aksa Mosque and the
Haram EslbSharif, and a violation of the Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949.1 Article 53 of the Geneva
Convention expressly prohibited any destruction by the
occupying Power of real or personal property belonging
individually or collectively to private persons or to the
State, or to other public authorities or to social or
co-operative organizations. No military operations are
taking place in Jerusalem now, but the Israelis are still
destroying and bulldozing private property in the area
adjacent to the Old City.

42. The Israeliauthoritiesare now contemplatingholding
a military paradeon 2 May 1968 in Jerusalem.Mr. Kollek,
an Israeli official, told the pressthat the paradewill starton
the Jerusalem-Ramallah
road, some 300 metresnorth of
Sheikh Jarrah, which is part of recently-occupiedArab
territory, and the reviewingstand will be there. The parade
will go past the foot of Mdunt Scopus,proceedthrough
Wadi Egoz (Jhoz) to the Rockefeller Museumandturn west
to DamascusGate. By looking at the map attachedto my
letter of 18 April 1968 [S/8549/ you will seethat the
route mentionedabove,which is about five kilometres,isin
the Old City of Jerusalemand in the other Arab territory
occupied since5 June 1967. Nearly half the route I have
referred to is in recently occupied Arab Jerusalem.The
processionwill then continue beyond the demilitarized
zone. This new act of provocation ispart of the Israeiiplan
aimedat the complkteannexation of Jerusalemin defiance
of the United Nationsresolutionsand authority. According
to Israeli authorities, this parade will be the biggestand
longest in Israel’shistory. The Israelisintend to bring into

37. On 5 January 1968, I brought to your attention the
fact that the Israeli authorities are embarking on a plan for
changing the sacred character of the Moslem Holy Places,
1 GenevaConventionrelativeto the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 7.5 (1950),
No. 973).

4

city of

tcljacen
of th
nting 0

ter the
In, twa
d Denis
ited the
lrted ta
usalem
e been
iont of
litional
ommis.
‘all and
Harani
doslem
er is a
of the
;ion of
ings of
Id and
fiance.
(3,345
usalem
rentual
ders of
Is used
of the
:fiance
resolu.
of the
ill for
lations
and a
olding
:ollek,
art on
rth of
Arab
parade
rough
1 west
to my
st the
I, is in
ritory
: have
, The
jrjzed
i plan
‘iance
lrding
t and
; into

Jerusalem for this parade heavy military armament in
excess of that allowed for in the Armistice Agreement. This
was confirmed by the Israeli radio on 24 and 25 April
1968, which quoted Colonel Eliezar Imitar, the officer-incharge of the military parade, as saying:

parade in Jerusalem on 2 May 1968. From reports
received the intended parade would appear to be of a
military nature and much of it will take place on the east
side of the armistice demarcation line and in part of what
is known as the ‘Old City of Jerusalem’.

“The parade will include 360 military aircraft of all
makes used by the Israeli Air Force. Among these will be
Sky Hawk fighter-bombers, planes and Bell 205 helicopters bought lately from the United States.

“The Secretary-General feels obliged to convey in this
note the concern about these reports which he has
already expressed orally in talks with the representative
of Israel. The Secretary-General wishes to emphasize that
the holding of a military parade in this area at the present
time will almost surely cause an increase in tension in the
Near East and could well have an adverse effect on the
efforts now going forward to find a peaceful settlement
of the problems in the area.

“Infantry and armoured units will parade for 9 kilometres starting from Shuufat (an Arab occupied village)
and ending in Tel-Biyout.
“The armoured units will include 400 pieces, including
190 tanks, and 2,000 soldiers and officers will take part
in the infantry units.”

“The Secretary-General’s concern about the proposed
military parade in that part of Jerusalem mentioned
above also relates specifically to pertinent resolutions of
the General Assembly [resolutions 2253 [ES-V) and
2254 (ES-V)] and of the Security Council [resohrtion
162 (1961)j, and to his position on the General
Armistice Agreement between Israel and Jordan as stated
in the introduction to his annual report, 16 June 1966-15
June 1967, paragraph 43.”

Y’$3. This p rovocative act constitutes a breach of the
Armistice Agreement and a violation of Security Council
resolution 162 (1961) of 11 April 1961, which endorsed
the decision of the Mixed Armistice Commission of 20
March 1961 (see S/4776]. That decision condemned such
Israeli acts and called upon the Israeli authorities to take
the strongest measures to prevent the recurrence of such a
breach of the Armistice Agreement. It called upon Israel to
refrain in future from bringing into Jerusalem any equipment in excess of that allowed for under the terms of the
Armistice Agreement. It may be recalled that only three
members of the Security Council abstained from voting on
that resolution-namely,
the Union of Soviet SociaIist
Republics, Ceylon and the United Arab Republic-on the
ground that the resolution was not strong enough. In doing
SO, they emphasized the need for a more effective resolu..
tion to prevent a recurrence of such Israeli violations. All
other members voted for the resolution. We, too, were not
happy with that resolution. We hope that the members who
maintain that the resolution offered an adequate remedy
will find it appropriate to take more effective measures
now. As a first step the Security Council should affirm its
resolution and call on Israel not to hold the military parade
in Jerusalem.

45. We did not come to this Council two days earlier, for
we wanted every constructive effort to be given adequate
time. It is not a pleasure for us to come to complain to the
Security Council.
46. The Israeli parade further violates General Assembly
resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V) of 4 and 14 July
1967, both of which called upon Israel “to rescind all
measures already taken and to desist forthwith from taking
any action which would alter the status of Jerusalem”.
Those are two General Assembly resolutions endorsed by
fourteen out of fifteen members around this table. Those
resolutions are intended to be reaffirmed and implemented.
47. The Israeli parade comes at a time when genuine
efforts are being made to implement Security Council
resolutions and bring peace to the area. Those efforts-and
we are grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for emphasizing
this point-are, as my Government maintains, being
obstructed by the Israeli authorities. The parade and other
violations I mentioned earlier will certainly undermine
those efforts and add to the gravity of the situation.

44. We submitted a letter earlier to the President of the
Security Council and to the Secretary-General about the
parade. We did not come to the Council on that same day
or on the second or third day, for we hoped that the efforts
of the Secretary-General would bring about results. It is not
a pleasure for Jordan to come complaining to the Security
Council. However, nothing happened other than the constructive efforts of the Secretary-General. He sent a note,
which is incorporated in document S/8561 of 26 April
1968. Up to this moment, as far as I am aware, no answer
has been given to that note. In paragraph 4 of that
document the Secretary-General states: “No reply to this
note has so far been received from the Government of
Israel.” I should like to quote verbatim the SecretaryGeneral’s note:

48. The Secretary-General rightly emphasised that the
hoIding of a military parade in that area at the present time
would almost surely cause an increase in tension in the Near
East and could well have an adverse effect on the efforts
now going forward to find a peaceful settlement of the
problems in the area.
49. In Jerusalem, Arab lawyers, realizing that it was
impossible to approach the Israeli authorities and obtain a
positive reaction, addressed a petition to the United
Nations concerning the prevention of such a huge contemplated parade passing through their city.

“The Secretary-General of the United Nations presents
his compliments to the Permanent Representative of
Israel to the United Nations and has the honour to refer
to the reported decision of the Israel authorities to hold a

50. Moreover, on Thursday, 25 April, the day before
yesterday, 300 representatives of Christian and Moslem
5

women in Jerusalem dressed in black and carrying placards,
demonstrated in protest against the Israeli parade. When
told to go home they shouted: “Arab Jerusalem is our
home”. The police then used force and began to tear the
placards and banners from the women and forcibly pushed
them away from the streets. They resisted, and the street
became a scene of Israeli cruelty against helpless, defenceless Arab women. They had only the broken banner sticks
to use for resisting that brutality. They faced Israeli rifle
butts and clubs with their hands and broken placard sticks.
The fighting spread to the sidewalks. They continued their
resistance, shouting “,&~Qhu akb&--“God is greater”. The
New York Times commented on that yesterday that
‘;lllahu akbd wasto the Arab what “We shallovercome”
wasto the AmericanNegroprotesters.Men on the streetsat
that time joined the women in shouting “Allahu akbar”.
They were alsobrutally attackedby the Israelis.
51. As a result of that Israeli brutality, the protesters
could not reachthe Israeliauthorities to deliver a petition
against the military parade.Eleven Christianand Moslem
women leaders and two men, who were chargedwith
encouraging the demonstratingwomen, were detained.
While the demonstrationwascoming to an end, the Arab
City of Jerusalemwasengulfedwith the roar of Israelijets
flashingby in practice for the contemplatedparade.
52. It has been noted that the Israelishave’bbughtlarge
quantities of the well-known Arab head-dress-/co&hand
ikal-to be worn by Israeli civilians to deceivethe world
public into believing that the Arabs were participating in
the parade and rejoicing. The Israeli plans have also
provided for forcing Arab studentsto line up on both sides
of the route, thus constitutinga humanshieldandhostages
againstany Arab resistance.
53. In my openingremarksI havestatedthat the situation
is fraught with dangerand if we comebefore the Council
today it is to requestthat the United Nationsresolutionsbe
implemented.Failure to take adequatestepsto meet the
Israeli defiancereflects on the effectivenessof the Security
Council.
54. Let me reiterate that failure to take an adequate
decisionwill affect the very existenceof this body which is
the principal organ of the United Nations responsible
for
peace and security. The Leagueof Nationsdied becauseit
wasunable to carry out its decisions.The Security Council
should live. The Security Councilis duty bound to put an
end to Israeliarroganceand actsof lawlessness.
By an act of
aggression
the Holy City of ,Jerusalem
wasoccupied,By an
act of aggressionthe City of the Prince of Peacewas
annexed. By a contemplatedact of defianceand provocation the authority of the United Nationsis being undermined. The Security Council shouldnot, by sheerinaction,
encourageor be a party to theseIsraeliviolations.
5.5. The present problem is a test of the effectivenessof
the Security Council. Failure to take immediateaction will
shatter confidencein the United Nationsand will dispel any
remaininghope in its ability to maintainworld peace.If no
resolute action is taken to cope with the problem, the
Security Council will in effect be proclaimingits impotence
to the whole world. In effect, it will be admitting to small

countries,like Jordan, that there is in fact no guarantee
in
the United Nations againstaggression,and that bruteforce
seemsto be the only way t-o restore a right; that cnly
resistance,with more ,escalatlon and more sufferingand
more bloodshed and more war, will bring peacewiti
justice.
56. In their consultations and in formulating a draft
resolution, I ask and I appeal to all my colleagues
around
this table to ponder thesepoints very carefully.
57. According to Tile New York Times of this mor&ag,
Mr. Dayan, the Defence Minister of Israel, warnedJo&a
that:

“Jordan may bring about a situation . . . in whichthe
Jordan Valley will turn into a battlefield. Therewill sot
be room there for civilian life, for families, children,
cattle and agricultural Cultivation cannot go hand in haad
with actsof war.”
HewarnedJordan againstbecoming“the swordof the .A&
States”. Jordan is the sword of its people; almosthalf of
them are now

victims Of Israeli occupation,

oppression aad

humiliation.
58. Whether there will be peaceor war in the arealiesin
the handsof the Security Council to a very great extent,
59. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):I callan
the representativeof Israel.
60. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Thank you, Mr. President,
Again we meet in the Security Council; this time at
Jordan’sinitiative. Twenty yearsafter Jordanhad launched
its war of aggression against Israelin defianceof the United
Nations, five months after the Security Council hadcalled
for a just and lastingpeacein the area,four weeksafterthe
Security Council had decided that violations of the cease.
fire cannot be tolerated, Jordan comesbefore this organ
not to declarethe end of war, not to embracethe cause
of
peace, not to renounce warfare by armed attack, raid and
sabotage,but to blaspheme and mock and desecrate
Jerusalem,the crown of the Jewish people,Jerusalem,
the
focusof universalspiritual veneration.
61. What is it that has aroused the displeasureof the
Governmentof Jordan? What is it that Jordan objectsto?
The Government of Jordan finds it appropriate to come
before the Security Council and complain about the
celebration

of Israel’s independence,

the reconstruction

of

synagoguesand housesof learning destroyedby Jordanian
vandalismin the Jewishquarter of Jerusalem,the measures
taken to restoresomesemblanceof life on the siteof Nafi
Ya’qub, in the north-easternpart of the Jerusalemarea,a
Jewishvillage razed to the ground by the Jordaniansaad
turned into an Arab Legion camp. The JordanianGovernment is grieved to seethe WesternWall of King Solomon’s
Temple rise againin its tragic glory, freed at last from the
slums,the dirt, the profanation which the Jordanianshave
heapedon it.
62. To Amman, Israel’s independence is an object of
vilification; Jerusalem’sreconstruction, anathema.Amman

6

nteein
5 force
.t only
~g alld
? with
draft
Iround

ch the
iU not
ildren,
I hand

! Arab
mlf of
111and
lies in
It.
all on
ident.
ne at
ached
Med
:aIled
:r the

XilSCorgan
1.wof
I and
mate
I, the

r the
3to?
:on1c
the
Ml of

minn
surcs
Ndi
ea, a
i and
wnion’s
1 the
have
t of
man

would have. Israel in mourning rather than in celebration
and Jerusalem hi the state 0f destruction and humiliation in
which Jordan has kept the eastern part of the city since its
conquest in 1948, rather than in rebirth and restoration.

“As the dawn of the Friday, 28 May 1948, was about
to break, the Jewish Quarter emerged convulsed in a
black cloud-a cloud of death and agony.”
70. When the din of battle died down the invader was able
to apply himself more thoroughly to the rape and ravage of
the city. In the Jewish Quarter all but one of the thirty-five
Jewish houses of worship that graced the Old City of
Jerusalem were wantonly destroyed. The synagogues were
razed or pillaged and stripped and their interiors used as
hen-houses and stables. In the ancient historic Jewish
graveyard on the Mount of Olives, tens of thousands of
tombstones were torn up, broken into pieces or used as
flagstones, steps and building materials in Jordanian
military installations and civilian constructions, including
latrines. Large areas of the cemetery were levelled and
converted into parking places and petrol filling stations.
These acts of desecration have been reported in a document
submitted to the Security Council [see S/8439 a& Add.1
of 6 March I968].

63, The world has not forgotten how Jordan, together
with other Arab States, trampled the United Nations
Charter and its resolutions, invaded Israel in 1948, and
proclaimed: “This will be a war of extermination and a
momentous massacre which will be spoken of like the
Mongolian massacres.”
64, This is what actually took place wherever the Arab
forces succeeded in retaining territory invaded by them, On
the west bank, the Jordanian armies did not leave a single
Jewish community intact. All Jewish villages in the areas
occupiGd by ‘,Jordan were completely wiped out. Not a
single Jew was left alive in the territories under Jordanian
control. When, for instance, the village of Kefar ‘Ezyon
surrendered to the Jordanian Army, after having defended
itself to the last round of ammunition, all but four of the
220 inhabitants were mercilessly butchered before the eyes
of Jordanian officers. However, the worst fate was reserved
for Jerusalem.

71. Again the world stood by in silence. Nobody raised his
voice. Where are the Security Council resolutions about the
destruction of Jewry’s Holy Places and religious sites in
Jerusalem? Where arc the Security Council resolutions
condemning the desecration of the cemetery on the Mount
of Olives? Where arc the Security Council interventions
about Jordan’s refusal to .allow free acceSs to Holy Places
and to the humanitarian institutions on Mount Scopus, in
accordance with the General Armistice Agreement? When
had the Security Council called on the Jordanian invaders
stationed on the Old City walls to desist from keeping
Jerusalem’s population under constant menace, from firing
indiscriminately, from satisfying the lust for blood in the
murder of children, innocent archaeologists, unsuspecting
tourists? What action did the Security Council take last
May when Jordan joined the conspiracy of the Arab States
that closed the Strait of Tiran, amassed huge armies on
Israel’s borders and proclaimed that the time for Israel’s
annihilation had come?

65, The Arab Legion besieged the city and launched an
indiscriminate artillery bombardment sparing no residential
quarter, disregarding completely the Holy Places. Jerusalem
was cut off on all sides. Starvation, pestilence and thirst
stalked the streets, and death dug daily new graves. The
siege continued for weeks. The toll of death increased.
Convoys with food supplies to the unfortunate inhabitants
were ambushed. The Arabs did not take prisoners. All men
and women were being massacred. Not even medical
assistance was respected.
66. On 13 April 1948, for instance, a convoy of doctors,
nurses and medical supplies to the Hadassah Medical Centre
was ambushed and set afire. Seventy-seven eminent doctors
and nurses were killed.

72. Is all that already forgotten? The people of Israel have
not forgotten.

67. The Jews of Jerusalem looked in desperation toward
the United Nations to stop the killing, to put an end to
aggression. The Jews of Jerusalem looked expectantly
tpward the great Powers to relieve the city’s agony. In vain.
The aggression continued. The aggressor stayed on in the
city. He stayed on for nineteen years.

73. Last June, when Jordan faced the choice between
peace and war, it wilfully rejected peace and chose war. King
Hussein described it as follows:
“On 5 June, after the fighting had already started, the
Norwegian General of the United Nations, Odd Bull,
handed me a communication from the Israel side to the
effect . . . that if we would refrain from attacking we
would escape the consequences that otherwise would be
inevitable, By that time, however, we had no choice.”

68.

Is all this forgotten already? The people of Israel have
not forgotten.
69. This how Abdullah cl-Tal, the Commander of the
Jordanian
invasion forces, describes the battle in his
memoirs:

74. When the Jordanian Army opened its frontal attack
against Israel, it was again Jerusalem that became the target
of the principal onslaught. Jerusalem was again under
Jordanian shell fire. Jordanian guns placed within the
confines of the Holy Places, Jordanian machine-guns firing
from the roof of the Omar Mosque opened up with a
deathly barrage against the city, aiming to kill as many
inhabitants as possible and destroy as much of the city’s
housing as could be attained.

“ . * . The operations of calculated destruction were set
in motion . . . I knew that the Jewish Quarter was densely
populated with Jews who caused their fighters a good
deal of interference and difficulty . . . I embarked, therefore, on the shelling of the Quarter with mortars, creating
harassment and destruction . . . Only four days after our
entry into Jerusalem the Jewish Quarter had become their
graveyard. Death and destruction reigned over it . . .

7

“You fool,” replied the other, ‘how good the situation is in
Israel if people are free to strike and demonstrate there.”

75. The letter dated 19 April 1968 addressed by the
Jordanian
representative
to the Secretary-General
[S/85.52], depicting damage to a number of churches on
Mount Zion, astonishingly omits the simple but crucial fact
that the damage was the result of Jordanian shelling in
attacks in 1948 and 1967. The churches and the cemetery
remained inaccessible and neglected because Jordanian
aggression left the compound in a “no-man’s land” between
the Armistice Lines, Of course, truth matters little when
the fantasies of hate reign supreme. Nor does the letter tell
us how Jordanian fire was directed last June at the
world-renowned Dormition Church on Mount Zion, causing
grave damage to it.

81. Could the Jews imprisoned today in Egyptian concentration camps hold a demonstration? Could the Jews
enclosed in the Damascus ghetto, could the Jew of
Baghdad, oppressed and discriminated against by new
hitlerite laws, demonstrate? Has the Government represented by the Jordanian delegate left a single Jew alive in its
territories who could demonstrate?
82. Must I recite again the long list of riots and demonstrations that have taken place in the cities of the west bank
and eastern Jerusalem during Jordanian rule? Should 1
again tell the Council of the thousands of Arab citizens
arrested by the Jordanian authorities in actions against
demonstrators, of the scores of Arab inhabitants exiled asa
result of those riots? Must I remind the Jordanian
representative how forces of the Jordanian army, employing tanks and tear gas, had been used repeatedly to put
down such demonstrations?

76. Today, the invader of 1948, the aggressor of 1967,
Jerusalem’s destroyer and desecrator, comes to complain
that the city is healing the wounds and removing the scars
he has inflicted upon it. The reign of terror, profanation
and ruin must be perpetuated, he suggests. The devastation
of Jerusalem should, he tells us, remain a monument to the
outrages of his conquest and rule.
77. He complains about an Israeli Independence Day
parade. He, the aggressor, who for nineteen years has led
the parade of peril and violence and demolition in
Jerusalem, now turns his wrecking zeal against Israel’s
twentieth anniversary of regained freedom and sovereignty.

83. Let the Jordanian representative come to Jerusalem, as
some of his compatriots are in fact doing, to see for himself
which Jerusalem is more peaceful, the united city of today
or the divided one under Jordanian occupation. Let him
come and see for himself where there is more freedom and
democracy: in Cairo, in Damascus, in Amman or in
Jerusalem.

78. It is not the parade that Jordan opposes but the
paraders. It is not the parade Jordan hates but what it
stands for-Israel’s existence, Israel’s liberty, Israel’s rout czfi4. Jordan bases its claims on the General Armistice
Agreement between Israel and Jordan. With what nostalgia
of Arab aggression. Had Jordan shed its destructive policy
the representative of Jordan dwelt on this Armistice as if its
of belligerency, it would not have tried again, as in the past,
only purpose had been to prevent Israeli military parades in
to upset Israel’s national holiday. Had the Jordanian
Jerusalem. He has conveniently left out the fact that the
Government abandoned irresponsible thought and action it
Armistice was a provisional agreement, valid as “a transition
would have been spared the illusion that it can dictate to
to permanent peace”, that it was judged by the Security
Israel how to celebrate its holiday, a right enjoyed by all
Council to be incompatible with belligerent rights, that his
nations in the world, a right on which no nation would
Government had flouted the Agreement for nineteen years
accept any outside interference.
by invoking the rights of war and tenaciously repudiating
the central provisions of the Agreement, in particular
79. What is perhaps most remarkable in Jordan’s objecarticles I, III, VIII and XII. The 1949 Armistice Agreetions to the Israeli Independence Day parade is the claim
ment,z which should have been succeeded in 1950 by a
that it would aggravate the situation in the area. Is not
peace treaty, had become by 1967 a formula for belligerJordan misjudging the credulity of the world? Does the
ency, a cover for armed attacks and incursions, an alibi for
Jordanian Government really believe that it is possible to
refusal to make peace. It was finally destroyed by Jordan
accept that the situation is aggravated not by the continuawlien on S June 1967 the Jordanian Government opened
tion of war against Israel, not by the refusal to make peace
up its general military onslaught against Israel. The repre.
with Israel, not by the persistence in active warfare by
sehtative of Jordan now tries to use the Armistice ghost as a
armed attack, terror and sabotage, not by official declarations that Israel must be exterminated, but by a one-time
screen for further warfare and hostility against Israel.
parade? Surely there must be a limit to the absurdities that
85. However, it is not only to disturb Israel’s indepenthe world would accept from Jordan.
dence festivities that the Armistice is brought out of the
dusty closet. There is an aim even more.sinister behind the
80. The Jordanian representative has mentioned a demonJordanian claims. The United Nations is now engaged in an
stration a few days ago in Jerusalem by about fifty women,
effort to guide the nations of the Middle East forward
some of them, like Miss Saidi Nusseiba, sent especially for
toward a just and lasting peace. Instead of advancing in that
that purpose from the east bank by the Jordanian authordirection the Government of Jordan asks for a return to the
ities. This reminds me of a story I once heard in the Soviet
Armistice. It is support for the resuscitation of the
Union. Not much favourable news appears in the Soviet
Armistice that it seeks support which the General
press about Israel, and a prominent part of such news are
Assembly and the Security Council have consistently
reports about the rise in apartment rents in Tel Aviv, strikes
refused to grant since last June.
of postal workers and demonstrations of all kinds. One
Soviet citizen said to another, “How bad the situation must
2 See Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Ye@,
be in Israel, with so many strikes and demonstrations”.
Special Supplement No. 1.
8

ill

:Il*
ws
01
eu

re,
its
Ill.
nk
II
:ns
1st

sa
ian
‘YNJt
as
elf
iay
im
nd
in
ice
gia
its
h
Ihe
Oil

ity
Ms
ars
ing
lx
ee.
fa
,erfor
Ian
red
‘re.sa
en.
the
the
an
lrd
nat
the
the
:ral
tb
‘ear,

J86, The Armistice

is no more because the Arabs have
destroyed it. The relations between Israel and the Arab
States are now founded upon and regulated by the
cease-fire-a cease-fire established by the Security Council
andconsecrated in a series of Council resolutions. Under
the cease-fire, Israel defence forces are stationed on the
SuezCanal, guard the crossings on the Jordan River and
patrolthe line in the Golan heights. Within this area of
cease-fireIsrael forces are free to move, to act and to
paradeas they see fit. It may be in Jordan’s interest to
weakenand undermine the cease-fire structure. Indeed, this
is precisely what it is trying to do by the armed attacks and
raidsperpetrated from Jordanian territory in violation of
thecease-fire. This is precisely what it is striving to achieve
by ignoring the cease-fire and suggesting the revival of the
now moribund provisions of the Armistice. Israel is not
preparedto aid it. Israel will not acquiesce in any attempt
to cripple the cease-fire, whether by violations of the
ceasefireline or by efforts to introduce qualifications and
impediments which have never been part of the cease-fire.
Military movements, of whatever kind, within the confines
of the cease-fire are unrestricted and so they must remain,
whether they please other parties to the cease-fire or not.

87. The Jordanian representative has tried to buttress his
allegationsby reference to General Assembly resolutions of
4 and 14 July 1967 [2X53 ES-V) and 2.254 (ES-V)].
Whatever one may think of those resolutions, and whether
onehad supported them or not, it is clear that they referred
to the legislation adopted by Israel last June. They did not
callfor stagnation in Jerusalem. They were not aimed at the
prevention of military marches in the City. They were not
intendedto paralyse construction in Jerusalem.
88. One of the pretexts for the Jordanian complaint is a
concoction of unfounded allegations about housing development in Jerusalem. Most of the land involved in the
reconstruction projects is not Arab-but Jewish-owned and
publicdomain. No attempts by the representative of Jordan
to distort this basic fact could succeed. The land records
happento be in Jerusalem, not in Amman. No mosque or
church, no Holy Place would be affected, It is sufficient to
look at the map to realize that all of the land in question
situated outside the Jewish Quarter is empty. In the Jewish
Quarter itself no home of any Arab inhabitant who has
settled there in the last two decades is involved. The
undertaking is one of normal urban development, of
clearingruins, restoring houses of worship and reconstructingslum areas. Many of these projects had been worked out
not by us, but by the Mandatory Government before the
Jordanian occupation of 1948. Had the attitude of the
occupying Jordanian authorities toward the City of Jerusalembeen different, they would have carried out these
projects themselves. An old Latin proverb says, “Fucilius
est destruere quam construere”--“It
is easier to pull down
than to build up”. Those who for years haire wrecked and
pulleddown, let them at least not interfere with the work
of rebuilding and creating.
89. Today the City of Jerusalem, divided for nineteen
years as a result of Jordanian aggression, is united again.
Thewalls, barbed-wired fences and mine-fields are no more.
The inhabitants of Jerusalem no longer fear bombardment
by Jordanian artillery or murderous fire from Jordanian

military positions on the ramparts of the Old City. The
Holy Places are protected. Discrimination against Christian
churches has been terminated. The Holy Sites desecrated by
the Jordanians are being restored. The Jewish Quarter,
nearly totally demolished by them, is being rebuilt. The
City is peaceful and life normal. The Christian communities, joined by thousands of tourists from abroad,
including visitors from the Arab States, celebrated recently
the Easter festivals. The Moslem community celebrated the
festival of Id elPitr and Id el-Adha in accordance with its
own traditions. Close to 250,000 Jewish inhabitants and
about 70,000 Arab citizens, this is the national character of
Jerusalem; 250,000 Jews and 70,000 Arabs mingle together
in ever-growing understanding and communion.
90. The representative of Jordan arrogates to himself the
right to speak on behalf of Arab inhabitants of Eastern
Jerusalem, Christians and Moslems alike-Eastern Jerusalem
conquered by Jordan in defiance of the United Nations. I
would respectfully suggest that he allow the inhabitants to
speak for themselves. In fact, they did speak for themselves
when, for instance, the Mayor, Council and i citizens of
Bethlehem petitioned the Israeli Government not to limit
itself to the unification of the two parts of Jerusalem, but
also to include the Town of Bethlehem in the united
municipality. The inhabitants of Jerusalem have spoken for
themselves in the public pronouncements of their leaders,
such as the Custos of the Holy Land, the Greek Orthodox
Patriarch, the Armenian Patriarch and others. For the first
time in twenty years the world sees that the two peoples,
Arabs and Jews, are at least capable of living side by side in
peace and constructive endeavour. This is the situation that
does not please the Jordanian Government. This is the
situation that, in its view, must not continue. This is the
situation which the Security Council is called upon to
disapprove.
91. For three thousand years Jerusalem has been the focal
point of Jewish history, civilization and religion. Even when
the cohorts of Imperial Rome conquered Jerusalem and
destroyed the Temple, Jerusalem remained Israel’s eternal
capital. It is the Bible that says:
“If I forget thee, 0 Jerusalem, let my right hand forget
her cunning.
“Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I
remember thee not, set not Jerusalem above my chiefest
joy.”
92. For two thousand years, every day, three times a day,
Jews all over the world have prayed:
“And to Jerusalem, thy city, return in mercy, and dwell
therein as thou hast spoken; rebuild it soon in our days as
an everlasting building, and speedily set up therein the
throne of David. Blessed art Thou, 0 Lord, who
rebuildest Jerusalem.”
Every day, for two thousand years, three times a day, in all
the corners of the world.
93. Jerusalem is too precious to all of us to wrong it.
Jerusalem is too central and too significant a part of the

entire Jewish saga, it is too highly venerated by the world’s
three great religions for the Amman Government to play
with it as if it were just another weapon in the campaign of
hate and hostility against Israel on which Jordan subsists.
Those with an understanding of history, those with a
feeling for justice and a respect for equity, will know that
the Jordanian complaint is but a malicious attempt to
create new tension and misunderstanding.
94. If Jordan’s belligerency, negativism and intransigence
continue unchecked, there can be little prospect for peace
in the area. Jordan seeks again encouragement to persist in
its war against Israel. If Jordan finds such encouragement, it
will, of course, draw the appropriate conclusions, and the
Middle East will have to brace itself for more hostility and
conflict. As on numerous occasions in the past, the present
situation calls for a clear, unequivocal summons to disavow
belligerency, to terminate warfare, to move onward to
peace-the only hope for the nations of the Middle East.
95. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I do not wish to
pursue most of what has been said here today. Much of
what has been said, it seems to me, may not contribute to
the progress we wish to see towards a settlement, a
settlement on the basis of the unanimous decision reached
in this Council last November.

any other action will increase tension and have an adverse
effect on the efforts now going forward to find a peaceful
and permanent settlement. It is on that test that we shall
greatly regret and deplore any action which is not directed
to a reduction of tension and to positive effort towards
carrying out the decisions and declared purposes of the
United Nations.
98. It is our strong opinion that the authority of this
Council should be consistently and insistently directed to
furthering the settlement for which we have all voted, and
equally towards the discouragement of every action, from
whatever quarter, which might excite or provoke ill will or
conflict. The influences working for pacification and for
political settlement appear to make so far little progress,
but certainly we rejoice that they persist. It is the clear
duty of this Council to encourage and sustain those
influences and those endeavours. It is our equal duty to
make it absolutely clear that any action whatever which.
makes a peaceful settlement more difficult and which might
lead to increased bitterness and bad feeling can meet in this
Council only with discouragement and disapproval.
99. I greatly hope that even after the statements we have
heard today, even now, we can turn from recrimination, I
trust that from now on the whole ‘weight of the Council
will again be put to a renewed productive and constructive
advance towards the settlement to which we are all publicly
committed and which the peoples of the Middle East so
desperately need.

96. Today, at this stage I wish to say two things only.
First, my Government stands firmly by the statements we
have made and the votes we have cast both in the Assembly
and in this Council on the question of the future of
Jerusalem, All that has since taken place has reinforced the
views which we have publicly stated, clearly and repeatedly.

100. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian]: In
accordance with the wishes expressed by the members of
the Security Council, this meeting is now adjourned. The
next meeting will take place at 3 o’clock this afternoon to
continue discussion of this item.

97: Secondly, with regard to the military parade, we apply
only one practical test, the test stated by the Secretary
General in his report yesterday [S/8.561]: whether this or

The meeting rose at 1.5 p.m.

10
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

35627-September

1972-2,100
