108

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

tation and used as a means of pressure or threat to and destabilization of other States and regions;
5. Expresses its conviction that the gradual military
disengagement of the great Powers and their military alliances from various parts of the world should be promoted;
6. Emphasizes the role that the United Nations has in
the maintenance ofinternational peace and security and in
economic and social development and progress for the
benefit of ali mankind;
7. Stresses that there is a need further to enhance the
etfectiveness of the Security Council in discharging its
principal role of maintaining international peace and
security and to enhance the authority and enforcement
capacity of the Council in accordance with the Charter;
8. Reiterates the need for the Security Council, in particular its permanent members, to ensure the etfective implementation of its decisions in compliance with the relevant provisions of the Charter;
9. Emphasizes that there can be no lasting peace and
security in the world without the solution of the international economic problems, particularly those of the developing countries, and the ensuring of the sustained growth
and development of the world economy;
10. Considers that respect for and promotion ofhuman
rights and fundamental freedoms in their civil, political,
economic, social and cultural aspects, on the one hand,
and the strengthening of international peace and security,
on the other, mutually reinforce each other;
11. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples
under colonial domination, foreign occupation or racist
régimes and their inalienable right to self-determination
and independence, and urges Member States to increase
their support for and solidarity with them and their national liberation movements and to take urgent and etfective measures for the speedy completion of the implementation ofthe Declaration on the Granting oflndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples 136 and for the final
elimination of colonialism, racism and apartheid;
12. Calls upon ali States, particularly the members of
the Security Council, to take appropriate and etfective
measures to promote the fulfilment of the objective of the
denuclearization of Africa in order to avert the serious
danger that the nuclear capability of South Africa constitutes to the African States, in particular the front-line
States, as well as to international peace and security;
13. Reaffirms that the democratization of international relations is an imperative necessity enabling, under
the ?onditions of interdependence, the ful! development
and mdependence of ali States, as well as the attainment of
genuine security, peace and co-operation in the world, and
stresses its firm belief that the United Nations otfers the
best framework for the promotion of these goals;
14. Invites Member States to submit their views on the
question of the implementation of the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security, and requests the
Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session on the basis of the replies
received;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the ítem entitled "Review of the im-

plementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security".
73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
43/89.

Comprehensive approach to strengthening international peace and security in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Convinced of the need to strengthen further the role and
etfectiveness ofthe United Nations on the basis offull and
universal implementation ofits Charter, in order to ensure
international peace and security on a comprehensive basis
covering ali States and ali aspects of their interrelationship,
Expressing the firm conviction that ensuring international peace and security requires concerted etforts and
close co-operation among ali States on the basis of the
Charter ofthe United Nations in order to resolve issues of
crucial importance in the following spheres: disarmament,
peaceful settlement of disputes and conflicts, international
economic co-operation and development, protection ofthe
environment, and human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Affirming that the system of security embodied in the
Charter is the fundamental and irreplaceable mechanism
for the preservation or restoration of international peace
and security,
Reaffirming that in the interest of ensuring international
peace and security on a comprehensive basis ali States
should adhere strictly to the fundamental principies of international law, especially respect for the sovereignty,
equality, political independence and territorial integrity of
States, non-intervention and non-interference in interna!
atfairs, refraining from the threat or use of force, peaceful
settlement of disputes, self-determination of peoples, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, cooperation among States and compliance in good faith with
their obligations assumed in accordance with the Charter,
Bearing in mind the report of the Secretary-General on
the ways and means of organizing an exchange of views on
the subject among the States Members of the United Nations, 137
Taking note of the suggestions, ideas and views expressed in the deliberations on this matter,138
1. Encourages Member Sta tes to con tribute toan international dialogue, primarily within the framework of the
United Nations, its Security Council and General Assembly and their subsidiary bodies, in arder to find universally
acceptable ways and means and to co-ordinate practica!
measures to strengthen on a comprehensive basis the system ofsecurity laid down in the Charter ofthe United Nations and to enhance the role and etfectiveness of the
United Nations in the maintenance of international peace
and security in ali aspects;
2. Calls upan ali States to intensify their practica! efforts towards ensuring international security in ali its as-

117 A/ 43/7 32.

136 Resolution 1514 (XV).

1-18 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-third Session.

Fi"1 Committee, 47th to 'í41h meetings, and corrigendum.

111.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

pects through peaceful means, in accordance with the purposes and principies of the Charter;
3. Decides to include in the agenda of its forty-fourth
session an item entitled "Comprehensive approach to

109

strengthening international peace and security in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations".
73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
